7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 1/376
Village of Albion, NY
Tuesday, July 14, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 8-14-1996 as L.L. No. 5-
1996. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-14-1996 as L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local laws, ordinances
and certain resolutions of the Village of Albion, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 275, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Village of Albion," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Albion" to any other
local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section number appearing in the Code as if
such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local laws,
ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this local law
are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior
local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and
are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it
appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.)
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Albion in force on the
date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in
force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 2/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not affect the
following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved
from repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Village
of Albion prior to the effective date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in violation of any
legislative provision of the Village of Albion or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may
result therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this local law, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Village of Albion.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village
of Albion.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Albion providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance
or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place within
the Village of Albion or any portion thereof.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Albion appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Albion or other instruments or evidence of the village's indebtedness.
Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property, or any
lawful contract or obligation.
The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
The annexation or dedication of property.
Any legislation relating to salaries.
Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
Any legislation adopted subsequent to November 8, 1995.
Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Any legislation relating to personnel policies.
Any legislation relating to civil penalties.
Any legislation setting fees.
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of this local law or of any local law,
ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
been rendered.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 3/376
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of
Albion and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village Clerk of the
Village of Albion by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of Albion, and such certified copy shall
remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held
and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Albion" or any new local laws or
resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained herein, and such local laws,
ordinances or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of
Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code of the Village of Albion required to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public.
All changes in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to
be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village of Albion upon the payment
of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or amends, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Village of Albion or who alters or tampers with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Albion to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an
offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment
for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 4/376
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for publication as the Code
of the Village of Albion, no changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain
grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
In addition, the amendments and/or additions set forth on Schedule A, attached hereto and made
a part hereof, are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine supplementation, some footnotes will
be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added) 8-XX-1996 by L.L. No. XX-1996."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of the changes, is on file in the Village Clerk's
office.
Nomenclature changes.
Throughout the Code, gender-specific pronouns (he, she, him, her, etc.) have been changed
to gender-neutral pronouns (he or she, him or her, etc.).
Throughout the Code, the terms "Department of Public Safety" and "Office of Public Safety
Administration" are hereby changed to "Police Department." In addition, the term "Public
Safety Administrator" is hereby changed to "Chief of Police."
Throughout the Code, the term "Police Justice" is hereby changed to "Village Justice."
Throughout the Code, the terms "Building Inspector" and "Zoning Enforcement Officer" are
hereby changed to "Code Enforcement Officer."
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.)
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code of the Village of
Albion, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections
of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
Article II. Legislation Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain new pieces of legislation or changes and/or additions to
various existing pieces of legislation were approved by the Board of Trustees for inclusion in the Code
of the Village of Albion. Such amendments and new enactments are noted in the histories of individual
chapters as "... amended (adopted) during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." Upon
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 5/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
final enactment, a complete enumeration of all chapters and sections in the Code involved in such
enactments will be included in this Article, along with specific dates of adoption.]
Chapter 4. Advisory Committee
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 9-13-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 4-1. Enactment; authority.
The Village Board of the Village of Albion does hereby ordain and enact the Village of Albion Advisory
Committee Law pursuant to authority and provisions of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 4-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Albion Advisory Committee Law."
§ 4-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to collect as much information as possible economically and
expeditiously on any given topic or project that might be presented and assist the Village Board in
its deliberation of the topic or project information; any recommendation made by the Advisory
Committee to the Village Board shall be nonbinding upon the Village Board.
It is the further purpose of this chapter to enable the Village of Albion to delegate to certain
individuals who reside in or about the Village of Albion the authority to investigate and report back
to the Village Board of Albion on a topic or project that may be pending before the Village Board of
the Village of Albion.
It is further purpose of this chapter to establish the Advisory Committee to provide to the Village
Board of the Village of Albion additional and sufficient information to assist the Village in its
deliberation and study of a topic or project on which the Village Board desires further study and
consideration.
§ 4-4. Composition and term; vacancies.
At the discretion and selection of the Village Board of the Village of Albion a committee of not less
than three nor more than nine individuals who live in or about the Village of Albion may be
appointed by the Village Mayor with the approval of the Village Board to serve on a voluntary,
uncompensated term for a period not to exceed 24 months, with the right to extend the term for a
like period.
Any vacancies shall be filed by the Village Mayor upon recommendation by the Village Board.
§ 4-5. Authority.
The sole purpose of the Advisory Committee is to make recommendations to the Village Board of the
Village of Albion on any chosen topic and/or project. Any and all recommendations are non-binding
upon the Village Board. Said Advisory Committee has no apparent or actual authority other than what
is set forth in this chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 6/376
A.
B.
Chapter 12. Cemeteries
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 5-13-1974 as Ch. 12 of the
1974 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Mount Albion Cemetery
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 12 of the 1974 Code]
§ 12-1. When open.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Mount Albion Cemetery shall be open, unless physically closed, daily between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. only.
§ 12-2. Opening graves or tombs.
No grave or tomb within Mount Albion Cemetery shall be opened for interment or removal by any
person not in the employ of the village for said cemetery or without the written consent of the Village
Board.
§ 12-3. Prohibited acts; penalty.
No person shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument or
gravestone or other structure placed in the cemetery aforesaid, or any fence, railing or other work
for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure aforesaid, or
of any cemetery lot within the limits of the cemetery aforesaid, or shall willfully destroy, remove,
cut, break or injure any tree, shrub, plant or flower within the limits of said cemetery or shall shoot
or discharge any gun or other firearm within the said limits or travel up and down any terrace or
slope.
Every violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment
of not more than (15) days, or both, according to the nature and aggravation of the offense, to be
imposed by the Town of Albion or Village of Albion Justice.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 12-4. Enclosing lots.
No stone or brick wall or wooden fence shall be erected as an enclosure of lots.
§ 12-5. Changing grades of lots.
No person shall be allowed to change the grade of any lot without the consent of the Village Board.
Persons who enclose lots or make other improvements upon them after having been graded, thereby
disarranging the previous improvements made, will be charged the cost of putting them again in order.
§ 12-6. Removal of trees and shrubs.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 7/376
[1]
[1]
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
If any trees or shrubs situate in any lot, by means of their roots, branches or otherwise, become
detrimental to the adjacent lots or avenues, or unsightly or inconvenient to passengers, it shall be the
duty of said Village Board, or its designee, and it shall have the right, to enter the said lot and remove
said trees and shrubs or such parts thereof as are detrimental, unsightly or inconvenient.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 12-6, Duties of Commissioners as to monuments, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provision, Art. I.
§ 12-7. Owners of lots to have access thereto.
The proprietors of lots and their families shall be allowed access to the grounds at all times, obeying
the rules which are or may be adopted for the regulation of visitors.
§ 12-8. Certain monuments prohibited.
Wooden enclosures and lettered boards designating graves will not be allowed.
§ 12-9. Speed limit.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Driving more than five miles per hour within the cemetery is strictly prohibited.
§ 12-10. Enforcement by cemetery keeper; penalties for
offenses; arrest.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any person who shall violate any of the foregoing rules, will be compelled instantly to leave the
grounds; and it is hereby made the special duty of the cemetery keeper to strictly enforce this chapter
and to arrest or cause to be arrested every person who shall violate any provision of this chapter and
forthwith to take such person or persons before the Town of Albion Justice.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 12-11, Decorum required, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 15. Continuity of Government
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 15 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 15-1. Intent.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Section 9129 of the Unconsolidated Laws of the State of New York authorizes political subdivisions of
the state to provide for the continuity of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent attack
upon the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. Section 27 of the Executive Law authorizes
political subdivisions to provide for the continuity of their governments in the event of other public
disasters, catastrophes or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such laws, this chapter is
adopted so that on such occasions the government of the Village of Albion, New York, may continue to
function properly and efficiently under emergency circumstances.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 8/376
A.
B.
§ 15-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean and include:
ATTACK
Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy or foreign nation upon the United
States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in
the United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shellfire or nuclear,
radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other weapons or processes.
PUBLIC DISASTER
A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent
that a substantial number of the residents of the Village of Albion either sustain injury, become ill,
are infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the result of injury, disease
or exposure, or the property of a substantial number of such residents is imperiled, damaged or
destroyed; and it is necessary and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that
the continuity of the government of the Village of Albion be assured in order that it be enabled to
function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential powers in meeting emergency
conditions. Such disasters, catastrophes and emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to,
conflagrations, explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal waves,
pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power or essential
transportation services or any incidents or occurrence which causes or threatens to cause danger
to life, health or property from exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY
A person authorized to perform all the powers and duties of a public office in the event that the
office is vacant or at such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability of
the incumbent officer where such authorization is provided pursuant to the provisions of any
general, special or local law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR
A person designated pursuant to this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and
duties, but not the office, of a village officer in the event that neither such officer nor any duly
authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the village or other physical, mental or legal
reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the office.
§ 15-3. Designation of interim successors; status; compensation.
Elective officers, within 30 days following the effective date of this chapter and thereafter within 30
days after first entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall, in addition to any duly authorized
deputy, designate such number of emergency interim successors to the powers and duties of his
or her office and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that
there will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or
combination thereof, to perform the powers and duties of the office.
Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law to appoint officers shall
within the time specified in Subsection A of this section, in addition to any duly authorized deputy,
designate for each such appointive officer such number of emergency interim successors to such
officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there
will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or
combination thereof, for each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists of members
having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review and, as necessary, revise the
previous designations of emergency interim successors by such board within 30 days after a new
member elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon the duties of his or her
office as a member of such body of officers.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 9/376
C.
D.
E.
F.
Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective officers specified in
Subsection A of this section, and the appointing officer or body of officers specified in Subsection
B of this section, shall from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to ensure that at all times there are at least three
duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination thereof, for each
elective and appointive officer of the village.
Qualifications. No person shall be designated to, nor serve as, an emergency interim successor
unless he or she is legally qualified to hold the office of the person to whose powers and duties he
or she is designated to succeed.
Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an emergency interim successor
shall hold that designation at the pleasure of the designator and such a designation shall remain
effective until replaced by another by the authorized designator.
Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without salary, unless otherwise
provided by local law. He or she shall, however, be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses
necessarily incurred in he performance of his or her powers and duties.
§ 15-4. Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency
interim successor.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in Subsection A or Subsection B of
§ 15-3 of this chapter or his or her duly authorized deputy, if any, is unable, due to death, absence from
the village or other physical, mental or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the office,
the emergency interim successor of such officer highest in rank in order of succession who is able to
perform the powers and duties of the office shall, except for the power and duty to discharge or replace
duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors of such officer, perform the powers and
duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall perform such powers and duties only until
such time as the lawful incumbent officer or his or her duly authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office
or undertakes the performance of the powers and duties of the office, as the case may be, or until,
where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or appointed to fill such vacancy and
qualifies as provided by law. The authority of an emergency interim successor performing the powers
and duties of an office shall not terminate upon the subsequent availability of an emergency interim
successor higher in rank in order of succession.
§ 15-5. Recordkeeping; notice.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy and emergency
interim successor shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and each designation, replacement or change in
order of succession of any emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order of succession. Such Clerk shall
keep an up-to-date file of all such data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim
successors, and the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify, in writing, each
designated person of the filing of his or her name as an emergency interim successor and his or her
rank in order of succession and also shall notify, in writing, any person previously designated who is
replaced or whose place in order of succession is changed.
§ 15-6. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible, emergency interim successors shall
take such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the
powers and duties of the office to which they may succeed.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 10/376
§ 15-7. Suspension of quorum requirements; vote.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Mayor, or his or her duly authorized deputy or
emergency interim successor performing his or her powers and duties, may suspend quorum
requirements for the Board of Trustees. If quorum requirements are suspended, any local law,
resolution or other action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative vote of a
specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or approved by the affirmative vote of the
specified proportion of those voting thereon.
Chapter 19. Defense and Indemnification
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 as L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 19-1. Conferral of statutory benefits.
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts § 18 of the Public Officers Law and confers the benefits thereof
upon all village officers and employees.
§ 19-2. Defense and indemnification to be provided.
The village shall provide for the defense of any village officer or employee in any civil action or
proceeding arising out of any alleged act or omission in which it is alleged that the officer or employee
has violated the civil rights of the claimant, petitioner or plaintiff under Sections 1981 and 1983 of the
United States Civil Rights Act. The village shall indemnify and save harmless such officer or employee
in the amount of any judgment or settlement of claim obtained against such officer or employee. Such
legal defense and indemnification shall be provided where the officer or employee, at the time of such
alleged act or omission, was acting in good faith and within the scope of his or her public employment,
powers or duties. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other statute, local law or
enactment providing legal defense and indemnification in civil actions brought against such officer or
employee.
Chapter 25. Ethics, Code of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 22 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
§ 25-1. Purposes.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Board of Trustees, Village of
Albion, recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must
be observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter to promulgate these rules of
ethical conduct for the officers and officials of the Village of Albion. The rules shall serve as a guide for
official conduct for the officers and employees of the Village of Albion. The rules of ethical conduct of
this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with, but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 11/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 25-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
INTEREST
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996] -- A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit
accruing to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the municipality
which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this chapter, a municipal officer or
employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
His or her spouse, minor children and dependents except a contract of employment with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a member or
employee.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or employee.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or
employee.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE
An officer or employee of the Village of Albion, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to be a
"municipal officer or employee" solely by reason of being a volunteer fireman or civil defense
volunteer, except a fire chief or assistant fire chief.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 25-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Albion shall be subject to and abide by the following
standards of conduct:
Gifts. He or she shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gifts having a value of $75 or more,
whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or
any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him or her or could be reasonably be expected to influence him or her in the
performance of his or her official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
or her part.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Confidential information. He or she shall not disclose confidential information acquired by him or
her in the course of his or her official duties or use such information to further his or her personal
interest.
Representation before one's own agency. He or she shall not receive or enter into any agreement,
express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before
any municipal agency of which he or she is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal
agency over which he or she has jurisdiction or to which he or she has the power to appoint any
member, officer or employee.
Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He or she shall not receive or enter into
any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for service to be rendered in relation to any
matter before any agency of this municipality whereby his or her compensation is to be dependent
or contingent upon any action by such agency with respect to such matter, provided that this
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 12/376
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
subsection shall not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he or she knows thereof, a member of the
Board of Trustees and any officer of the Village of Albion, whether paid or unpaid, who participates
in the discussion or gives official record, shall disclose the nature and extent of any direct or
indirect financial or other private interest he or she has in such legislation.
Investments in conflict with official duties. He or she shall not invest or hold any investments
directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction which
creates a conflict with his or her official duties. Any member of the Board of Trustees and any
officer or employee of the Village of Albion shall, prior to any action that may affect such
investments, disclose such investments on the official record of the Board of Trustees.
Private employment. He or she shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept
private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service
creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge of his or her official duties.
Future employment. He or she shall not, after the termination of service or employment with such
municipality, appear before any board or agency of the Village of Albion in relation to any case,
proceeding or application in which he or she personally participated during the period of his or her
service or employment or which was under his or her active consideration.
§ 25-4. Exclusion of certain actions.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a present or former municipal
officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or suit against the Village of Albion, or by any
agency thereof on behalf of himself or herself or any member of his or her family, arising out of any
personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 25-5. Distribution of copies.
The Mayor of the Village of Albion shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the Village of Albion within 60 days after the effective date of this
chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon the duties of his or her office of employment.
Failure to distribute any copy of the Code of Ethics or failure of any officer or employee to receive
such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such Code nor the enforcement of
the provisions thereof.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 25-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who shall knowingly and
intentionally violate any of the provisions of this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office
or employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 26. Progressive Disciplinary Procedure
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 6-24-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 13/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(1)
(2)
A.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 35.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 61.
§ 26-1. Endorsement of policy.
The Village of Albion endorses the policy of progressive discipline. Normal steps in this process are
oral warning, written warning, suspension from duty, and finally discharge. The policy of progressive
discipline does not necessarily apply for a number of the more serious violations or offenses, where
immediate discharge, in line with due process, may be required.
§ 26-2. Determining proper discipline.
A basic principle underlying progressive disciplinary procedures is that the supervisor must have
just cause for imposing the discipline. "Just cause" means that the supervisor has the right to
discipline when an employee does not comply with rules or performance standards. This excludes
disciplinary action for mere whim or caprice. This standard is used in judging whether the
supervisor acted fairly in enforcing rules and regulations. The following questions should be
answered when contemplating a disciplinary action:
Was the rule or order reasonably related to the efficient and safe operation of Village
government?
What was the rule intended to accomplish?
If the rule were observed as written, would the purpose be realized?
Was the rule realistic? Easy to understand?
Was the rule out of date?
Can the rule, as written, be complied with under the present circumstances?
Are the penalties too light? Too severe?
Do the people orating under the rule consider the penalties as being just?
Are the penalties being enforced? If enforcement has been lax in the past, management
shouldn't reverse its course and begin to crack down without first warning employees of
its intent.
Do all the people affected by the rule know the rule?
Was it brought to their attention periodically?
As far as practical, do all people affected know the "why" of the rule?
Was the rule affecting groups that do not need it?
Should the rule be extended to cover groups not now affected by it?
Were certain groups allowed to violate the rule without incurring the penalties?
Was the employee adequately warned of the consequences of his/her conduct? The warning
may be given orally or in printed form. An exception may be made for certain conduct such as
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 14/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(7)
B.
insubordination, drinking on the job, stealing, or using Village property, or other actions so
serious that the employee is expected to know it will be punishable.
Did management investigate before administering the discipline? An investigation should be
made before the decision to discipline is made.
Was the investigation fair and objective? Witnesses should be interviewed, their statements
recorded and a careful investigation made to see that both sides of the story are available and
fairly presented.
Did the investigation produce substantial evidence of the infraction? It is not required that the
evidence be preponderant, conclusive, or beyond reasonable doubt, except where the alleged
misconduct is of such criminal or reprehensive nature as to stigmatize the employee and
seriously impair his/her chances for future employment.
Are there mitigating or aggravating circumstances? Mitigating circumstances (for example,
refusal to obey an order because the employee had received contrary orders from another
supervisor) justify a lesser penalty. Aggravating circumstances (for example, prior violations of
the same rule) justify a more severe penalty. Some points to review when determining
mitigating or aggravating circumstances include:
Prior conduct record. This refers to any formal disciplinary reprimands or suspensions.
Penalties generally become more severe for each instance of misconduct.
Length of service.
Period of time since last penalty. A long period of good conduct following previous
disciplinary action should be considered, since it represents the aim of corrective
discipline. Disciplinary action that occurred more than two years to three years previous
generally is of little value determining the current level of discipline.
In contemplating the dismissal of an employee you might want to ask yourself these
questions:
Does the employee have the skills required for the job?
Is it possible that the content of his/her job has changed since originally hired?
Is his/her attitude towards the job so negative that it is not only affecting his/her
performance, but also that of other individuals in the group?
Have you attempted to motivate him/her to improve performance by setting mutually
acceptable work objectives, observing the worker's progress, and conducting
performance evaluations over short intervals?
After considering the above seven questions, the supervisor should have an indication of the
seriousness of the problem and what sort of disciplinary action would be proper.
§ 26-3. Probationary employees.
The probationary period for original appointees is generally 180 days. The minimum probationary
period is eight weeks. Civil service rules require that probationary employees be advised from time to
time of their status. Termination may be made for any rational reason, including doubts about the
employee's capabilities. A termination notice (see hiring policy) must be in writing and must be given at
least one week prior to the termination.
§ 26-4. Interrogating employees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 15/376
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
C.
"Interrogation" means the questioning of an employee, who at the time of such questioning
appears to be a likely subject for disciplinary action. Interrogation must be done privately under the
following guidelines:
No employee who is represented by a union shall be required to submit to an interrogation
unless the employee is notified in advance of his/her right to have representation present.
An employee shall not be coerced, intimidated or suffer any reprisals, either directly or
indirectly, as a result of exercising his/her right to representation.
The employee's statement should be carefully recorded in writing with a copy provided to the
employee and attached to any disciplinary action that may result from the situation being
investigated.
§ 26-5. Policy.
General.
Employees' have a right to know what is expected of them. It is the responsibility of the
department head, officer or official to communicate the Village's requirements and
expectations to the employee, and to help the employee in meeting these standards. When
disciplinary action is required, such action should be taken on a progressive basis and should
be designed to rehabilitate rather than punish the employee involved. In most cases, informal
action should be attempted before initiating formal disciplinary action.
An investigation should be conducted before the decision to discipline is made. Witnesses
should be interviewed, their statements recorded and carefully considered to insure that the
proposed action is appropriate.
Informal disciplinary process.
Verbal counseling. Verbal counseling is the first step in a disciplinary process and should take
place privately. The supervisor should review the applicable rule or standard with the
employee so she/he knows what's expected. A time frame for compliance should be
established and the consequences of failure to comply should be explained. Immediately
following the meeting, the supervisor should summarize the counseling in writing and save it
for future reference.
Counseling memorandum. Counseling memorandum is the second step in a disciplinary
process and should take place privately. The employee must be notified of the right to union
representation (when the employee is represented by a union). The supervisor should review
the applicable rule or standard with the employee so they know what's expected. A time
frame for compliance should be established and the consequences of failure to comply should
be explained. Immediately following the meeting, the supervisor must summarize the
counseling in writing. The employee must sign the counseling memorandum to acknowledge
that he/she has read it. A copy must be given to the employee, and placed in the employee's
personnel file.
Formal disciplinary process.
Warnings. In the case of a persistent personnel problem or a serious infraction, a written
warning (reprimand) may be necessary. This warning is a formal, written censure that is
placed in the employee's personnel folder. A written warning should be administered in writing
at a private meeting between the employee, the union steward (when the employee is
represented by a union), the supervisor, and the next immediate supervisor. The warning
should include the reason for the warning, what corrective action needs to be taken, and what
will happen if the problem is not resolved. The employee must sign the warning to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 16/376
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
(a)
(b)
(2)
acknowledge that he/she has read it. A copy must be given to the employee, sent to the union
president and the Mayor, and placed in the employee's personnel file.
Suspensions and/or termination.
Suspension and/or termination may be required if an employee repeats an action for
which a written warning has been issued or commits a major offense. These include, but
are not limited to:
Failure to perform his/her job.
Destruction or theft of property.
Insubordination.
Committing unlawful acts.
Using abusive language or threatening language.
Appearing on duty in a drunken or drugged condition.
Engaging in discriminatory employment practices.
Other acts of misconduct that impact adversely upon the operation of the Village.
Except in emergencies, imposed penalties should be reviewed with the Attorney for the
Village and the Mayor. A suspension and/or termination should be administered in
vesting at a private meeting between the employee, the union steward (when the
employee is represented by a union), and the department head or Mayor. The notice
should state the reason for the suspension and/or termination. The employee must sign
the notice of suspension/termination to acknowledge that he/she has read it. A copy must
be given to employee, and sent to the union president, the Mayor and placed in the
employee's personnel file.
Chapter 29. Finances and Fundraising
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-11-1983 as L.L. No. 3-1983
(Ch. 22A of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procurement policy — See Ch. 66.
§ 29-1. Authorization to accept security.
When a credit is given upon the sale of village property for the consideration of money, or any part
thereof, the Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to take in its corporate name such security by note
and mortgage or otherwise for the payment thereof, as it shall deem best, and shall hold the same as a
corporation and account therefor to its successors in office and the public in the manner it is now or
hereafter required by law to account for moneys received by it; and the Board and its successors may,
in the name of its office, sue for and recover the moneys due and unpaid upon any security so taken
by it or its predecessors.
§ 29-2. Funds or property made available by the federal
government.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 17/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
The village shall have the power, either individually or jointly with one or more municipal corporations,
to apply for, accept and expend funds or property made available by the federal government, either
directly or through the state, pursuant to the provisions of any federal law which is not inconsistent with
the statutes or Constitution of this state, in order to administer, conduct or participate with the federal
government in programs relating to the general welfare of the inhabitants of the village. This village is
authorized to appropriate and expend such funds or property as is required to administer, conduct or
participate in any such programs and may perform any and all acts necessary to effectuate the
purposes of any such programs.
§ 29-3. Agreements with private, nonprofit agencies.
The village, either individually or jointly with one or more other municipal corporations, may enter
into agreements with private, nonprofit agencies which are authorized to apply for and accept
funds or property made available by the federal government pursuant to the provisions of any
federal law which is not inconsistent with the statutes or Constitution of this state in order to
administer, conduct or participate with the federal government in programs relating to the general
welfare of the inhabitants of the village. Such agreements may provide that funds, property,
services or facilities will be made available by the village or any such municipal corporations to
such private, nonprofit agency upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the
village or any such municipal corporation in order to defray that portion of the cost of any program
administered by any such private, nonprofit agency which is not paid for by funds made available
by the federal government.
Such private, nonprofit agency shall file annually with the village and such other municipal
corporation with which it has entered into such an agreement, or at such more frequent periods as
may be required by the village or such municipality, a financial report with respect to such program
or programs and shall make available for inspection or audit by the village and such municipal
corporations its books, records and other data.
No funds, property, services or facilities shall be made available by the village to a private,
nonprofit agency pursuant to the provisions of this section unless such agency has attained
approval of its program as required by law and its program is designed to serve an area within the
village.
Chapter 35. Grievance Procedure
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 5-13-1974 as Ch. 27 of the
1974 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 61.
Article I. General Provisions
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 27 of the 1974 Code]
§ 35-1. Declaration of policy.
The purpose of this Article is to provide an orderly process whereby every employee of the village
may equitably and expeditiously settle grievances that may arise in the course of village
employment and shall have the right to present his or her grievance in accordance with the
procedures provided herein, free from coercion, restraint, interferences, discrimination or reprisal.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 18/376
B.
Every employee shall have the right to be represented by a person of his or her own choosing at
all states of this grievance procedure.
It shall be a fundamental responsibility of persons in supervisory capacity at all levels,
commensurate with the authority delegated to them by their superiors to consider promptly and
take appropriate action upon grievances presented to them by employees under their supervision.
To such extent as is practicable, appropriate authority is hereby delegated to such persons with
supervisory duties to take such steps as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions
prescribed herein.
§ 35-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANSWER
The respondents explanations of the subject matter of a complaint.
BOARD
The Board of Trustees of the said Village of Albion.
CHAIRMAN
The Chairperson of the Grievance Committee.
COMMITTEE
The Grievance Committee as established herein, including the Chairperson and the two members
thereof.
COMPLAINANT
The employee originating a grievance.
COMPLAINT
The written allegations constituting a grievance.
DECISION
The written disposition and determination of grievance by the Committee.
EMPLOYEE
Any person directly employed and compensated by the Village of Albion, except persons
employed in the legislative and judicial branch thereof and persons covered by union contract.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
GRIEVANCE
A claimed violation, misinterpretation or inequitable application of the existing rules, procedures,
regulations, administrative orders or work rules of the village or a department or agency thereof,
which relate to or involve employee health or safety, physical facilities, materials or equipment
furnished to employees or supervision of employees; provided, however, that such term shall not
include any matter involving an employee's rate of compensation, retirement benefits, disciplinary
proceedings, discharge or any matter which is otherwise reviewable pursuant to law or any rule or
regulation having the force and effect of law.
RESPONDENT
The individual against whom a grievance is asserted.
SUPERIORS
Persons regardless of title who are assigned to exercise any level of supervisory responsibility
over Village employees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 19/376
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
VILLAGE
The Village of Albion, Orleans County, New York.
§ 35-3. Dispute as to propriety of grievance.
Should a dispute arise as to whether or not any complaint is properly a matter for proceeding under the
grievance procedure, the issue shall be sent by the complainant or his or her superior directly to the
grievance committee which shall decide that question and its decision shall be final and binding.
Whereupon, the complaint shall be returned for further processing to the stage from which the issue of
proper jurisdiction originated.
§ 35-4. Procedures.
The grievance procedure for employees of the village is hereby established as follows:
First stage. The first stage shall consist of the employee's presentation of his or her grievance to
his or her immediate superior who shall, to such extent as he or she may deem appropriate,
consult in turn with his or her superiors. The discussion and resolution of grievances at the first
stage shall be on an oral and informal basis. If such grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at this
first stage within three working days, such employee may proceed to the second stage.
Second stage.
The second stage shall consist of filing of the employee's grievance, in writing, with the head
of his or her bureau, or its equivalent. The bureau head shall investigate the grievance and
shall dispose of it within seven working days. The decision shall be in writing to the employee
filing the grievance with copies to the immediate superior and to the department head. In the
process of investigating the grievance the bureau head may consult with his or her superiors.
The written grievance shall set forth the following information:
Name, address and work location of complainant.
Name, title and work location of respondent.
A concise resume of acts alleged to constitute the grievance, including names, places,
dates and times.
The ruling of an immediate superior.
Other information the complainant may think pertinent.
The signature of the complainant.
The bureau head shall forward the complete grievance file to the department head upon
making disposition.
Third stage. Any village employee may appeal, by written request, to a three-member Grievance
Committee established herein from a determination of a grievance made in accordance with these
provisions by his or her bureau head. Such Grievance Committee shall promptly consider, review
and determine such grievance and render a report and findings thereon to the Board as is
hereinafter provided. The findings of the Grievance Committee shall be binding unless overruled
by the Board.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 20/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
§ 35-5. Grievance Committee; powers and duties; meetings;
procedure.
Grievance Committee; members. There is hereby established a Grievance Committee which shall
consist of a Chairperson and two members each of whom shall be appointed by the Board to
serve at its pleasure.
Powers and duties.
The Grievance Committee is empowered to receive, investigate, adjust and adjudicate
grievances, as herein defined, submitted to it in accordance with the procedures subsequently
set forth. The jurisdiction of the Committee is limited to grievances of village employees.
The Committee shall promptly consider all grievances properly presented to it and take such
necessary action as is required hereby. The merits of all grievances shall be considered
objectively, with due consideration to the harmonious interrelationship that is sought to be
achieved among employees of the village and for the best interests of the public.
The Committee, in its discretion, may conduct a hearing, under oath or otherwise, on any
complaint before it, take testimony of the parties and their witnesses, receive documents or
other papers submitted to it, issue subpoenas and establish rules for the conduct of its
proceedings and hearings, not inconsistent with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
Any such hearing may be conducted by any one of the members of the Committee
designated by the Committee to act in its behalf; provided, however, that if less than the full
Committee is present at such hearing, the Committee thereof conducting such hearing shall
render a report thereon to the full Committee, and the full Committee shall thereupon make its
report. A majority vote of the entire Committee shall determine all matters.
The Committee shall make a determination of the grievance and shall reduce the same to a
written decision, which shall be filed and served as hereinafter provided.
The Committee has no power to discipline; to determine policies or administrative matters
within the jurisdiction of the Board, to consider matters involving salaries, appointments to
positions or the failure to fill position vacancies; or to incur any expense without prior approval
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion.
Meetings. A suitable place of meeting shall be provided for the Grievance Committee by the
Board. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and hearings, except that in his or her
absence the Committee may designate one of the members to act in his or her place. The Board
shall provide necessary secretarial, stenographic and investigative assistance to the Chairperson
of the Committee.
Procedure. A grievance submitted on appeal to the Grievance Committee for determination shall
be presented according to the following procedure:
The employee, or his or her representative, shall notify the Grievance Committee in writing
that he or she is appealing the bureau head's decision. A copy of such notice shall be
forwarded, to the bureau head who shall in turn forward the entire grievance file to the
Grievance Committee.
The appeal shall be signed by the complainant and filed with the Chairperson. Where the
appeal contains incomplete information, the Chairperson and/or the Committee shall promptly
seek the needed information from the complainant. In the event that such information is not
furnished within a reasonable time, and within the time limited by the Chairperson and/or the
Committee, the case may be closed without further proceedings.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 21/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
The Chairperson may require the respondent to serve, in writing an answer to the complaint.
Such answer shall be signed by the respondent and filed with the Chairperson within a time
specified by the Chairperson.
The Chairperson may refer a grievance for investigation if he or she deems such investigation
necessary and shall refer the same for investigation if so directed by the Committee. The
investigator shall make a preliminary investigation of the facts stated in the complaint and
answer and make a written report thereon to the Chairperson.
The Committee shall consider the complaint, answer and report and take suitable action
thereon. At any stage of the proceedings, the Committee shall have the right to summon the
complainant, respondent and any and all persons considered necessary to an equitable and
expeditious adjustment of the grievance proceedings shall be informal.
The Committee in its discretion may conduct a hearing, and the Chairperson shall preside at
such hearing and direct its conduct, including ruling on admissibility of evidence.
The burden of proof is on the complainant in such hearing.
Copies of rules established by the Committee for the conduct of its proceedings and hearings
shall be furnished each complainant and respondent.
The report of the Committee shall contain a statement of the Committee's determination of
fact, conclusions and findings. The Committee's findings shall be a final determination of the
grievance unless overruled by the Board and shall be rendered no later than 14 days after
submission to it of said grievance for settlement. The original decision shall be filed with the
Board and copies shall be sent to each employee involved, his or her representative, if any,
the head of the Department concerned and each member of the Committee. The Board shall
have 10 days after the Committee reports its findings to it to overrule the Committee.
Otherwise the Committee's findings shall be binding.
The Committee shall file with the Board all complaints, answers, reports and decisions,
together with stenographic record of all proceedings, transcripts of hearings, to be retained as
permanent records.
The proceedings of the Committee shall be confidential and are not to be disclosed except to
its Chairperson, members, committee personnel and the parties to the grievance. Nothing
herein contained, however, shall prevent the Board from making public the decisions of the
Committee filed with it.
Chapter 46. Legislation, Adoption of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 5-13-1974 as Ch. 49 of the
1974 Code; Art. II, 5-13-1974 as Ch. 50 of the 1974 Code, amended in its entirety at time of adoption
of Code 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996 (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I); Art. III, 8-13-1980 as L.L.
No. 1-1980 (Ch. 50A of the 1974 Code). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Public Hearings
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 49 of the 1974 Code]
§ 46-1. Public hearing required; notice.
Before voting upon the proposed enactment of a local law, the Board of Trustees shall fix a day, within
30 days after the presentation of a local law to it, for a public hearing thereon and, within 20 days after
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 22/376
[1]
such local law shall have been presented to it, shall cause a notice of the time and place of such
hearing to be given. Such public notice shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing the same to be
published once in the official newspaper at least three days prior to the day fixed for such hearing. In
case there is, at any time, no official newspaper, the Board of Trustees shall designate the manner of
giving such public notice. Such notice shall also contain the title of the proposed local law and a brief
explanatory statement thereof prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney.
§ 46-2. Attendance of Board; public access.
The Board of Trustees shall attend at the time and place appointed for such hearing, which shall be
within the village and reasonable of access and at a reasonable hour, and shall afford an opportunity
for a public hearing concerning such proposed local law.
§ 46-3. Proof of publication.
Proof of publication of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
Article II. Notice and Publication
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 50 of the 1974 Code; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code 8-
14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996[1]]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 46-4. Proposed public laws to be posted; notice of hearing.
The Village Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies of such proposed local law
and shall, not later than the day such notice is published as provided in Article I of this chapter, post
one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, in a conspicuous place in his or her office and shall
also make copies of such proposed local law available at his or her office for inspection by and
distribution to any interested person during business hours.
§ 46-5. Publication of adopted local law; posting.
After a public hearing, as provided in Article I of this chapter and upon adoption of a local law by the
Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk shall forthwith post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in his or
her office and shall, within 10 days after such adoption, cause the local law or ordinance, or an
abstract thereof describing the same in general terms, to be published in the official newspaper of the
village.
§ 46-6. Proof of posting and publication to be filed.
Proof of posting and publication required by §§ 46-4 and 46-5 hereof shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.
Article III. Summary Publication
[Adopted 8-13-1980 as L.L. No. 1-1980 (Ch.50A of the 1974 Code)]
§ 46-7. Legislative intent.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 23/376
The Village Board desires to reduce expenses with respect to publication in the Village of Albion official
newspaper of duly adopted local laws. The Village Board has determined that publication of local laws
in a consolidated form together with the posting of such local laws in their entirety will be sufficient to
notify the citizens of the Village of Albion of the contents of such newly adopted local laws.
§ 46-8. Procedure.
The Village Clerk shall, from the effective date of this Article, be authorized to publish duly adopted
local laws in a consolidated form, said form to be determined by said Village Clerk in such manner that
each respective publication contains the general substance and meaning of such local law. The Village
Clerk shall also post each duly adopted local law in its entirety in the Village of Albion offices for a
period of 10 days following the date of its adoption.
Chapter 50. Meetings
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 9-12-1990. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
Article I. Distribution of Minutes
[Adopted 9-12-1990]
§ 50-1. Delivery to Board members.
The minutes of Board meetings shall be written up and distributed to the members within one week of
said meeting.
Chapter 55. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 19.
Code of ethics — See Ch. 25.
Police Department — See Ch. 63.
Article I. Terms of Elective Offices
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 61, Art. I, of the 1974 Code]
§ 55-1. Mayor.
The term of office of the Village Mayor commencing with the successor of the present incumbent shall
be four years.
§ 55-2. Trustees; Village Justice.
The term of office of the Village Trustees commencing with the successors of the present incumbents
shall be four years, and the term of office of the Village Justice shall be four years, except as
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 24/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
hereinafter provided. If the term of office of any elected official in office at the time of the adoption of
this Article shall expire in a year which would require an election to be held in a year other than
biennial, the successor of such official shall be elected for a term of five years.
§ 55-3. Elections to be in even-numbered years.
Henceforth, Village elections shall be held biennially in even-numbered years, and all elected
officials of the Village of Albion shall be elected for terms of four years, except as hereinafter
provided.
If the term of any elected official in office at the time of the adoption of this Article shall expire in a
year which would require an election to be held in a year other than biennially in even-numbered
years, an election shall be held in such year, and there shall be elected to such office a successor
for a term to commence upon the expiration of the term of such incumbent, and to end at noon, on
the first Monday in the month following the Village election in the fifth calendar year following, and
the successors of such officials so elected shall be elected for terms of four official years.
§ 55-4. Statutory authorization.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
This article is adopted pursuant to § 3-302 of the Village Law.
Article II. Personal Business
[Adopted 2-6-1991]
§ 55-5. Prohibited acts.
The following shall apply to activities which are of a personal business nature:
No personal business shall be conducted at the Village office which may be interpreted to be
official Village of Albion business;
No instruction for delivery of personal business shall be directed to the Village office; and
Any such activity which may currently be occurring shall cease immediately.
Article III. Abolition of Village Justices and Court
[Adopted 1-21-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
§ 55-6. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion is to abolish and terminate the Albion
Village Court System and the two Village Justice positions pursuant to its authority under Village
Law §§ 3-301, 3-302 and 3-303. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion to
immediately terminate the Village Justice position which is due for election on March 16, 2004.
The remaining Village Justice position would continue until April 1, 2006, when the present term is
due to expire. On April 1, 2006, the Albion Village Court System would cease to exist.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 25/376
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
During the period from April 1, 2004 to April 1, 2006, the one Village Court Justice position due to
expire on April 1, 2006 shall remain. By April 1, 2004, the Mayor shall appoint, and the Board of
Trustees shall agree, a person to fill the position of Acting Village Court Justice, who will serve
when requested by the Village Court Justice or in the absence or inability of the Village Court
Justice.
On April 1, 2006, the Albion Village Court would cease to exist and the remaining Village Justice,
Acting Village Justice, Village Court Clerk and all supportive services would terminate.
§ 55-7. Timeline for terminations.
Effective April 1, 2004, the Village Justice position due for election on March 16, 2004, will terminate.
Effective April 1, 2004, there will be an Acting Village Court Justice position created. Effective April 1,
2006, the remaining Village Justice, the Acting Village Justice, the full-time Court Clerk and the Albion
Village Court System shall cease to exist.
§ 55-8. Town courts will adjudicate.
On or after April 1, 2006, all matters necessitating the intervention of the local justice court system,
both criminal and civil actions, originating in the Village of Albion or once adjudicated in the Albion
Village Court System shall be docketed in the Town of Albion Justice Court or the Town of Gaines
Justice Court by virtue of the Village of Albion being located in both aforementioned towns.
§ 55-9. Filings.
Within five days of the effective date of the local law, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion shall
file a copy of such local law with the Clerk of the Town of Albion and the Town of Gaines and with the
State Office of Court Administration.
Chapter 59. Parks and Recreation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 9-11-1991 as L.L. No. 5-1991
(Ch. 16 of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemeteries — See Ch. 12.
Animals — See Ch. 208.
§ 59-1. When open.
All parks owned and operated by the Village of Albion shall be open, unless physically closed,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only, except when authorized by the Chief of
Police.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any park which is physically closed by fence, gates or other physical device is not open.
§ 59-2. Designation of parks.
Parks presently operated by the village are:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 26/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Bullard Park.
Lafayette H. Beach Park.
Veterans' Memorial Park.
Waterman Park.
Any other parks operated by the village in the future shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter unless otherwise provided by local law.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 16-4, dealing with trespassing in Mount Albion Cemetery and other parks,
which followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
§ 59-3. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 61. Personnel Policies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 2-10-1993. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 19.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
Retirement benefits — See Ch. 75.
Article I. Creation of Full-Time Positions
[Adopted 2-10-1993]
§ 61-1. Procedures.
The department head must present a written request to the Village Board explaining the need for
the creation of a new position. This request must be accompanied by a job description, along with
a suggested starting rate of pay for the position.
If the position is approved by the Board, the department head must present a written request to
Orleans County's Civil Service Department, along with the Village Board-approved job description.
This must state the reason for the creation of the new position.
If the position is approved by the Civil Service Department, the department head must present a
letter to the respective union in which the new position resides, along with a copy of the Village
Board-approved job description and the Village Board-approved starting rate of pay.
If the position is accepted by the union:
The union representative should have the new job description and the starting rate of pay
incorporated into the current contract between the union and the Village of Albion as an
addendum.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 27/376
(2) The department head shall follow the hiring policy/procedure which was adopted at the March
18, 1992, Village Board meeting.
Chapter 63. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 9-10-1980 as L.L. No. 3-
1980 (Ch. 12A of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Chief of Police
[Adopted 9-10-1980 as L.L. No. 3-1980 (Ch. 12A of the 1974 Code)]
§ 63-1. Legislative intent.
The Village Board of Trustees enacts this Article for the purpose of abolishing the Village Department
of Public Safety and with it the office of Public Safety Administrator, which Department and position
were previously created by L.L. No. 4 of 1976, as amended by L.L. No. 3 of 1977. The Village Board of
Trustees is further desirous, by the enactment of this Article, of creating the office of Chief of Police of
the Albion Village Police Department, said Chief of Police to act as chief administrator of said Police
Department.
§ 63-2. Abolition of Department of Public Safety and office of
Public Safety Administrator.
The Department of Public Safety of the Village of Albion and the office of Public Safety Administrator,
as established by L.L. No. 4 of 1976, as amended by L.L. No. 3 of 1977, are hereby abolished. The
heretofore mentioned local laws which created said Department and position of Public Safety
Administrator are hereby rescinded in their entirety.
§ 63-3. Creation of office of Chief of Police.
The aforementioned local laws, by their terms, abolished the position of Chief of Police and transferred
the duties of the Chief of Police to the Public Safety Administrator. The office of Chief of Police of the
Albion Village Police Department is hereby reestablished. The office of Chief of Police shall be a fulltime
appointed position subject to the Civil Service Law of the State of New York with respect to
termination of the position, appointment or termination of the individual serving in the position,
disciplinary action, grievances, etc. The classification of the Chief of Police position and the
qualifications for the office of Chief of Police and the duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police
shall be established by the Civil Service Commission of the State of New York upon such Civil Service
Commission approving and certifying the position of Chief of Police, as submitted by the Village Board
of Trustees or as modified by said Civil Service Commission in a manner acceptable to the Village
Board of Trustees.
§ 63-4. When effective.
This Article shall take effect upon the filing and posting pursuant to the laws of the State of New York,
subject, however, to the approval and certification of the position of Chief of Police by the New York
State Civil Service Commission.
Chapter 66. Procurement Policy
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 28/376
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finances and fundraising — See Ch. 29.
§ 66-1. Review of purchase types; competitive bidding;
documentation.
Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine whether it is a purchase
contract or a public works contract. Once that determination is made, a good faith effort will be
made to determine whether it is known or can reasonably be expected that the aggregate amount
to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject to competitive bidding, taking into
account past purchases and the aggregate amount to be spent in a year. The following items are
not subject to competitive bidding pursuant to § 103 of the General Municipal Law: purchase
contracts under $20,000 and public works contracts under $35,000; emergency purchases; certain
municipal hospital purchases; goods purchased from agencies for the blind or severely
handicapped; goods purchased from correctional institutions; purchases under state and county
contracts; and surplus and secondhand purchases from another governmental entity.
[Amended 4-25-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding will be documented, in writing,
by the individual making the purchase. This documentation may include written or verbal quotes
from vendors, a memo from the purchaser indicating how the decision was arrived at, a copy of
the contract indicating the source which makes the item or service exempt, a memo from the
purchaser detailing the circumstances which led to an emergency purchase or any other written
documentation that is appropriate.
§ 66-2. Requests for proposals; exceptions.
[Amended 4-14-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
All goods and services will be secured by use of written requests for proposals, written quotations,
verbal quotations or any other method that assures that goods will be purchased at the lowest
price and that favoritism will be avoided, except in the following circumstances: purchase contracts
over $20,000 and public works contracts over $35,000; goods purchased from agencies for the
blind or severely handicapped pursuant to § 175-b of the State Finance Law; goods purchased
from correctional institutions pursuant to § 186 of the Correction Law; purchases under state
contracts pursuant to § 104 of the General Municipal Law; purchases under county contracts
pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 3, of the General Municipal Law; or purchases pursuant to § 66-6
of this chapter.
[Amended 4-25-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
This procurement policy requires that consideration in the solicitation of bids or quotes for
services, supplies or contracts to be given to:
Small and/or locally owned businesses, with priority to businesses owned by or which employ
low- or moderate-income persons as defined by HUD; and
Qualified minority- and women-owned business enterprises (M/WBE) listed in the directory of
certified minority- and women-owned businesses maintained by the Empire State
Development Corporation on its website at http://205.232.252.35 or at
www.nyloveswmbe.ny.gov. These provisions shall apply to the procurement of goods and
services related to the implementation of the. CDBC-funded programs and activities as well
as to the procurement of goods and services related to the general conduct of business by
the Village of Albion.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 29/376
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
A.
§ 66-3. Method of purchase.
The following method of purchase will be used when required by this policy in order to achieve the
highest savings:
[Amended 4-25-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
Purchase contracts.
Estimated Amount of Purchase Contract Method
$250 to $2,999 Verbal quotations
$3,000 to $19,999 Written/fax quotations; written request for
proposals
Public works contract.
Estimated Amount of Purchase Contract Method
$250 to $2,999 Verbal quotations
$3,000 to $4,999 Written/fax quotations
$5,000 to $34,999 Written/fax quotations; written request for
proposals
A good-faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of proposals or quotations. If the
purchaser is unable to obtain the required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event shall the failure to obtain the
proposals be a bar to the procurement.
§ 66-4. Documentation required.
Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each procurement.
§ 66-5. Awarding of contracts.
Documentation and an explanation is required whenever a contract is awarded to other than the lowest
responsible offeror. This documentation will include an explanation of how the award will achieve
savings or how the offeror was not responsible. A determination that the offeror is not responsible shall
be made by the purchaser and may not be challenged under any circumstances.
§ 66-6. Exemptions from solicitation.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the procurement policy may contain
circumstances when or types of procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body,
the solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best interest of the municipality.
In the following circumstances, it may not be in the best interests of the Village of Albion to solicit
quotations or document the basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill, training or expertise.
The individual or company must be chosen based on accountability, reliability, responsibility,
skill, education and training, judgment, integrity and moral worth. These qualifications are not
necessarily found in the individual or company that offers the lowest price, and the nature of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 30/376
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
these services are such that they do not readily lend themselves to competitive procurement
procedures.
In determining whether a service fits into this category, the Board of Trustees shall take into
consideration the following guidelines: whether the services are subject to state licensing or
testing requirements; whether substantial formal education or training is a necessary
prerequisite to the performances of the services; and whether the services require a personal
relationship between the individual and municipal officials. Professional or technical services
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: services of an attorney; services of a
physician; technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans, maps and estimates;
securing insurance coverage and/or services of an insurance broker; services of a certified
public accountant; investment management services; printing services involving extensive
writing, editing or artwork; management of municipally owned property; and computer
software or programming services for customized programs or services involved in substantial
modification and customizing of prepackaged software.
Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General Municipal Law. Due to the
nature of this exception, these goods or services must be purchased immediately, and a delay in
order to seek alternate proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the residents.
This subsection does not preclude alternate proposals if time permits.
Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods from any source. If alternate proposals are required,
the Village of Albion is precluded from purchasing surplus and secondhand goods at auctions or
through specific advertised sources where the best prices are usually obtained. It is also difficult to
try to compare prices of used goods, and a lower price may indicate an older product.
Goods or services under $250. The time and documentation required to purchase through this
policy may be more costly than the item itself and would therefore not be in the best interests of
the taxpayer. In addition, it is not likely that such de minimis contracts would be awarded based on
favoritism.
§ 66-7. Annual review.
This policy will be reviewed annually by the Village Board of Trustees.
Chapter 68. Property, Disposition of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 3-12-1986. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 68-1. Removal or disposition of property.
No property of the village, including wood and earth, may be taken, claimed or removed from
village property by a village employee, except as his or her supervisor may direct that such
property be moved for storage or disposal purposes.
No property, other than broken or used consumable items which are ordinarily of a type or kind
which are discarded and not salvaged after use, shall be disposed of without consent of the
Village Board. It is the duty of the Supervisor to notify the Village Board of any property which they
propose to sell or dispose of. Each supervisor shall provide the Board with the name and address
of a person who generally deals in such type of property, whether it be wood, dirt, shell casings
and furniture (this list is by way of example only and not inclusive), and advise the Board as to
such businessperson's opinion concerning the value of any such property.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 31/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 68-2. Public auction.
All village property to which this policy is applicable shall be sold at such time and place and upon
such terms and conditions as the Village Board may direct.
Unless the Board directs otherwise, all sales shall be advertised to the public one week in
advance of the sale.
Unless the Board directs otherwise, there shall be no prepayment on account of items sold by the
village.
Receipts given for village property shall identify the date, price, amount and kind of property.
§ 68-3. Posting to employees.
This policy shall be posted in each employee's place of work.
§ 68-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any employee violating this policy shall be subject to immediate dismissal.
Chapter 72. Records
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Public Access
[Adopted 5-28-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014[1]]
Editor’s Note: This local law also superseded former Article I, Public Access, adopted 9-9-1974, as
amended.
§ 72-1. Legislative intent.
The people's right to know the process of government decision-making and the documents and
statistics leading to determinations is basic to our society. Access to such information should not
be thwarted by shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy of confidentiality.
This article provides information concerning the procedures by which records may be obtained.
Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records required by the Freedom of
Information Law, as well as records otherwise available by law.
Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be construed in favor of the
availability of public records.
§ 72-2. Records Access Officer designated; duties and
responsibilities.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 32/376
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
C.
A.
The Village of Albion Clerk is responsible for insuring compliance with the regulations herein, and
designates the following person(s) as Records Access Officer(s):
Village of Albion Clerk
35-37 East Bank Street
Albion, NY 14411
The Records Access Officer is responsible for insuring appropriate agency response to public
requests for access to records. The designation of a Record Access Officer shall not be construed
to prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records or information available
to the public from continuing to do so.
The Records Access Officer shall insure that agency personnel:
Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
Assist persons seeking records to identify the records sought, if necessary, and when
appropriate, indicate the manner in which the records are filed, retrieved and generated to
assist persons in reasonably describing records.
Contact persons seeking records when a request is voluminous or when locating the records
involves substantial effort, so that personnel may ascertain the nature of records of primary
interest and attempt to reasonably reduce the volume of records requested.
Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
Make records available for inspection; or
Deny access to the records, in whole or in part, and explain, in writing, the reasons
therefor.
Upon request for copies of records, make a copy available upon payment of or an offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 72-8.
Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
The Village of Albion is not the custodian for such records; or
The records of which the Village of Albion is a custodian cannot be found after diligent
search.
§ 72-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at:
Village of Albion Office
35-37 East Bank Street
Albion, NY 14411
§ 72-4. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records produced during all hours
regularly open for business.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 33/376
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
These hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.; Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
Any request to inspect or copy documents should be made at least 24 hours in advance.
§ 72-5. Requests for public access to records.
A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted when records are readily
available.
If records are maintained on the Internet, the requester shall be informed that the records are
accessible via the Internet and in printed form, either on paper or other information storage
medium.
A response shall be given within five business days of receipt of request by:
Informing a person requesting records that the request, or portion of the request, does not
reasonably describe the records sought, including direction, to the extent possible, that would
enable that person to request records reasonably described;
Granting or denying access to records, in whole or in part;
Acknowledging the receipt of a request, in writing, including an approximate date when the
request will be granted or denied, in whole or in part, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances of the request and shall not be more than 20 business days after the date of
acknowledgement, or if it is known that circumstances prevent disclosure within 20 business
days from the date of such acknowledgement, providing a statement, in writing, indicating the
reason for inability to grant the request within that time and date certain, within a reasonable
period under the circumstances of the request, when the request will be granted, in whole or
in part; or
If the receipt of request was acknowledged, in writing, and included an approximate date
when the request would be granted, in whole or in part, within 20 business days of such
acknowledgement, but circumstances prevent disclosure within that time, providing a
statement, in writing, within 20 business days of such acknowledgement specifying the
reason for the inability to do so and a date certain, within a reasonable period under
circumstances of the request, when the request will be granted, in whole or in part.
In determining a reasonable time for granting or denying a request under the circumstances of a
request, personnel shall consider the volume of a request, the ease or difficulty in locating,
retrieving or generating records, the complexity of the request, the need to review records to
determine the extent to which they must be disclosed, the number of requests received by the
agency, and similar factors that bear on the ability to grant access to records promptly and within a
reasonable time.
A failure to comply with the time limitations described herein shall constitute a denial of a request
that may be appealed. Such failure shall include situations in which an officer or employee:
Fails to grant access to the records sought, deny access, in writing, or acknowledge the
receipt of a request within five business days of the receipt of the request;
Acknowledges the receipt of a request within five business days but fails to furnish an
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied, in whole or in part;
Furnishes an acknowledgement of the receipt of a request within five business days with an
approximate date for granting or denying access, in whole or in part, that is unreasonable
under the circumstances of the request;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 34/376
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
(1)
E.
Fails to respond to a request within a reasonable time after the appropriate date given or
within 20 business days after the date of acknowledgement of the receipt of a request;
Determines to grant a request, in whole or in part, within 20 business days of the
acknowledgement of the receipt of a request, but fails to do so, unless the agency provides
the reason for its inability to do so, in writing, and a date certain within which the request will
be granted, in whole or in part;
Does not grant a request, in whole or in part, within 20 business days of the
acknowledgement of the receipt of a request and fails to provide the reason, in writing,
explaining the inability to do so and a date certain by which the request will be granted, in
whole or in part; or,
Responds to a request, stating that more than 20 business days are needed to grant or deny
the request, in whole or in part, and provides a date certain within which that will be
accomplished, but such date is unreasonable under the circumstances of the request.
§ 72-6. List to be maintained by subject matter.
The records access officer shall maintain a current list by subject matter of all records in his or her
possession, whether or not the records are available pursuant to Subdivision, 2 of Section 87 of
the Public Officers Law.
The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit identification of the category of the
record sought.
The subject matter list shall be updated annually. The most recent update shall appear on the first
page of the subject matter list.
§ 72-7. Denial of access to records.
Denial of access to records shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and advising the
requester of the right to appeal to the individual or body established to determine appeals (which
or who) shall be identified by name, title, business address and business phone number.
If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 72-5 of this article, such failure
shall be deemed a denial of access.
The following person or persons or body shall determine appeals regarding denial of access to
records under the Freedom of Information Law:[1]
Mayor of the Village of Albion
35 East Bank Street
Albion, NY 14411
(585) 589-9176
Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 87 et seq.
Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of denial.
The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to determine appeals shall
commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
The date and location of the requests for records;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 35/376
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A description, to the extent possible, of the records that were denied; and
The name and return address of the person denied access.
A failure to determine an appeal within 10 business days of its receipt by granting access to the
records sought or fully explaining the reasons for further denial, in writing, shall constitute a denial
of the appeal.
The person or body designated to determine appeals shall transmit to the Committee on Open
Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of appeals. Such copies shall be addressed to:
Committee on Open Government
Department of State
One Commerce Drive
99 Washington Avenue, Suite 650
Albany, NY 12231
The person or body designated to determine appeals shall inform the appellant and the
Committee on Open Government of its determination, in writing, within 10 business days of receipt
of an appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open Government in
the same manner set forth in Subsection F of this section.
§ 72-8. Fees.
There shall be no fee charged for:
Inspection of records;
Search for records; or;
Any certification pursuant to this article.
Fees for copies may be charged, provided that:
The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for photocopies not exceeding
nine inches by 14 inches. This section shall not be construed to mandate the raising of fees
where agencies or municipalities in the past have charged less than $0.25 for such copies;
The fee for photocopies of records in excess of nine inches by 14 inches shall not exceed the
actual cost of the reproduction; or
An agency has the authority to redact portions of a paper record and does so prior to
disclosure of the record by making a photocopy from which the proper redactions are made.
The fee an agency may charge for a copy of any other record is based on the actual cost of the
reproduction and may include only the following:
An amount equal to the hourly salary attributing to the lowest paid employee who has the
necessary skill required to prepare a copy of the requested record, but only when more than
two hours of the employee's time is necessary to do so; and
The actual cost of the storage device or media provided to the person making the request in
complying with such request; or
The actual cost to the agency of engaging an outside professional service to prepare a copy
of a record, but only when an agency's information technology equipment is inadequate to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 36/376
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
prepare a copy, and if such service is used to prepare a copy.
When an agency has the ability to retrieve or extract a record or data maintained in a computer
storage system with reasonable effort, or when doing so requires less employee time than
engaging in manual retrieval or redactions from nonelectric records, the agency shall be required
to retrieve or extract such record or data electronically. In such case, the agency may charge a fee
in accordance with Subsections C(1) and (2) above.
An agency shall inform a person requesting a record of the estimated cost of preparing a copy of
the record if more than two hours of an agency employee's time is needed, or if it is necessary to
retain an outside professional service to prepare a copy of the record.
An agency requires that the fee for copying or reproducing a record be paid in advance of the
preparation of such copy.
Chapter 74. Residency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Albion 4-13-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 61.
§ 74-1. Residency within county.
Consistent with § 3-300 of the Village Law of the State of New York, the Village Board of Trustees may
provide by Board resolution, in lieu of any other residency requirement imposed by law, that any
appointed Village officer may reside within the county in which the Village is wholly or partially situated
to any office, board, committee or commission.
§ 74-2. Consideration of residency.
Prior to said appointment, due consideration and preference will be given to individuals seeking
appointment in the following order:
Applicants who reside within the Village of Albion;
Applicants who reside within the county in which the Village is wholly or partially situated and
who own real property within the Village of Albion; or
Applicants who reside within the county in which the Village is wholly or partially situated but
do not own any real property within the Village of Albion.
In all instances the intent is to appoint persons who are best qualified to perform the
responsibilities of the office. In the case of equally qualified candidates, preference will always be
given to Village residents, except in the event where an appointed officer who is also a Village
employee is up for reappointment, in which case preference will be given to the Village employee,
even though he or she may not be a Village resident.
Chapter 75. Retirement Benefits
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 10-9-1986; Art. II, 2-11-
1987. Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 37/376
A.
B.
C.
Article I. Career Retirement
[Adopted 10-9-1986]
§ 75-1. Conferral of benefits.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion does hereby elect to provide the following benefits:
Section 375-i of the Retirement and Social Security Law as presently or hereafter amended.
The additional pension benefits of § 375-e of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as presently
or hereafter amended, and entitled "guaranteed retirement benefits for employees of participating
employers."
The Career Retirement Plan of § 375-g of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as presently or
hereafter amended, for employees of participating employers.
Article II. Final Average Salary
[Adopted 2-11-1987]
§ 75-2. Conferral of benefits.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion does hereby elect, as provided in § 302, Subdivision
9(d), of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as presently or hereafter amended, to grant one
year's final average salary for eligible employees.
Chapter 78. Seal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 70 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 78-1. Description of seal.
The seal heretofore in use by the Trustees of the Village of Albion and described as follows: consisting
of two circles, one being within the other, and between the two are the words, "The Trustees of the
Village of Albion. Incorporated 1828," and in the center of the inside circle the word "Seal," is hereby
declared to be the Corporate Seal of the Village of Albion.
§ 78-2. Custody; care.
The Village Clerk shall have the custody of the Village Seal and shall carefully preserve the same in
the village office and shall affix the same to such instruments or writings as the Trustees and the laws
of the state may authorize him or her to do.
Chapter 82. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 38/376
Article I. Utility Services
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 59 of the 1974 Code]
§ 82-1. Tax on the furnishing of utility services.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State of New York, a tax equal to
1% of its gross income from and after the first day of July 1961 is hereby imposed upon every utility
doing business in the Village of Albion which is subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Public Service and which has a gross income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500,
except motor carriers or brokers, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of July 1961 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in the Village of
Albion which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Albion and shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not
be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village
of Albion, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction
within such limits.
§ 82-2. Definitions.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GROSS INCOME
Include receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, (except sales
hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be
included in gross income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in this state, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not
such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; provided, however, that "gross
income" with respect to a provider of telecommunication services shall not include receipts from
the sale of telecommunication services as such services are defined in § 186-e of the Tax Law.
"Gross income" also includes profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the
sale of personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also
receipts from interest, dividends and royalties, derived from sources within this state other than
such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the tax
paying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in
connection with the receipt thereof, also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and
rentals) within this state whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME
Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water or refrigeration, or in or by
reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water or refrigerator
service in this state, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any
deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor
or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 39/376
Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock companies or associations,
partnerships and limited liability companies, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting in a
fiduciary capacity or any other entity, and persons, their assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers,
appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities,
political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations and
associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual,
and excepting a corporation organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of leasing from a
city in this state a waterworks system designed to supply water at cost to users thereof for
discharge, either before or after industrial use, into a river within such city in order to improve the
flow and condition of such river and thereby to provide a means to relieve such river from
pollution.
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
Shall have the same meaning as such term is defined in § 186-e of the Tax Law.
UTILITY
Includes every person (including every provider of telecommunication services) subject to the
supervision of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of
operating on the public highways of this state one or more omnibuses, having a seating capacity
of more than seven persons, and persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing
sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit,
subway and elevated railroads and also includes every person (whether or or not such person is
subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water or refrigeration, delivered
through mains, pipes or wires or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water or refrigeration service, by
means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of
such person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 82-3. Utilities to keep records.
Every utility subject to a tax under this article shall keep such records of its business and in such form
as the Treasurer may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except
that the Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept
longer.
§ 82-4. Utilities to file returns.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or 15th of March, a return for the 12
calendar months ending December 31 preceding such return date or any portion thereof for which the
tax imposed hereby is effective; provided, however, that, in lieu of the annual return required by the
foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly on or before September 25, December 25, March 25
and June 25, a return for the three calendar months preceding each such return date and, in the case
of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax imposed hereby was
effective. Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered
thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him or her for such
purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he or she may require to be
included therein. The Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require any utility
doing business in the Village of Albion to file at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall
contain any data that may be specified by him or her, and he or she may require any utility doing
business in the Village of Albion to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him
or her, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have
annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a
copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by a
corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 40/376
A.
B.
§ 82-5. Tax payable with return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the Treasurer the tax
imposed by this article for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the
time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the return is
required to be filed.
§ 82-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the
Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days after the same is
required by notice from him or her, or if no return is made for any period, the Treasurer shall
determine the amount of tax due from such information as he or she is able to obtain, and if
necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He or she shall give
notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after
the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the
Treasurer of his or her own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the Treasurer shall
give notice of his or her decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law of the State of New York, if application
therefor is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest
and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the Treasurer and an undertaking filed
with him or her, in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the Supreme Court shall
approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will
pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the
option of the applicant such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest,
penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay
such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such order.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no
assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three years from the
date of the filing of a return, provided, however, that, where no return has been filed as required by
this article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 82-7. Giving of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given by mailing the same
to the person for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope, addressed to such person or persons at
the address given in the last return filed by such person or persons under this article, or, if no return
has been filed, then to such address as may be obtained from existing directories or records. The
mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person or
persons to whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the provisions of this
article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 82-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or any portion thereof within the
time required by this article shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of
such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such return was
required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Treasurer, for causes shown, may extend the time
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 41/376
A.
for filing any return and, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 82-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall make application for
a refund thereof and the Treasurer or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion
thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined.
For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Treasurer.
However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Treasurer
as hereinbefore provided unless the Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his or
her own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law of the State of New York that such determination was
erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application
for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax
or penalty complained of and the Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After
making his or her determination, the Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he or she shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said Article 78, subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 82-10. Tax to be part of operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and shall not be
added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a
part of the operating cost of such utility.
§ 82-11. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the Village Attorney
shall, upon the request of the Treasurer, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The
proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer. Each such tax
and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner
and to the same extent that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 82-12. Village Treasurer to make rules; subpoena.
In the administration of this article, the Treasurer shall have power to make such reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his or her powers and
the performance of his or her duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with
reference to any matter within the line of his or her official duty under this article, and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 82-13. Confidentiality; penalty for violation.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be
unlawful for the Treasurer, or any agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Albion, to divulge or
make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income or any
particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. The officer charged with the
custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything
contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 42/376
B.
C.
A.
B.
Albion in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article or on behalf of the State Tax
Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when
the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of
which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said
returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular returns and the items thereof or the publication of delinquent lists
showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner
provided for by this article, together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the
Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the Village
Attorney or other legal representatives of the Village of Albion of the return of any person who
shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has
been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding,
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer,
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Albion he or she shall be dismissed from office and shall
be incapable of holding any office or employment in the Village of Albion for a period of five years
thereafter.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal
officer of any city or any other village in the State of New York information contained in returns
filed under this article, provided that such city or other village grants similar privileges to the
Village of Albion, and provided that such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any information contained in
such returns.
§ 82-14. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Treasurer under this article shall be paid into the treasury of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village.
Article II. Termination of Village's Status as Assessing Unit
[Adopted 1-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 82-15. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion is to implement § 1402 (3) of the Real
Property Tax Law providing for the voluntary termination of the Village's status as an assessing
unit, as provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the intent of this
article to abolish the position of Assessor and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided
by law for the review of the assessment of real property located in the Village of Albion.
On or after the effective date of this article, the Village of Albion shall cease to be an assessing
unit.
§ 82-16. Abolition of position of Assessor.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Albion is hereby abolished.
§ 82-17. Abolition of Board of Assessment Review.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 43/376
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Albion is hereby abolished.
§ 82-18. Towns to assume assessment power.
On or after the effective date of this article, because the Village is located in the Town of Gaines and
Town of Albion, taxes in the Village of Albion shall be levied on a copy of the applicable assessment
roll of the Town of Albion and/or the Town of Gaines, with the taxable status date of the applicable town
controlling for the Village.
§ 82-19. Filings.
Within five days of the effective date of this local law, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion
shall file a copy of such local law with the Clerk and Assessor of the Town of Albion and Town of
Gaines and with the State Board of Real Property Services.
Article III. Historic Property Exemption
[Adopted 1-14-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
§ 82-20. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide an exemption for qualifying historic real property as set forth in
Real Property Tax Law § 444-a. Real property altered or rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date
of this article shall be exempt from taxation as herein provided.
§ 82-21. Exemption granted; amount; conditions.
Historic property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to
such alteration or rehabilitation pursuant to the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percent of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or rehabilitation unless:
Such property has been designated as a landmark, or is a property that contributes to the
character of an historic district, created by a local law passed pursuant to § 96-a or 119-dd of
the General Municipal Law;
Alterations or rehabilitation must be made for means of historic preservation;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 44/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property meets guidelines and review standards in
the local preservation law;
Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property is approved by the local preservation
commission prior to commencement of work;
Alterations or rehabilitation is commenced subsequent to the effective date of this article.
§ 82-22. Application required.
Such exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner or owners of such historic real
property on a form prescribed by the state board. The application shall be filed with the Assessor of the
Village of Albion having power to assess property for taxation on or before the appropriate taxable
status date of such town.
§ 82-23. Application approval; commencement of exemption;
recordkeeping.
Such exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an
exemption pursuant to this article. The Assessor shall approve such application, and such property
shall thereafter be exempt from taxation from county real property taxes as herein provided
commencing with the assessment roll prepared on the basis of the taxable status date referred to in
§ 82-22 of this article. The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be
entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property, with the amount of
exemption shown in a separate column.
Article IV. Exemption for Capital Improvements to
Residential Buildings
[Adopted 1-14-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
§ 82-24. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article to grant the exemption authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 421-f. Real
property altered or rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from
taxation as herein provided.
§ 82-25. Exemption granted; eligibility.
Residential buildings, which for the purposes of this article shall mean any building or structure
designed and occupied exclusively for residential purposes by not more than two families, that are
reconstructed, altered or improved shall be exempt from taxation levied by the Village of Albion on the
increase in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to the extent
provided hereinafter, pursuant to § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 82-26. Duration and calculation.
The length of the exemption shall be eight years. The exemption shall be computed pursuant to the
following schedule:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 45/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Year of Exemption Percent of Exemption Base Exempt from Tax
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
6 37.5%
7 25%
8 12.5%
§ 82-27. Exemption base and market value.
The "exemption base" shall be the increase in assessed value as determined in the initial year of
the term of the exemption, except as provided in Subsection B of this section.
In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or more is certified for a final
assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the state board (Office of Real Property Services), the
exemption base shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the total
assessed value of the parcel on such final assessment roll (after accounting for any physical or
quantity changes to the parcel since the immediately preceding assessment roll), and the
denominator of which shall be the total assessed value of the parcel on the immediately preceding
final assessment roll. The result shall be the new exemption base, notwithstanding the fact that
the Assessor receives certification of the change in level of assessment after the completion,
verification, and filing of the final assessment roll. In the event that the Assessor does not have
custody of the roll when such certification is received, the Assessor shall certify the recomputed
exemption in a manner authorized by the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
The exemption shall be limited to a maximum of $80,000 in increased market value of the property
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement, and any increase in market value
shall not be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this article. The market value of such
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement shall be equal to the increased assessed value
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement divided by the most recently
established state equalization rate or special equalization rate, unless such rate is 95% or more, in
which case the increase in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement is to be considered equal to market value.
§ 82-28. Requirements.
No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted for reconstruction, alteration or improvement
unless:
Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced subsequent to the effective date
of this article.
The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement exceeds $3,000.
The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the building reconstructed, altered, or
improved is at least five years old.
The reconstruction, alteration, or improvement is not ordinary maintenance or repairs.
§ 82-29. Application.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 46/376
A.
B.
A.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such building on a form
prescribed by the state board (Office of Real Property Services). The application shall be filed with the
Assessor for the Village of Albion having the power to assess properly for taxation on or before the
appropriate taxable status date of such town. Improvements to residential buildings must be completed
to qualify for the exemption pursuant to this article.
§ 82-30. Exemption discontinuance.
In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this article ceases to be used
primarily for residential purposes or title thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or distributees
of the owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this article shall cease.
Upon determining that an exemption granted pursuant to this article should be discontinued, the
Assessor shall mail a notice so stating to the owner or owners thereof at the time and in the
manner provided by § 510 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law. Such owner or owners
shall be entitled to seek administrative and judicial review of such action in the manner provided
by law, provided that the burden shall be on such owner or owners to establish eligibility for the
exemption.
Article V. Exemption for Conversion from Nonresidential to
Mixed-Use Property
[Adopted 1-14-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
§ 82-31. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article to grant the tax exemption authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-a
granting a qualified owner an exemption for conversion of nonresidential real property to mixed-use
property. Real property altered or rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be
exempt from taxation as herein provided.
§ 82-32. Exemption granted; eligibility.
As authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-a, the Village of Albion does hereby provide that
qualifying real property that was once nonresidential and is later converted to mixed-use property,
partially nonresidential and partially residential shall be exempt from taxation levied by the Village of
Albion on the increase in assessed value attributable to reconstructions, alterations or improvements to
the extent provided hereinafter pursuant to the above-referenced § 485-a.
§ 82-33. Duration and calculation; exemption base.
The length of the exemption shall be 12 years. The exemption shall be computed pursuant to the
following schedule:
Years of Exemption
Percentage of Exemption Base Exempt from
Tax
1 through 8 100%
9 80%
10 60%
11 40%
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 47/376
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Years of Exemption
Percentage of Exemption Base Exempt from
Tax
12 20%
The "exemption base" shall be determined for each year in which there is an increase in assessed
value attributable from that of the previous year's assessed value.
§ 82-34. Requirements and exclusions.
No such exemption shall be granted unless:
The conversion was commenced subsequent to the date on which this article took effect.
The cost of the conversion exceeds the sum of $10,000 or such greater amount as may be
specified by a Village local law.
The term "conversion" shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to any other real property tax
exemption granted to the same improvement to real property, except where, during the period of
such previous exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were made to the local
government in an amount that would be equal to or greater than such improvements had such
property been granted the exemption. In such case, an exemption shall be granted pursuant to
this article equal to the 12 year exemption granted pursuant to this article less the number of years
the property would have been previously exempt from real property taxes.
§ 82-35. Application; commencement of exemption;
recordkeeping.
The Assessor shall grant the exemption only upon application of the owner of such real property
on the form prescribed by the state board. The application shall be filed with the Assessor for the
Village of Albion on or before the appropriate taxable status date of the Village.
If the Assessor approves the application for exemption, the real property shall thereafter be
exempt from taxation as provided herein commencing with the assessment roll prepared after the
taxable status date referred to in this article. The assessed value of any exemption granted
pursuant to this article shall be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
Article VI. Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-12-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 82-36. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the within article to adopt a local law to provide a qualified owner an exemption for
qualifying residential real property from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such
property, which exemption shall not exceed $6,000, and in addition to provide a disability exemption to
the multiple of 50% of the disability rating not to exceed $20,000, all as set forth in Real Property Tax
Law § 458-b.
§ 82-37. Cold War veterans exemption.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 48/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
As is authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 458-b, the Village of Albion does hereby provide that
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the
assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $6,000
or the product of $6,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the assessing unit, or, in
the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
In addition, as is authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 458-b, to the exemption provided by
Subsection A of this section, where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of Defense because of a
service-connected disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of the product of the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $20,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special
assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
§ 82-38. Time limitation.
There is no automatic termination period, often referred to as a "sunset provision," to this article, and
any automatic termination period provision pertaining to the Cold War tax exemption as set forth in
Real Property Tax Law § 458-b shall have no effect on this article.
§ 82-39. When effective.
The within article shall be effective immediately upon passage, subject to the Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-b, except for any automatic termination period provisions in the law and proper filing with the
Office of the Secretary of State.
Article VII. Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 9-12-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 82-40. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law and the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 82-41. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to the applicable provisions of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York, the maximum veterans exemption from real property taxes for property located in the Village of
Albion are the exemptions which are currently permitted pursuant to Subparagraph 2 (a,b,c) of § 458-
a, being $6,000, $10,000 and $20,000, respectively, more particularly established as follows:
Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 15% of the
assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed the
lesser of $6,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of Albion.
In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A, where the veteran served in a combat
theatre or combat zone operations, as documented by the award of the United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such property; provided, however that such exemption
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 49/376
C.
A.
shall not exceed the lesser of $10,000 or the product of $10,000 multiplied by the latest state
equalization rate of the Village of Albion.
In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this section, where the veteran
received a compensation rating from the United States Veterans Administration because of a
service-connected disability, qualifying residential property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property multiplied by 50% of the veteran's
disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $20,000 or
the product of $20,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of Albion.
§ 82-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon adoption and its filing with the Secretary of State and
shall apply to the assessment rolls prepared on the basis of the taxable status dates occurring on or
after September 12, 2018.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 90. Appearance Tickets
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 90-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Appearance Tickets Law of the Village of Albion."
§ 90-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Fire Marshal and the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Village of Albion issue to and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations of state statutes,
local laws and rules or regulations of the Village of Albion relating to parking; licensing of occupations
or business; fire prevention and safety; health and sanitation; and building, zoning and planning.
§ 90-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET
A written notice issued and subscribed by a police officer or other public servant authorized by
state law or local law enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law to issue
the same directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a
designated future time in connection with his or her alleged commission of a designated offense. A
notice conforming to such definition constitutes an "appearance ticket," regardless of whether it is
referred to in some other provision of law as a summons or by any other name or title.
§ 90-4. Designation of officials to issue tickets.
The Fire Marshal and Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Albion is hereby authorized to
issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to violations of state statutes, local laws and rules
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 50/376
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
or regulations of the Village of Albion that such public servant is required or authorized to enforce,
including the violation of any state or local law relating to building construction, zoning and fire
prevention and safety, as well as related parking restrictions enacted for fire-safety purposes.
The Fire Marshal and Code Enforcement Officer or his or her appointed deputies shall also have
the power and authority to issue appearance tickets for violations of these sections of the Code of
the Village of Albion dealing with junk cars, junkyards, control of litter, signs, garbage and refuse,
dumping, unsafe buildings, building construction, solid waste and abandoned vehicles.
The Animal Control Officer shall also have the power and authority to issue appearance tickets for
violations of state statutes, local laws and rules and regulations of the Village of Albion dealing
with animals.
Chapter 112. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 116.
Building construction — See Ch. 161.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 179.
ATTACHMENTS
112a Parameters of Concern
Article I. General Provisions
§ 112-1. Short title.
For brevity and ease of communication, this chapter may be cited as the "Village of Albion Sewer Use
Law."
§ 112-2. General purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to provide for efficient, economic, environmentally safe and legal
operation of the Village of Albion Joint Municipal Industrial Pollution Control Facility, hereinafter cited
as "JMIPCF."
§ 112-3. Purpose.
The specific purposes of this chapter are as follows:
To prevent the introduction of substances into the JMIPCF that will:
Interfere with the JMIPCF in any way.
Pass through the JMIPCF to the state's waters and cause contravention of standards for
those waters or cause violation of the JMIPCF's State Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) permit.
Increase the cost or otherwise hamper the disposal of JMIPCF sludge and/or residuals.
Endanger municipal employees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 51/376
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
D.
Cause air pollution or groundwater pollution, directly or indirectly.
Cause, directly or indirectly, any public nuisance condition.
To prevent new sources of infiltration and inflow and, as much as possible, eliminate existing
sources of infiltration and inflow.
To assure that new sewers and connections are properly constructed.
To provide for equitable distribution to all users of the JMIPCF of all costs associated with sewage
transmission, treatment and residuals disposal, and to provide for the collection of such costs.
§ 112-4. Applicability.
Articles I, II, IV, VIII, XI, XIII and XV shall apply in all incorporated areas of the Village of Albion.
Articles III, V, VI, VII, IX and X shall apply only in incorporated areas of the Village of Albion which are
also within the service area of the JMIPCF.
Article II. Terminology
§ 112-5. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated in the section where the term is used in this chapter, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as stated below.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE
Sewage whose concentration of one or more characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the
maximum concentrations of the characteristics of normal sewage (see "normal sewage").
ACT OR THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., as may be amended.
ADMINISTRATOR
The Regional Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA),
Region 2.
AMMONIA
The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of
ammonia in a sample, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT
That person who makes application for any permit. The applicant may be an owner, new or old, or
his/her agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) or the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event that the NYSDEC is delegated approval
authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE
The procedures defined as "standard methods" in this Article, or other procedures approved by
the Superintendent, for flow measurement or determination of the concentration of pollutants or
their surrogates in waters, wastewaters and/or sludge's.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 52/376
A.
B.
C.
ASTM (DENOTING AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS)
The latest edition of any ASTM specification, when stipulated in this chapter.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER
A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President, if the industrial user is a
corporation.
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship,
respectively.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The result obtained when using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the aerobic biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in a sample, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDER
Any person who undertakes to construct a building or any part of a building, either under contract
or for resale.
BUILDING DRAIN
That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the building walls and conveys it to the
building lateral, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
CHIEF OPERATOR
The licensed operator in charge of the Village of Albion Joint Municipal Industrial Pollution Control
Facility (JMIPCF).
CHLORINE DEMAND
The result obtained when using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the difference
between the amount of chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in the
sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
CLERK
The person appointed by the Board of Trustees to perform clerical and financial matters for the
village, as designated.
COD (DENOTING CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The result obtained when using an approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen
requirement of that portion of matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation, by a specific
chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COLOR
The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water.
One-hundred percent-transmittance is equivalent to zero point zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE
The sample resulting from the combination of individual samples of wastewater taken at selected
intervals, for a specified time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes or the
individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION
Attachment of one user to a sewer (see "extension").
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 53/376
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE)
The one-time application fee to offset Village of Albion expenses to process an application for a
connection of a building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also covers plan review, permit
issuance, street repair cost and inspection costs. The fee may be scaled to the amount of work
involved or to the size of the public sewer involved.
CONTROL AUTHORITY
The term shall refer to an approval authority, or to the Superintendent when the Village of Albion
has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
CONTROL MANHOLE
A manhole accessible to the control authority in or upstream of the street lateral, such that
samples collected from the manhole represent the discharge to the JMIPCF.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT
A pollutant that the JMIPCF was designed to treat, defined in accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER
The water discharged from any system of condensation, air-conditioning, refrigeration or other
sources. It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce COD or suspended solids in
excess of five milligrams per liter, or toxic substances, as limited elsewhere in this chapter.
COUNTY
The county in which the Village of Albion is located.
DEVELOPER
Any person who subdivides land for the purpose of constructing or causing to be constructed
buildings for which wastewater disposal facilities are required.
DIRECT DISCHARGE
The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of New York
(for reference, see "indirect discharge").
DOMESTIC WASTES
See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWERS
The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future connection to the JMIPCF but which is not
used, in the meantime, for transport of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT
An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
END-OF-PIPE
For the purpose of determining compliance with limitations prescribed by Article IX, the control
manhole, provided that the samples collected from the control manhole are representative of the
discharge to the JMIPCF.
END-OF-PIPE CONCENTRATION
The concentration of a substance in a sample of wastewater at end of pipe.
END-OF-PROCESS CONCENTRATION
See "National Categorical Pretreatment Standard."
EPA, USEPA OR UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
The agency of the federal government charged with the administration and enforcement of federal
environmental laws, rules and regulations. Also may be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of this agency.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 54/376
EXTENSION
Attachment of a sewer line, with more than one user, to an existing sewer line.
FLOATABLE OIL
Oil, grease or fat in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in a wastewater treatment facility.
FLOW RATE
The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain period of time.
GARBAGE
The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, from the handling, storage
and sale of produce and from the packaging and canning of food.
GRAB SAMPLE
A single sample of wastewater representing the physical, chemical and biological characteristics
of the wastewater at one point and time.
ICS FORM
The form used by the NYSDEC to survey industries to perform and update the industrial chemical
survey.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE
The introduction of wastewater into the JMIPCF for treatment and ultimate discharge of the treated
effluent to the state's waters (for reference, see "direct discharge").
INDUSTRIAL
Meaning or pertaining to industry, manufacturing, commerce, trade, business or institution, and
distinguished from domestic or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS)
The survey of industries in New York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical
usage and storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL USER
See "user, industrial."
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
The liquid or liquid-carried solid, liquid and/or gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, service, utility or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION
Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system (excluding building drains) from the
ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. "Infiltration"
does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. "Infiltration" is inadvertent, that is, not
purposely designed or built into the sewer or drain.
INFLOW
Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system (including building drains) from sources
such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers,
catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation drains, swimming pools, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage. "Inflow" does not include and is distinguished from infiltration.
"Inflow" is purposely designed and/or built into the sewer or drain.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 55/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Inhibits or disrupts the JMIPCF, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Village of Albion JMIPCF's
SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the JMIPCF in accordance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or
local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as
the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)"], and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA);
The Clean Air Act;
The Toxic Substance Control Act; and
The Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
JMIPCF AND PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS
The "JMIPCF" is the portion of the system designed to provide treatment to wastewater and to
treat sludge and residuals derived from such treatment, owned and operated by the Village of
Albion. A "publicly owned treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C
1292), which is owned, in this instance, by Village of Albion, includes any sewers and
appurtenances that transport wastewater to the JMIPCF, but does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not connected directly or indirectly to a facility providing treatment.
LATERAL, BUILDING
The sewer extension from the building drain to the sewer main or other place of wastewater
disposal.
LATERAL, STREET
Same as "building lateral."
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(B) and (C) of the Act (22 U.S.C. § 1347), which applies to a specific category of
industrial users. These standards apply at the end of the categorical process ("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD
Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(B) of the Act, and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET
Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, to state's waters.
NEW OWNER
That individual or entity who purchased property within the service area of the Village of Albion
after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW SOURCE
Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of the proposed
regulation prescribing a Section 307(C) (33 U.S.C. § 1317) Categorical Pretreatment Standard
which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 56/376
NEW USER
A discharger to the JMIPCF who commences discharge after the effective date of this chapter.
NORMAL SEWAGE
See "sewage, normal."
NUISANCE
The use or lack of use of the JMIPCF in such a manner so as to endanger life or health, give
offense to the senses or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of
the JMIPCF.
OIL AND GREASE
The result obtained when using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of
fats, wax, grease and oil in a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
OLD OWNER
That individual or entity who owns or owned a property, within the service area of the JMIPCF,
purchased prior to the effective date of this chapter, or who inherited the property at any time and
intends to sell the property or has sold the property to a new owner; also the agent of the old
owner.
OTHER WASTES
Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood, egg shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings,
bark, sand, lime, ashes and all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial
wastes. Also, the discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial waste.
PASS-THROUGH
The discharge which exits the Village of Albion JMIPCF into waters of the state in quantities,
which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the JMIPCF's State Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT
A temporary revocable written document allowing use of the JMIPCF for specified wastes over a
limited period of time, containing sampling locations and reporting frequencies and requiring other
actions as authorized by this chapter.
PERSON
Any individual, public or private corporation, political subdivision, federal, state or local agency or
entity, association, trust, estate or any other legal entity whatsoever.
pH
The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, in gram moles per liter of
solution. A pH value of seven point zero (7.0), the pH scale midpoint, represents neutrality. Values
above seven point zero (7.0) represent alkaline conditions. Values below seven point zero (7.0)
represent acid conditions.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL
See "total phosphorus."
POLLUTANT
Any material placed into or onto the state's waters, lands and/or airs which interferes with the
beneficial use of that water, land and/or air by any living thing at any time.
POLLUTION
The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological
integrity of the state's waters, lands and/or airs resulting from the introduction of a pollutant into
these media.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 57/376
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT)
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the JMIPCF. The reduction or alteration can be
achieved by physical, chemical or biological process, process changes, or by other means, except
as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(D).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any categorical standard or prohibitive discharge standard.
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS
The most recently revised or updated list, developed by the EPA, in accordance with the Act.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD
See "National Prohibitive Discharge Standard."
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE
The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, and with no particle having a dimension greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any
dimension.
RECEIVING WATERS
A natural watercourse or body of water (usually waters of the state) into which treated or untreated
sewage is discharged.
ROOF DRAIN
A drain installed to receive water collecting on the surface of a roof for disposal.
SEPTAGE
All liquids and solids in and removed from septic tanks, holding tanks, cesspools or approved-type
of chemical toilets, including, but not limited to those serving private residences, commercial
establishments, institutions and industries. Also sludge from small sewage treatment plants.
"Septage" shall not have been contaminated with substances of concern or priority pollutants.
SEPTIC TANK
A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting of an underground tank (with suitable
baffling), constructed in accordance with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SERVICE AREA OF THE JMIPCF
The legally defined bounds of real property from which wastewater may be discharged into the
JMIPCF. The bounds shall be established, altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged,
combined or consolidated by action of the Village of Albion Board.
SEWAGE
A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments and such ground-, surface- and stormwater as may be inadvertently
present. The admixture of sewage, as defined above, with industrial wastes and other wastes shall
also be considered "sewage," within the meaning of this definition.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTES)
Liquid wastes from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food, liquid wastes
containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences in dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial buildings and institutions or liquid wastes from clothes washing
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 58/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
A.
and/or floor/wall washing. Therefore, "domestic sewage" includes both black water and gray water.
(See "sewage, sanitary.")
SEWAGE, NORMAL
Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, which show, by analysis, the following
characteristics:
BOD (five-day): 2,090 pounds per million gallons (250 milligrams per liter), or less.
Suspended solids: 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams per liter), or less.
Phosphorus: 125 pounds per million gallons (15 milligrams per liter), or less.
Ammonia: 250 pounds per million gallons (30 milligrams per liter), or less.
Total kjeldahl nitrogen: 417 pounds per million (50 milligrams per liter), or less.
Chlorine demand: 209 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams per liter), or less.
Chemical oxygen demand: 2,920 pounds per million gallons (350 milligrams per liter), or
less.
Oil and grease: 830 pounds per million gallons (100 milligrams per liter), or less.
In spite of satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the sewage also contains substances
of concern, it may not be considered normal sewage.
SEWAGE, SANITARY
Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and
hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water,
industrial and other wastes (see "domestic wastes.")
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT)
See "JMIPCF."
SEWAGE, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER
Sewage which has characteristics greater than those of normal sewage and/or which contains
substances of concern.
SEWER
A pipe or conduit for carrying or transporting sewage.
SEWER, COMBINED
A sewer designed to receive and transport both surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC
A sewer in which all abutting property owners have equal rights and the use of which is
controlled by the Village of Albion.
SEWER, SANITARY
A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm-, surface and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN)
A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastewaters, other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM (ALSO JMIPCF)
All facilities for collecting, regulating, pumping and transporting wastewater to and away from
the JMIPCF.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 59/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE
The demand payment for the use of a public sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the
handling of any sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in
which the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such characteristics in
normal sewage (see "volume charge.")
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
See "user, significant industrial."
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC)
A user is in significant noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those, in 66% or more
of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period, which exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those, in which 33% or more of
all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period,
which equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limits multiplied by the
applicable TRC [TRC equals one point four (1.4) for BOD, total suspended solids, fats, oil
and grease; TRC equals one point two (1.2) for all other pollutants];
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or long-term average)
that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of JMIPCF
personnel or the general public);
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health,
welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the Superintendent's exercise of its
emergency authority under Article XI of this chapter;
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance;
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
Failure to report accurately any noncompliance; or
Any other violation which the Superintendent determines will adversely affect the
implementation or operation of the local pretreatment program.
SLUG
A substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge or constituent concentration (see
"normal sewage") sufficient to cause interference. In any event, a discharge which, in
concentration of any constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or
flow during normal user operations shall constitute a slug.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)
A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, and subsequent
revisions.
STANDARD METHODS
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 60/376
Procedures contained in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, procedures
established by the Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(G) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR 136, and amendments thereto (if 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, then procedures set forth in EPA publication, Sampling
and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April
1977, and amendments thereto, shall be used.), any other procedure approved by the
Administrator, or any other procedure approved by the Superintendent, whichever is the most
conservative.
STATE
State of New York.
STATE'S WATERS
See "waters of the state."
STORMWATER
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation; also the flow resulting
therefrom.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN
Those compounds which the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation has
determined may be harmful to humans or the environment.
SUMP PUMP
A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or wet well.
SUPERINTENDENT
Those individuals appointed by the Village of Albion Board as the Chief Operator of the
Pollution Control Facility and Superintendent of Streets. Such individuals shall be qualified to
oversee wastewater treatment, distribution and JMIPCF operations. This definition shall also
include their authorized deputies, agents or representatives.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure, to determine the dry weight of
solids in a sample that either float on the surface of or are in suspension or are settleable and
can be removed from the sample by filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN)
The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of
ammonia in a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen compounds,
expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS
The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure, to determine the total quantity
of orthophosphate, in a sample of wastewater, following the hydrolysis of phosphorus
compounds, expressed as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES
Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, that when discharged to a public sewer in
sufficient quantities may be hazardous to JMIPCF operation and maintenance personnel,
tend to interfere with any biological sewage treatment process or to constitute a hazard to
recreation in the receiving waters due to the effluent from a sewage treatment plant or
overflow point; any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by the EPA under provisions of Section 307(A) of the Clean Water Act, or other
acts.
USER
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 61/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the
JMIPCF.
USER, EXISTING
A discharger to the JMIPCF who is discharging on or before the effective date of this chapter.
USER, INDUSTRIAL
A discharger to the JMIPCF who discharges nondomestic wastewaters.
USER, NEW
A discharger to the JMIPCF who initiates discharge after the effective date of this chapter.
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU)
An industrial user of the Village of Albion JMIPCF who is:
Subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the EPA;
Having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other industries, on
the operation of the treatment works;
Using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons of raw
material containing priority pollutants and/or substances of concern and discharging
a measurable quantity of these pollutants to the sewer system; or
Discharging more than 5% of the flow or load of conventional pollutants received by
the JMIPCF.
A user discharging a measurable quantity of a pollutant may be classified as
nonsignificant if, at the influent to the JMIPCF, the pollutant is not detectable.
VILLAGE
The Village of Albion, Orleans County, New York.
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE)
The demand sewer use charge which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal
sewage discharged into the JMIPCF (there may be surcharges, as provided for in Article XIII).
The "volume charge" shall be based on a specific cost per 100 cubic feet or per 1,000
gallons. The specific charge shall be subject to approval by the Village of Albion Board. The
moneys so obtained shall be used for current operation and maintenance, for retirement of
bonded indebtedness and for funding of capital projects of the JMIPCF. The basis of volume
charge calculations shall be made available to the public, on demand, as provided in Article
XIII. The volume charge shall be recalculated annually, as well as the surcharge rates.
WASTEWATER
The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastewaters from dwellings, commercial
establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any ground-, surface and
storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the JMIPCF.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit as set forth in Article X of this chapter.
WASTEWATER, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER
See "sewage, unusual strength or character."
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS)
All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 62/376
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
§ 112-6. Word usage.
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense shall include the future, and words used in
the plural shall include the singular and vice versa. Furthermore, a masculine pronoun shall include the
feminine. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 112-7. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
AWWA American Water Works Association
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CPLR Code of Public Law and Rules
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligram
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPI National Clay Pipe Institute
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
NYSDOH New York State Department of Health
NYSDOT New York State Department of Transportation
P Total phosphorus
PSI Pounds per square inch
JMIPCF Joint Municipal Industrial Pollution Control Facility
PPM Parts per million, weight basis
SIC Standard industrial classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 690L, et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code of Laws
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
TSS Total suspended solids
§ 112-8. Undefined terms.
Terms not defined in this Article, or terms found to be ambiguous or improperly defined in this Article,
shall be defined by the Act or regulations pursuant thereto.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 63/376
Article III. Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 112-9. Waste disposal unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary
manner, on public or private property, within the Village of Albion or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said municipality, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. Also, no person
shall discharge domestic sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge it in a way that permits it
to come to the surface of the ground.
§ 112-10. Connecting private sewage system to storm sewer
prohibited.
No person shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows into a storm sewer or into a
drain intended exclusively for stormwater.
§ 112-11. Discharge of sewage into well prohibited.
No person shall discharge sewage into a well.
§ 112-12. Wastewater discharge unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within Village of Albion, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the said municipality, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 112-13. Approved wastewater disposal system required for
building permit.
No property owner, builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling or
structure requiring sanitary facilities unless a suitable and approved method of wastewater disposal,
conforming to this chapter, is available. All housing construction or building development which takes
place after this chapter is enacted shall provide for an approved system of sanitary sewers.
§ 112-14. Private wastewater disposal unlawful.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank or other facility intended or used for disposal of wastewater.
§ 112-15. Connection to public sewer required.
Owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated within the Village of Albion and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may, in the future, be located a public sewer are hereby required, at the
owner's expense, to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with
the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 64/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 112-16. Limitation on use of public sewers.
The use of the Village of Albion public sewers shall be strictly limited and restricted, except as provided
in § 112-15, to receive and accept the discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial
wastes generated on or discharged from real property within the bounds of the service area of the
JMIPCF.
§ 112-17. Intermunicipal and individual agreements.
The Village of Albion Board, on the recommendation of the Superintendent, shall have the
authority to enter into agreements to accept sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes,
generated by or discharged from persons outside the service area of the JMIPCF.
If the person is a municipality, that municipality shall have enacted a sewer use law as restrictive
on the discharge of sewage and other wastes as the restrictions contained in this chapter.
If the person is not a municipality, the discharge shall be made only with the expressed written
consent of the Superintendent (the issuance of a permit) setting forth the terms and conditions of
such a discharge.
§ 112-18. Moratorium.
At the recommendation of the Superintendent, who determines that one or more segments of the
JMIPCF is exceeding its hydraulic capacity at any time and any specific purpose of this chapter is
being violated, the Village of Albion Board shall have the authority to limit or deny new connections to
the JMIPCF until the conditions leading to the moratorium are corrected. Such correction may be by:
Construction of new facilities.
Enlarging existing facilities.
Correction of inflow and infiltration.
Cleaning and repairing of existing facilities.
§ 112-19. Authority.
All requirements, directives and orders calling for mandatory use of the sewers, within the service area
of the JMIPCF, for the proper discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes, shall
be established and given by the Village of Albion Board, NYSDEC, USEPA and/or other such state or
federal agencies which have enforcement powers.
Article IV. Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
§ 112-20. Public sewer unavailable.
Where a public sewer is not available, under the provisions of § 112-12, the building lateral shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the Rules and
Regulations of the New York State Department of Health, to be enforced by the Superintendent and/or
the County Health Department.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 65/376
§ 112-21. Separate buildings to have separate systems.
No two separate permanent buildings where the intended use for either is for a distinct and separate
business or a dwelling place for a private family or families shall be connected to the same individual
septic tank and tile absorption field.
§ 112-22. Construction application.
A completed application form, containing results of percolation tests, computations and a plot plan,
including the design and cross-section of the wastewater disposal system in relation to lot lines,
adjacent and on-site well or water supply and buildings, shall be submitted to the Village of Albion. A
fee established by Article XIII shall accompany the application. The wastewater disposal system shall
be designed by a professional engineer, licensed surveyor or architect and shall be in accordance with
the New York State Department of Health's Standards for Waste Treatment Works or the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation's Standards for Commercial and Institutional
Facilities, as appropriate.
§ 112-23. Construction permit required; inspections.
A written construction permit shall be obtained from the Superintendent before construction
commencement. The Superintendent, or his/her designated representative, shall be permitted to
inspect the construction work at any stage, without prior notice.
§ 112-24. Contamination of waters; rehabilitation required.
When the liquid or liquid-borne effluent from a private wastewater disposal system enters any
watercourse, ditch, storm sewer or water supply system located in the Village of Albion in such a
manner, volume and concentration so as to create a hazardous, offensive or objectionable condition, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, the County Health Department or the New York State Department of
Health, the owner of the premises upon which such wastewater disposal system is located, upon
receiving written notice from the Superintendent to do so, shall within 90 days after receipt of such
notice repair, rebuild or relocate such wastewater disposal system for the purpose of eliminating such
hazardous, offensive or objectionable conditions. The repair, rebuilding or relocation of the system
shall be accomplished in accordance with the rules and regulations of the New York State Department
of Health and the County Health Department, at the owner's expense.
§ 112-25. Sanitary operation required; expense thereof.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal system in a satisfactory manner
at all times, at the owner's expense.
§ 112-26. Septage removal.
Where a private wastewater disposal system utilizes a cesspool or a septic tank, septage shall be
removed from the cesspool or septic tank by a licensed hauler of trucked and hauled wastes, at threeyear
intervals or more frequently.
§ 112-27. Direct connection to new public sewers required.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 66/376
A.
B.
C.
At such time that a public sewer becomes available to a property, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer, in compliance with this chapter, and any cesspool, septic tank and similar wastewater
disposal facilities shall be cleaned of septage by a licensed septage hauler and, finally, either filled with
clean sand, bank-run gravel or dirt or removed and properly disposed. When the connection is made to
the public sewer, the connection to the private wastewater disposal facility shall be broken, and both
ends of the break shall be plugged, as appropriate.
§ 112-28. Construal of Article.
No statement in this Article shall be construed to prevent or interfere with any additional requirements
that may be deemed necessary by the Superintendent to protect public health and public welfare.
Article V. New Sewers or Sewer Extensions
§ 112-29. Design standards.
New sanitary sewers and all extensions to sanitary sewers owned and operated by the Village of
Albion shall be designed, by a professional licensed to practice sewer design in the state, in
accordance with the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the Great Lakes-
Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers (Ten State Standards) and in strict
conformance with all requirements of the NYSDEC. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to and
written approval shall be obtained from the Superintendent, the County Health Department and the
NYSDEC before initiating any construction. The design shall anticipate and allow for flows from all
possible future extensions or developments within the immediate drainage area.
§ 112-30. Approval of plans required; expenses; inspections;
reporting.
When a property owner, builder or developer proposes to construct sanitary sewers or extensions
to sanitary sewers in an area proposed for subdivision, the plans, specifications and method of
installation shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent and the County Health
Department, in accordance with § 112-29.
Said property owner, builder or developer shall pay for the entire installation, including a
proportionate share of the treatment plant, intercepting or trunk sewers, pumping stations, force
mains and all other Village of Albion expenses incidental thereto.
Each street lateral shall be installed and inspected pursuant to Article VI, and inspection fees shall
be paid by the applicant prior to initiating construction. Design and installation of sewers shall be
as specified in § 112-32 and in conformance with Paragraphs 3 through 6 of ASTM Specification
C-12. The installation of the sewer shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Superintendent,
without prior notice. The Superintendent shall determine whether the work is proceeding in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and whether the completed work will
conform with the approved plans and specifications. The sewer, as constructed, must pass the
infiltration test (or the exfiltration test, with prior approval), required in § 112-36, before any
building lateral is connected thereto. The Superintendent shall be notified 30 days in advance of
the start of any construction actions so that such inspection frequencies and procedures as may
be necessary or required, may be established. No new sanitary sewers will be accepted by the
Village of Albion Board until such construction inspections have been made so as to assure the
Village of Albion Board of compliance with this chapter and any amendments or additions thereto.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 67/376
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
The Superintendent has the authority to require such excavation as necessary to inspect any
installed facilities if the facilities were covered or otherwise backfilled before they were inspected
so as to permit inspection of the construction.
The Superintendent shall report all findings of inspections and tests to the Village of Albion Board.
§ 112-31. Plans, specifications and pipe test results required.
Plans, specifications and methods of installation shall conform to the requirements of this Article.
Components and materials of wastewater facilities not covered in this chapter, such as pumping
stations, lift stations or force mains shall be designed in accordance with § 112-29 and shall be clearly
shown and detailed on the plans and specifications submitted for approval. Force main details are
covered in § 112-376. When requested, the applicant shall submit to the Superintendent and to the
County Health Department all design calculations and other pertinent data to supplement review of the
plans and specifications. Results of manufacturer's tests on each lot of pipe delivered to the job site
shall also be furnished, upon request.
§ 112-32. Sewer pipe specifications.
Sewer pipe material shall be:
Reinforced concrete pipe (note that nonreinforced concrete pipe shall not be used). Portland
cement shall conform to ASTM C-150 Type II. The pipe and specials shall conform to ASTM
Specification C-76. The reinforcing wire cage shall conform to ASTM Specification A-15, A-82
or A-185, as appropriate. Entrained air shall be 5.0% to 9.0% by ASTM C-890. Water
absorption and three-edge bearing tests shall conform to ASTM Specification C-497. Gaskets
shall conform to Sections 3.3 and 3.4 of AWWA Specification C-302.
Cast-iron pipe, extra heavy. Pipe, fittings and specials shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM Specification A-74 or ANSI A-21.11. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM Specification C-
564.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, heavy wall. Pipe shall be made from Class 12454-B materials
or better in accordance with ANSI/ASTM Specification D-1784. Pipe and accessories shall
conform to the requirements of the following, with a minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi at a
maximum deflection of 5%:
ANSI/ASTM D-3034: four to fifteen (4 - 15) inches.
ASTM F-679 Type I: eighteen to twenty-seven (18 - 27) inches.
Ductile iron pipe. Pipe, fittings and specials shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM
Specification A-746. Pipe shall have a minimum thickness of Class 50. Fittings shall conform
to ANSI Specification A-21.11 and have a minimum pressure class rating of 150 psi. All pipe
and fittings shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with ANSI Specification A-21.4, at
twice the specified thickness, and have an internal and external bituminous seal coating.
Closure pieces shall be jointed by means of a mechanical coupling of the cast-sleeve type.
Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior written approval of the Superintendent
before being installed.
The minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight inches.
Joints for the selected pipe shall be designed and manufactured such that O-ring gaskets of the
snap-on type are used.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 68/376
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
F.
Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and shall provide a positive
compression seal in the assembled joint such that the requirements of § 112-36 are met.
Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
Y-branch fittings shall be installed for connection of street laterals in accordance with §§ 112-49
through 112-51.
§ 112-33. Safety and load factors.
Selection of pipe class shall be predicated on the following criteria:
The safety factor shall be one point five (1.5).
The load factor shall be one point seven (1.7).
Weight of the soil shall be 120 pounds per cubic foot.
Wheel loading shall be 16,000 pounds.
Utilizing the foregoing information, design shall be made as outlined in Chapter IX of the Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition, Design and Construction of
Sanitary and Storm Sewers, and the pipe shall have sufficient structural strength to support all
loads to be placed on the pipe, with a safety factor as specified above. PVC pipe shall not be
encased in concrete, due to their different coefficients of linear thermal expansion.
§ 112-34. Sewer pipe installation.
Local utilities shall be contacted to verify construction plans and to make arrangements to
disconnect all utility services, where required to undertake the construction work. The utility
services shall later be reconnected. The work shall be scheduled so that there is minimum
inconvenience to local residents. Residents shall be provided proper and timely notice regarding
disconnection of utilities.
The construction rights-of-way shall be cleared only to the extent needed for construction.
Clearing consists of removal of trees which interfere with construction, removal of underbrush,
logs and stumps and other organic matter, removal of refuse, garbage and trash, removal of ice
and snow and removal of telephone and power poles and posts. Any tree which will not hinder
construction shall not be removed and shall be protected from damage by any construction
equipment. Debris shall not be burned, but hauled for disposal in an approved manner.
The public shall be protected from personal and property damage as a result of the construction
work.
Traffic shall be maintained at all times in accordance with applicable highway permits. Where no
highway permits are required, at least one-half (1/2) of a street shall be kept open for traffic flow.
Erosion control shall be performed throughout the project to minimize the erosion of soils onto
lands or into waters adjacent to or affected by the work. Erosion control can be effected by limiting
the amount of clearing and grubbing prior to trenching, proper scheduling of the pipe installation
work, minimizing time of open trench, prompt grading and seeding and filtration of drainage.
Trenches.
The trench shall be excavated only wide enough for proper installation of the sewer pipe,
manhole and appurtenances.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 69/376
(2)
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
Allowances may be made for sheeting, de-watering and other similar actions to complete the
work. Roads, sidewalks and curbs shall be cut, by sawing, before trench excavation is
initiated.
Under ordinary conditions, excavation shall be by open cut from the ground surface. However,
tunneling or boring under structures other than buildings may be required. Such structures include
crosswalks, curbs, gutters, pavements, trees, driveways and railroad tracks.
Open trenches shall be protected at all hours of the day with barricades, as required.
When the work is in progress, trenches shall not be open for more than 30 feet in advance of pipe
installation nor left unfilled for more than 30 feet in the rear of the installed pipe without permission
of the Superintendent. When work is not in progress, including overnight, weekends and holidays,
the trench shall be backfilled to ground surface.
The trench shall be excavated approximately six inches deeper than the final pipe grade. When
unsuitable soils are encountered, these shall be excavated and replaced with select materials.
Ledge rock, boulders and large stones shall be removed from the trench sides and bottom. The
trench shall be over excavated at least 12 inches for five feet, at the transition from rock bottom to
earth bottom, centered on the transition.
Maintenance of grade, elevation and alignment shall be done by some suitable method or
combination of methods.
No structure shall be undercut, unless specifically approved by the Superintendent.
Proper devices shall be provided and maintained operational at all times to remove all water from
the trench as it enters. At no time shall the sewer line be used for removal of water from the
trench.
To protect workers and to prevent caving, shoring and sheeting shall be used, as needed. Caving
shall not be used to backfill the trench. Sheeting shall not be removed, but cut off no lower than
one foot above the pipe crown nor no higher than one foot below final grade, and left in the trench
during backfill operations.
The pipe barrel shall be supported along its entire length on a minimum of six inches of crusherrun
maximum one-half-inch stone free of organic material. This foundation shall be firmly tamped
in the excavation.
Bell holes shall be hand excavated, as appropriate.
Pipe shall be laid from low elevation to high elevation. The pipe bell shall be up-gradient; the pipe
spigot shall be down-gradient.
The joints shall be made and the grade and alignment checked and made correct.
The pipe shall be in straight alignment.
When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the invert of the larger sewer shall be lowered sufficiently
to maintain the same hydraulic gradient. An approximate method which may be used for securing
this result is to place the zero and eight-tenths (0.8) depth of both sewers at the same elevation.
Crushed stone shall be placed over the laid pipe to a depth of at least six inches. The embedment
of thermoplastic pipe shall be in accordance with ASTM D-2321 using class 1A or 1B backfill
materials. Care shall be exercised so that stone is packed under the pipe haunches. Care shall be
exercised so that the pipe is not moved during placement of the crushed stone.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 70/376
W.
X.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The migration of fines from surrounding backfill or native soils shall be restricted by gradation of
embedment materials or by use of suitable filter fabric.
The remaining portion of the trench above the pipe embedment shall be backfilled in foot lifts
which shall be firmly compacted. Compaction near/under roadways, driveways, sidewalks and
other structures shall be to 95% of the maximum moisture-density relationship, as determined by
ASTM Specification D-698, Method D. Ice, snow or frozen material shall not be used for backfill.
§ 112-35. Manholes and manhole installation.
Design of all manholes shall be submitted to the Superintendent and shall receive approval prior
to placement.
Manholes shall be placed where there is a change in slope or alignment and at intervals not
exceeding 400 linear feet.
Manhole bases shall be constructed or placed on a minimum of six inches of crusher-run
maximum one-half-inch stone free of organic materials.
Manhole bases shall be constructed of 4,000 psi (twenty-eight-day) concrete, eight inches thick, or
shall be precast bases properly bedded in the excavation. Field constructed bases shall be
monolithic, properly reinforced, and extend at least six inches beyond the outside walls of lower
manhole sections. Precast manhole bases shall extend at least six inches beyond the outside
walls of lower manhole sections.
Barrel sections.
Manholes shall be constructed using precast minimum four-foot diameter concrete manhole
barrel sections and an eccentric top section, conforming to ASTM Specification C-478, with
the following exceptions on wall thickness:
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 5
5 6
6 7
6 1/2 7 1/2
7 8
8 9
All sections shall be cast solid, without lifting holes. Flat top slabs shall be a minimum of eight
inches thick and shall be capable of supporting a H-20 loading.
All joints between sections shall be sealed with an O-ring rubber gasket, meeting the same
specifications as pipe joint gaskets, or butyl joint sealant completely filling the joint.
All joints shall be sealed against infiltration. All metal parts shall be thickly coated with bitumastic
or elastomeric compound to prevent corrosion.
No steps or ladder rungs shall be installed in the inside or outside manhole walls at any time.
No holes shall be cut into the manhole sections closer than six inches from joint surfaces.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 71/376
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
A.
Manholes which extend above grade shall not have an eccentric top section. The top plate shall
be large enough to accommodate the cover lifting device and the cover.
The elevation of the top section shall be such that the cover frame the top elevation is zero and
five-tenths (0.5) feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation (in a field), zero and five-tenths
(0.5) feet above a lawn elevation or at finished road or sidewalk grade.
When located in a traveled area (road or sidewalk), the manhole frame and cover shall be heavyduty
cast iron. When located in a lawn or in a field, the manhole frame and cover may be light-duty
cast iron. The cover shall be 24 inches in diameter. The minimum combined weight of the heavy
duty frame and the cover shall be 735 pounds, plus or minus five percent (+/- 5%). The minimum
combined weight of the light duty frame and the cover shall be 420 pounds, plus or minus five
percent (+/- 5%). The mating surfaces shall be machined and painted with tar pitch varnish. The
cover shall not rock in the frame. Infiltration between the cover and frame shall be prevented by
proper design and painting. Covers shall have "Sanitary Sewer" cast into them. Covers shall have
lifting holes suitable for any lifting/jacking device. The lifting holes shall be designed so that
infiltration is prevented.
A drop of at least one-tenth (0.1) foot shall be provided between incoming and outgoing sewers on
all junction manholes and on manholes with bends greater than 45°.
Inverts and shelves/benches shall be placed after testing the manholes and sewers.
Benches shall be level and slope to the flow channel at about one inch per foot.
The minimum depth of the flow channel shall be the nominal diameter of the smaller pipe. The
channel shall have a steel trowel finish. The flow channel shall have a smooth curvature from inlet
to outlet.
Manhole frames, installed at grade, shall be set in a full bed of mortar with no less than two nor
more than four courses of brick underneath to allow for later elevation adjustment. In lieu of brick,
grade rings may be used for elevation adjustment. Grade rings shall not exceed six inches in
depth. The total number of grade rings shall not exceed 12 inches in height, however, in no event
shall more than three grade rings be used.
Manholes which extend above grade shall have the frames cast into the manhole top plate. The
top plate shall be securely anchored to the manhole barrel by a minimum of six one-half-inch
corrosion-resistant anchor bolts to prevent overturning when the cover is removed. The anchor
bolts shall be electrically isolated from the manhole frame and cover.
Internal drop pipes and fittings shall be PVC plastic sewer pipe in compliance with ASTM D-2241.
Corrosion-resistant anchors shall be used to attach the drop pipe to the inside surface of the
manhole barrel.
§ 112-36. Testing.
Infiltration/exfiltration testing. All sanitary sewers or extensions to sanitary sewers, including
manholes, shall satisfy requirements of a final infiltration test before they will be approved and
wastewater flow permitted by the Village of Albion. The infiltration rate shall not exceed 25 gallons
per 24 hours per mile per nominal diameter in inches. An exfiltration test may be substituted for
the infiltration test; the same rate shall not be exceeded. The exfiltration test shall be performed by
the applicant, under the supervision of the Superintendent, who shall have the responsibility for
making proper and accurate measurements required. The exfiltration test consists of filling the
pipe with water to provide a head of at least five feet above the top of the pipe or five feet above
groundwater, whichever is higher, at the highest point under test, and then measuring the loss of
water, from the pipe section under test, by the amount of water which must be added to maintain
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 72/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
(1)
G.
the original level. However, under no circumstances shall the head at the downstream manhole
exceed 10 feet or fill to within six inches of the top of the downstream manhole. Should this
condition prevail, the testing methods in § 112-36F and/or G shall be utilized. In this test, the test
section must remain filled with water for at least 24 hours prior to taking any measurements.
Exfiltration shall be measured by the drop of water level in a standpipe with a closed bottom end
or in one of the sewer manholes serving the test section. When a standpipe and plug arrangement
is used in the upper manhole in the test section, there shall be some positive method for releasing
entrapped air prior to taking any measurements.
Test section. The test section shall be as ordered or as approved, but in no event longer than
1,000 feet. In the case of sewers laid on steep grades, the test length may be limited by the
maximum allowable internal pressure on the pipe and joints at the lower end of the test section.
For purposes of determining the leakage rate of the test section, manholes shall be considered as
sections of forty-eight-inch diameter pipe, five feet long. The maximum allowable leakage rate for
such a section is 1.1 gallons per 24 hours. If leakage exceeds the allowable rate, then necessary
repairs or replacements shall be made and the section retested.
Test period. The test period during which the test measurements are taken shall not be less than
two hours.
Pipe lamping. Prior to testing, the section shall be lamped. Any length of pipe out of straight
alignment shall be realigned.
Deflection testing. Also prior to testing, all plastic pipe in the test section shall be tested for
deflection. Deflection testing shall involve the pulling of a rigid ball or mandrel, whose diameter is
95% of the pipe inside diameter, through the pipe. Any length of pipe with a deflection greater than
5% shall be replaced. The test section shall be flushed just prior to deflection testing. The test
shall not be performed with a mechanical pulling device.
Low-pressure air testing alternative.
In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), low-pressure air testing may be
employed. Low-pressure air tests shall conform to ASTM Specification C-828. All sections to
be tested shall be cleaned and flushed and shall have been backfilled prior to testing. Air shall
be added until the internal pressure of the test section is raised to approximately four point
zero (4.0) psig. The air pressure test shall be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the
air pressure to drop from three point five (3.5) psig to two point five (2.5) psig.
Acceptance is based on limits tabulated in the Specification Time Required for a 1.0 PSIG
Pressure Drop in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association's Recommended Practice For Low-
Pressure Air Testing of Installed Sewer Pipe.
Before pressure is applied to the line, all connections shall be firmly plugged. Before the test
period starts, the air shall be given sufficient time to cool to ambient temperature in the test
section.
If the test section is below groundwater, the test pressure shall be increased an amount
sufficient to compensate for groundwater hydrostatic pressure; however, the test pressure
shall not exceed 10 psi.
The pressure test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a copy of the calibration
results shall be made available to the Superintendent prior to testing.
Vacuum testing alternative.
In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), vacuum testing may be employed for
testing of sewer lines and manholes. Sewer lines and manholes shall be tested separately. All
sewer lines to be tested shall be cleaned and flushed and shall have been backfilled prior to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 73/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
testing. The vacuum test shall be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the vacuum to
decrease from 10 inches of mercury to nine inches of mercury for manholes, and from seven
inches of mercury to six inches of mercury for sewers. Acceptance of manholes is based on
the following:
Manhole Depth
(feet)
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Time to Drop 1 Inch of Mercury
(from 10 to to 9 inches)
(seconds)
10 or less 4 120
10 to 15 4 150
15 to 25 4 180
For five-foot diameter manholes, add 30 seconds to the times above. For six-foot diameter
manholes, add 60 seconds to the times above.
If the test on the manhole fails (the time is less than that tabulated above), necessary repairs
shall be made and the vacuum test repeated, until the manhole passes the test.
Acceptance of sewers [seven inches of mercury (Hg) to six inches of mercury (Hg)] is based
on the time tabulated in the Specification Time Required for a 0.5 PSIG Pressure Drop in the
Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association's Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing of
Installed Sewer Pipe.
The vacuum test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a copy of the calibration
results shall be made available to the Superintendent prior to testing.
§ 112-37. Force mains.
General provisions. Force mains serving sewage lifting devices, such as grinder pumps and pump
stations, shall be designed in accordance with § 112-29. Additional design requirements are as
follows:
Force main pipe material shall be:
Ductile iron pipe. Pipe shall conform to ANSI A-21.51. The minimum wall thickness shall
be Class 52 (ANSI A-21.50). The pipe shall be clearly marked with either "D" or
"DUCTILE." Fittings shall conform to ANSI A-21.10. Pipe and fittings shall be furnished
with push-on joints conforming to ANSI A-21.11. Pipe and fittings shall be cement mortar
lined and have an internal and external bituminous seal coating.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe. Pipe shall conform to ASTM D-2241. Materials
used in the manufacture of PVC pipe shall meet ASTM C-1784. The minimum wall
thickness shall be SDR-21. Fittings shall conform to ASTM D-2241. Joints and gaskets
shall conform to ASTM D-2241, D-1869 and F-477.
Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior written approval of the
Superintendent before being installed.
Trenching, bedding and backfilling shall be in accordance with § 112-34.
Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's written
instructions.
Anchorage's, concrete blocking and/or mechanical restraint shall be provided when there is a
change of direction of seven and one-half degrees (71/2°) or greater.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 74/376
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
A.
Drain valves shall be placed at low points.
Automatic air-relief valves shall be placed at high points and at four-hundred-foot intervals on
level force main runs.
Air-relief and drain valves shall be suitably protected from freezing.
When the daily average design detention time in the force main exceeds 20 minutes, the
manhole and sewer line receiving the force main discharge or the sewage shall be treated so
that corrosion of the manhole and the exiting line are prevented. The corrosion is caused by
sulfuric acid biochemically produced from hydrogen sulfide anaerobically produced in the
force main.
The force main shall terminate in the receiving manhole at a PVC plastic sewer pipe tee. The
vertical arms of the tee shall be twice the diameter of the force main. The upper arm shall be
at least four feet long; the lower arm shall terminate in a PVC plastic sewer pipe ninetydegree
elbow in a flow channel directed to the manhole exit pipe. The tee and its arms shall
be securely fastened to the inside surface of the manhole wall using corrosion resistant
anchors.
Force main testing. All force mains shall be subjected to hydrostatic pressure of 150% of the
normal operating pressure. The duration of the test, at pressure, shall be at least two hours.
Before conducting the test, the pipe shall be filled with water and all air shall be expelled. During
the test, water shall be added, as needed, to maintain the test pressure. The amount of water
added shall be recorded so as to calculate leakage. Leakage shall not exceed 25 gallons per day
per mile per inch nominal pipe diameter. During the test, the owner and the Superintendent shall
walk the route of the force main and examine the exposed pipe and the ground covering any
backfilled pipe to discover leaks. Leakage in excess of that specified above shall be corrected with
new material at the owner's expense and the test repeated. Any observed leaks shall be repaired
at the owner's expense.
§ 112-38. Final acceptance and warranty/surety.
All sanitary sewers and extensions to sanitary sewers constructed at the applicant's expense, after
final approval and acceptance by the Superintendent, and concurrence by the Village of Albion Board,
shall become the property of the Village of Albion and shall thereafter be operated and maintained by
the Village of Albion. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by the Village of Albion until four copies of
as-built drawings have been so filed with the Superintendent and the Superintendent has approved the
submitted drawings. Said sewers, after their acceptance by the Village of Albion, shall be guaranteed
against defects in materials or workmanship for one year, by the applicant. The guaranty shall be in
such form and contain such provision as deemed necessary by the Village of Albion Board, secured by
a surety bond or such other security as the Village of Albion Board may approve.
§ 112-39. Liability insurance coverage.
All contractors engaged in connecting house laterals with sanitary sewers who perform any work
within the right-of-way of any highway shall file a bond, cash or certified check in the amount of
$5,000 with the Village of Albion Clerk to indemnify the Village of Albion against loss, cost,
damage or expense sustained or recovered on account of any negligence, omission or act of the
applicant for such a permit or any of his, or their agents arising or resulting directly or indirectly by
reason of such permit or consent or of any act, construction or excavation done, made or
permitted under authority of such permit or consent. All bonds, cash or certified checks shall
contain a clause that permits given by the Village of Albion (Board) may be revoked at any time for
just cause.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 75/376
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
Before commencing work, the above contractor shall file insurance certificates with the Village of
Albion Clerk for the following:
Workmen's compensation and employer's liability insurance as required by the laws of the
state covering the contractor.
Personal injury liability having limits of not less than $500,000 each occurrence and $500,000
aggregate (completed operations/products, personal injury).
Property damage liability having limits of not less than $500,000 for all damages arising
during the life of the contract; and shall include, but not be limited to, the following designated
hazards:
Premises and operations.
Independent contractors.
Operations and products.
Property damage.
Explosions and collapse underground.
Comprehensive automobile liability (including non-owned and hired automobiles) having limits
of not less than:
Bodily injury:
Each person: $300,000.
Each occurrence: $500,000.
Property damage, each occurrence: $500,000.
Business excess liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.
All insurance policies must provide for five business days' notice to the Village of Albion before
cancellation and must cover all liabilities of the Village of Albion and be in a form approved by the
Village of Albion Board and be in a satisfactory form approved by the Board.
The minimum insurance limits stated above shall be subject to periodic review by the Village of
Albion Board and adjustments made, by resolution, as appropriate.
Where it is necessary to enter upon or excavate any highway or cut any pavement, sidewalk or
curbing, permission must be obtained from the Superintendent of Streets if a Village of Albion
street is involved; from the County Highway Department if a county highway is involved; and/or the
New York State Department of Transportation if a state highway is involved.
Article VI. Laterals; Connections
§ 112-40. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.
§ 112-41. Inflow/infiltration prohibited.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 76/376
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, cooling water or unpolluted
industrial waters to any sanitary sewer. Swimming pool drains shall not be connected to any sanitary
sewer.
§ 112-42. Sewer lateral permits; fee.
There shall be two classes of sewer lateral permits:
Residential, commercial and institutional service.
Service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, a permit application shall be submitted to the Superintendent. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent, in the judgment of the Superintendent. A fee, established by § 112-123, shall
accompany the application.
§ 112-43. New building laterals.
A separate and independent building lateral shall be provided for every building requiring sanitary
facilities. When, however, there is a building behind a front building, the second building may use
the front building's building lateral, if there is no other way to provide sanitary service to the back
building.
New street laterals and/or building laterals shall not go under building basements. In like fashion, a
building shall not be constructed over an existing lateral; the lateral shall be relocated after the
Superintendent has approved plans showing the relocation. If relocation is not physically possible,
then the lateral shall be:
Exposed and totally encapsulated in not less than three inches of concrete; or
Exposed and walled and the building rooms above positively ventilated outdoors.
All existing manholes in or under the basement shall be sealed air-tight in a manner acceptable to
the Superintendent. No new manholes shall be constructed on the portion of the lateral under the
building.
§ 112-44. Laterals serving several buildings.
When building laterals are to serve multiple dwelling structures, the building lateral shall be sized in
accordance with the metered water use and with sound professional engineering judgment.
§ 112-45. Laterals serving complexes.
Where a lateral sewer is to serve a complex of industrial, commercial, institutional or dwelling
structures, special design of the building lateral system shall be required. Such lateral sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The Superintendent shall determine if and where
this connection to the public sewer is required. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in the
public sewer pursuant to §§ 112-35 and 112-94, and the lateral connection made and tested as
directed by the Superintendent. Plans and specifications shall be prepared and submitted for approval
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 112-46. Dry sewers.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 77/376
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Dry sewers shall be designed and installed in accordance to this chapter.
§ 112-47. Existing building laterals.
Existing building laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 112-48. Lateral pipe materials.
Building and street lateral pipe materials shall be one of the following:
Tar-coated, service grade, cast-iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM Specification A-74, Castiron
Pipe and Fittings. All dimensions, weight and markings of the pipe shall conform to the
requirements of ANSI, Designation A-112.5.1, except spigot ends shall be plain end, if gasket
joints are used.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM Specification D-3034-73, SDR-
35 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings. All pipe shall be suitable for gravity
sewer service. Provisions shall be made for contraction and expansion at each joint with a
rubber ring. The bell shall consist of an integral wall section stiffened with two PVC retainer
rings which securely lock the solid cross-section ring into position. Minimum pipe stiffness
(F/Y) at five-percent deflection shall be 46 psi when tested in accordance with ASTM
Specification D-2412.
Any part of the building or street lateral that is located within five feet of a water main or water
service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe. Cast-iron soil pipe may be required by the
Superintendent where the building or street lateral is likely to be damaged by tree roots. If installed
on fill or unstable ground, the building or street lateral shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, although other
pipe material may be permitted if such pipe is uniformly supported on a poured concrete cradle
approved by the Superintendent. The distance between consecutive joints, as measured along the
center line of the installed pipe, shall not be less than 10 feet, except under abnormal
circumstances, in which case this dimension may be diminished, if approved by the
Superintendent. The size and slope of building and street laterals shall be subject to approval by
the Superintendent, but in no event shall the internal pipe diameter be less than four inches, nor
shall the pipe slope be less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.
§ 112-49. Street lateral to public sewer connection.
At the point of connection of a street lateral to a main sewer, a standard Y-fitting and sufficient oneeighth-
bend (forty-five-degree) fittings shall be used. The Y-fittings shall be installed so that flow in the
arm shall transition smoothly into the flow in the public sewer. No lateral connection shall be made to
the public sewer which permits the flow into the public sewer from the lateral to enter at right angles.
§ 112-50. Future connection locations; as-built drawings.
The street lateral, including the Y- and one-eighth-bend fittings, shall be connected to the main sewer
at the time of constructing the main sewer, for each proposed lot for either immediate or future
development. Laterals installed for future development shall be fitted a standard plug approved for use
by the Superintendent. All sewer connections shall be via a properly installed saddle on the main
sewer pipe. No portion of the lateral pipe shall protrude into the main sewer pipe. The location of all
lateral connections shall be field marked with a two-by-six-inch corrosion- and rot-resistant board. The
marker board shall extend from the depth of the lateral to a minimum of two feet above grade. The
location of all lateral connections shall be indicated on a drawing, and four copies of this drawing,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 78/376
A.
B.
showing the as-built location of these connections, shall be furnished to the Superintendent. A
refundable deposit shall be placed with Village of Albion to assure receipt of these as-builts. The
deposit shall be placed when application is made; the amount of the deposit shall be $100 per sheet of
plans showing locations of lateral connections. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by Village of
Albion until four copies of this record drawing have been so filed with the Superintendent and the
Superintendent has approved the submitted drawings.
§ 112-51. Special institution manhole requirements.
When any street lateral is to serve a school, hospital or similar institution or public housing or is to
serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings or, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will
receive wastewater or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance of said
building or street lateral is anticipated, then such street lateral shall be connected to the public sewer
through a manhole. The Superintendent shall determine if and where this type of connection to the
public sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the
Superintendent. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in the public sewer pursuant to §§ 112-35
and 112-94, and the lateral connection made thereto as directed by the Superintendent.
§ 112-52. Laterals at and near buildings.
Whenever possible, the building lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. Building laterals laid parallel to a bearing wall shall not be installed closer than three
feet to such wall. The building lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes of
direction of 90° or greater shall be made with a cleanout which extends to grade, terminating in a
terminal box set in concrete. The ends of all building or street laterals which are not connected to the
interior plumbing of the building for any reason shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper,
plug or by other approved means.
§ 112-53. Sewage lifting.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by mechanical means and discharged to the building
lateral, on approval of the Superintendent.
§ 112-54. Lateral pipe installation.
All excavations required for the installation of a building or street lateral shall be open trench work
unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Pipelaying and backfilling, regardless of pipe
material used, shall be performed in general accordance with Paragraphs 3 through 6 of ASTM
Specification C-12, except that trench width, measured at the top of the installed pipe, shall not exceed
the outside pipe diameter plus 14 inches and except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected. The depth of cover over the pipe shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, but
in any case such depth shall not be less than four feet.
§ 112-55. Joints.
Watertight joints. All joints and connections shall be made watertight.
Cast-iron pipe poured joints. Poured joints for cast-iron pipe shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp, and the annulus filled with an approved compound not less than one inch deep. Said
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 79/376
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
compound shall be run in with a single pouring and caulked tight, if appropriate for the compound
used. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the
joint has been tested and approved. The transition joint between cast-iron pipe and other pipe
materials shall be made with special adapters and jointing materials approved by the
Superintendent. If such joints are hot-poured, the material shall not soften sufficiently to destroy
the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160° F., nor be soluble in any of
the wastes carried by the lateral.
Cast-iron push joints. Premolded gaskets may be used for hub and plain end cast-iron pipe joints
and joints with fittings, if approved by the Superintendent. The gasket shall be a neoprene
compression-type unit which provides a positive seal in the assembled joint. The gasket shall be a
premolded, one-piece unit, designed for joining the cast-iron hub and plain-end soil pipe and
fittings. The assembled joint shall be sealed by compression of the gasket between the exterior
surface of the spigot and the interior surface of the hub. The joint shall be assembled following the
manufacturer's recommendations using acceptable lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools
designed for that purpose. The plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end of the pipe for the
full depth of the hub itself. Lubricant shall be a bland, flax-base, nontoxic material and shall not
chemically attack the gasket material.
PVC push joints. Joints for PVC sewer pipe shall follow the manufacturer's recommendations,
using properly designed couplings and rubber gaskets pursuant to the published information
relating thereto, and conforming to the applicable ASTM specification identified in § 112-48.
§ 112-56. Street laterals.
Building lateral/street lateral connection.
The connection of the building lateral to an existing street lateral shall be made at the property
line. Except as provided under §§ 112-30 and 112-31, if a lateral has not previously been
provided, the lateral will be constructed from the existing public sewer at the owner's
expense. The street lateral shall be installed with a properly sealed and covered cleanout to
grade located at the property line. The cleanout shall terminate in a metal box imbedded in
concrete.
The cost of constructing the lateral from the existing public sewer shall be at the property
owner's expense; all subsequent costs and expense incidental to the installation and
connection of the building lateral shall also be borne by the owner.
The property owner shall indemnify the Village of Albion from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building lateral.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, repair or replace the building
lateral, as needed.
The method of connection of the building lateral will be dependent upon the type of sewer
pipe material and, in all cases, shall be approved by the Superintendent.
Cleanout repair and replacement. If, in the judgment of the Superintendent, it is determined that a
building lateral without a property line cleanout needs repair or replacement, the Superintendent
may require a cleanout at the property line, at the property owner's expense, such that the street
lateral can be maintained independently of the building lateral.
Street lateral replacement; expenses. Any existing street lateral which, upon examination by the
Superintendent, is determined to be in need of replacement will be replaced with a new street
lateral with a property line cleanout. The cost of constructing the replacement street lateral and
cleanout shall be at the property owner's expense.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 80/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 112-57. Testing.
The street lateral, building lateral or the combined lateral shall be tested for infiltration/exfiltration by:
Any full-pipe method described in § 112-36; or
By a suitable joint method, with the prior written approval of the Superintendent.
§ 112-58. Supervision of connection; inspection.
The applicant for the building lateral permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building
lateral is ready for inspection and connection is to be made to the street lateral. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
The applicant for the street lateral permit shall notify the Superintendent when the street lateral is
ready for inspection and connection is to be made to the main sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
§ 112-59. Trench inspections.
When trenches are excavated for the laying of building lateral pipes or for laying of street lateral pipes,
such trenches shall be inspected by the Superintendent. Before the trenches are backfilled, the person
performing such work shall notify the Superintendent when the laying of the building lateral is
completed, and no backfilling of trenches shall begin until approval is obtained from the
Superintendent.
§ 112-60. Public protection; restoration of public property.
All excavations for constructing building laterals shall be adequately protected with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent.
When installation requires disturbance of paved public roads and shoulders, restoration shall involve
backfilling to road grade. Shortly thereafter, the Village of Albion Department of Public Works (DPW)
shall complete road and shoulder restoration to the Village of Albion standards. The cost for such final
road and shoulder restoration by the Department of Public Works shall be included with the fees paid
with the application for the permit required in § 112-42.
§ 112-61. Interior cleanout.
An interior cleanout fitting shall be provided for each building lateral at a readily accessible location,
preferably just inside the basement wall. The fitting shall contain a forty-five-degree branch with
removable plug or test tee, and be so positioned that sewer cleaning equipment can be inserted
therein to clean the building lateral. The cleanout diameter shall be no less than the building lateral
diameter.
§ 112-62. Costs to be borne by owner; indemnification.
All costs associated with the provisions of this Article shall be borne by the builder and/or property
owner unless specifically stated or agreed to be a cost borne by the Village of Albion. The property
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 81/376
A.
owner shall indemnify the Village of Albion from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly
occasioned by the installation of the building and street laterals and connections and appurtenances.
Article VII. Inflow
§ 112-63. New sources prohibited.
No connections shall be made to a sanitary or to a combined sewer which connections are intended to
discharge inflow. Such prohibited connections include, but are not limited to, footing drains, roof
leaders, roof drains, cellar drains, sump pumps, catch basins, uncontaminated cooling water
discharges or other sources of inflow.
§ 112-64. Existing sources disconnected.
For properties where separate storm sewers are available (and capable of handling flows as
determined by the Superintendent) within 100 feet of the property line or where, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, sufficient natural drainage is available, connections which contribute inflow to the
sanitary sewers must be disconnected in a fashion approved by the Superintendent, prior to the sale of
the property.
§ 112-65. Disconnection of sources.
Upon notice from the Tax Assessor, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect any newly sold
property for the purpose of determining if storm sewers or natural drainage is available and, if so, if all
connections which contribute inflow to the sanitary sewer system have been disconnected.
§ 112-66. Reconnection prohibited.
It shall be a willful violation of this chapter for any person to reconnect any inflow source which has
been disconnected pursuant to this Article.
§ 112-67. Charges.
The Superintendent is enabled to take whatever action is necessary to determine the amount of inflow,
including the requirement for installation of a control manhole. The property from which the inflow
originated shall be billed for inflow according to Article XIII, however, the Village of Albion Board may
cause a surcharge at a rate not to exceed five times that for normal sewage volume charge.
Article VIII. Trucked or Hauled Waste
§ 112-68. License required for discharge.
The discharge of trucked or hauled wastes into the Village of Albion sewer system and public
sewers tributary thereto will be permitted only with the written approval (license) of the
Superintendent. Applicants for such license shall apply on a form provided by the Superintendent.
These forms may require information, such as vehicle specifications, vehicle license number,
vehicle color, NYSDEC permits issued under 6 NYCRR 364, approximate annual septage volume
expected, service area and any other information that the Superintendent may require, to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 82/376
B.
A.
determine whether the trucked or hauled wastes could adversely impact the JMIPCF. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee prescribed by the Superintendent.
The licensee of trucked or hauled wastes will also be charged a fee for each dumping, in
accordance with Article XIII. The dumping fee shall be paid prior to dumping, unless other billing
arrangements have been made between the hauler and the village.
§ 112-69. License requirements; term; suspension and
revocation.
The applicant for a license to truck or haul wastes shall be the owner of the vehicle or vehicles to be
used for such discharge. Any false or misleading statement in any license application shall be grounds
for invalidating the license. All licenses issued by the Superintendent for this purpose shall be for one
year. The licensee shall also be duly permitted by the NYSDEC under 6 NYCRR 364 (364-permit). If,
for any reason, the 364-permit is revoked, lapses or becomes invalid, then the license issued under
this Article shall become invalid immediately. All acts performed in connection with the license shall be
subject to the inspection and regulations, as established by the Superintendent, the terms and
conditions of the license and all local and general laws, ordinances and regulations which are now or
may come into effect, and such license may be suspended or revoked, at any time, by the
Superintendent for willful, continued or persistent violation thereof.
§ 112-70. Discharge location and times.
The Superintendent may require discharging at only certain locations within the JMIPCF, and only at
certain times, and on only certain days of the week or seasons of the year, as shall be stated on said
license or as may be relocated by the Superintendent, after appropriate notice. The time and
conditions for permissible discharge shall be as set forth on the license, or as may be revised by the
Superintendent, after appropriate notice.
§ 112-71. Notification of discharge.
Each discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall be made only with the approval of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent may require inspection, sampling and analysis of each load prior
to the discharge of a load. Any extra costs associated with such inspection, sampling and analysis
shall be paid by the licensee.
Article IX. Discharge Requirements
§ 112-72. Pretreatment standards.
All users of the Village of Albion JMIPCF will comply with all standards and requirements of the Act
and standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the Act, including, but not limited to, 40 CFR
406 through 471.
§ 112-73. Prohibited discharges.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or fashion, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the JMIPCF.
These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the JMIPCF whether or not the user is
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 83/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may not contribute the following substances
to the JMIPCF:
Any solids, liquids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion
or be injurious, in any way, to the JMIPCF or to the operation of the JMIPCF. At no time shall
both of two successive readings on a flame-type explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any other point in the system) be more than 25% nor any
single reading be more than 40% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Unless
explicitly allowable by a written permit, prohibited materials include, but are not limited to
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, carbides, hydrides
and sulfides and any other substance which the Village of Albion, the state or the EPA has
determined to be a fire hazard or a hazard to the JMIPCF.
Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise
interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. Unless explicitly allowable
by a written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass or stone grinding or polishing
wastes.
Any wastewater having a pH less than five point zero (5.0) or greater than ten point zero
(10.0), unless the JMIPCF was specifically designed to manage such wastewater, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and/or JMIPCF personnel.
Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants (including heat), to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the JMIPCF or to exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant
to Section 307(A) of the Act.
Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance or repair.
Oils and grease. Any commercial, institutional or industrial wastes containing fats, waxes,
grease or oils which become visible solids when the wastes are cooled to 10° C. (50° F.); any
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in excess of 100
mg/l or in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
Any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through.
Any wastewater with objectionable color which is not removed in the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
Any solid, liquid, vapor or gas having a temperature higher than 65° C. (150° F.); however,
such materials shall not cause the JMIPCF influent temperature to be greater than 40° C.
(104° F.). The Superintendent reserves the right, in certain instances, to prohibit or limit the
discharge of wastes whose maximum temperatures are lower than 65° C.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 84/376
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Unusual flow rate or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs, except by industrial
wastewater permit.
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes except as approved by the
Superintendent, and in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or which creates a public nuisance,
either by itself or in combination, in any way with other wastes.
Any wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C., using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the JMIPCF
in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
§ 112-74. Concentration-based limitations.
No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the JMIPCF, wastewater containing any of the
following substances in concentrations exceeding those specified below on either a daily or an
instantaneous basis, except by permit or as provided for in this section. Concentration limits are
applicable to wastewater effluents at the point just prior to discharge into the JMIPCF (end-of-pipe
concentrations).
SPDES
Constituent
Allowable Effluent Concentration
Limit
[Domestic Concentration (mg/l)]
Aluminum, total 1.597
Cadmium, total 0.000045
Chromium, total 0.0045
Copper, total 0.0045
Iron, total 4.842
Lead, total 0.00113
Mercury, total 0.000059
Thailum, total 0.129
Cyanide, total 0.592
Phenols, total 0.113
Benzene 0.134
Chlorobenzene 0.082
Tetrachorethene 0.023
Edosulfan-1 0.062
Antimony, total 0.623
Barium, total 0.824
Beryllium, total 0.098
Chromium, hexavalent 0.299
Manganese, total 1.545
Nickel, total 0.0009
Silver, total 0.185
Zinc, total 0.0113
Trichloroethene 0.098
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 85/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
SPDES
Constituent
Allowable Effluent Concentration
Limit
[Domestic Concentration (mg/l)]
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 6.728
PCB'S, total 0.0000005
Arsenic 0.00027
Selenium 0.00014
Molybdenum 0.000158
Except for chromium (hex), all concentrations listed for metallic substances shall be as total metal,
which shall be defined as the value measured in a sample acidified to a pH value of two or less,
without prior filtration.
All concentration's shall be as determined on a composite sample taken from the user's daily
discharge over a typical operational and/or production day.
Other substances which may be limited are as follows: antibiotics; chemical compounds which,
upon acidification, alkalinization, oxidation or reduction, in the discharge or after admixture with
wastewater and its components in the JMIPCF produce toxic, flammable or explosive compounds;
pesticides, including algicides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides and rodenticides; polyaromatic
hydrocarbons; and viable pathogenic organisms from industrial processes or hospital procedures.
§ 112-75. Discharge-based limitations.
At no time shall the influent to the JMIPCF contain quantities in excess of those specified below:
SPDES
Constituent
Allowable Influent Loading
[Allowable Domestic
Concentration (pounds per day)]
Aluminum, total 1.550
Cadmium, total 0.0006
Chromium, total 0.0623
Copper, total 0.0623
Iron, total 4.700
Lead, total 0.0156
Mercury, total 0.0008
Thailum, total 0.125
Cyanide, total 0.575
Phenols, total 0.110
Benzene 0.130
Chlorobenzene 0.080
Tetrachorethene 0.022
Edosulfan-1 0.060
Antimony, total 0.605
Barium, total 0.800
Beryllium, total 0.095
Chromium, hexavalent 0.290
Manganese, total 1.500
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 86/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
A.
SPDES
Constituent
Allowable Influent Loading
[Allowable Domestic
Concentration (pounds per day)]
Nickel, total 0.0124
Silver, total 0.180
Zinc, total 0.1557
Trichloroethene 0.095
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 6.530
PCB'S, total 0.0000005
Arsenic 0.00027
Selenium 0.00015
Molybdenum 0.000160
Determination.
To assure that none of the above noted limitations are violated, the Superintendent shall issue
permits to significant industrial users limiting the discharge of the substances noted above.
Each permit shall restrict the discharge from each significant industrial user to a portion of the
total allowable influent loading. In determining what portion of the total of each substance that
each significant industrial user shall be allowed to discharge, the Superintendent shall
consider:
The quantities of each substance that are uncontrollable because they occur naturally in
wastewater;
The quantities of each substance that are anthropogenic but are nonetheless
uncontrollable;
Historical discharge trends;
Past pollution control efforts of each significant industrial user as compared to other
significant industrial dischargers of the same substance;
Potential for growth in the JMIPCF service area;
Potential for more restrictive regulatory requirements to be placed on the JMIPCF
discharge or sludge disposal or sludge reuse method; and
Treatability of the substance.
The Superintendent shall apply a minimum fifteen-percent safety factor to be protective of the
JMIPCF.
Permits issued in accordance with this section may allow for discharges in excess of limitations
set forth under § 112-73.
§ 112-76. Modification of limitations.
Limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge contained in this chapter may be
supplemented with more stringent limitations when, in the opinion of the Superintendent:
The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to protect the JMIPCF;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 87/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
C.
The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to enable the JMIPCF to comply with
applicable water quality standards or the effluent limitations specified in the JMIPCF's SPDES
permit;
The JMIPCF sludge will be rendered unacceptable for disposal or reuse as the Village of
Albion desires, as a result of discharge of wastewaters at the above prescribed concentration
limitations;
Municipal employees or the public will be endangered; or
Air pollution and/or groundwater pollution will be caused.
The limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge shall be recalculated not less frequently
than once every five years. The results of these calculations shall be reported to the Village of
Albion Board. This chapter shall then be amended appropriately. Any issued industrial wastewater
discharge permits which have limitations based directly on any limitations of this chapter, which
limitations were changed, shall be revised and amended, as appropriate.
§ 112-77. Dilution.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard, no user shall ever
increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard.
Dilution flow shall be considered to be inflow.
§ 112-78. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent,
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease, flammable substances, sand or other harmful substances; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or living units.
All restaurants and food preparation establishments shall be required to install grease/oil
interceptors and any existing restaurants and food preparation establishments shall install
grease/oil interceptors upon transfer of ownership.
All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner, at his/her expense.
Article X. Discharge Permits; Pretreatment Requirements
§ 112-79. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this chapter, with applicable SPDES permit conditions and
with applicable state and federal law, each industrial user shall be required to notify the Superintendent
of any new or existing discharges to the JMIPCF by submitting a completed industrial chemical survey
(ICS) form and a completed industrial wastewater survey (IWS) form to the Superintendent. The
Superintendent may require any user discharging wastewater into the JMIPCF to file wastewater
discharge reports and to supplement such reports as the Superintendent deems necessary. All
information shall be furnished by the user in complete cooperation with the Superintendent.
§ 112-80. Notification to industrial users.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 88/376
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
The Superintendent shall, from time to time, notify each industrial user of applicable pretreatment
standards and of other applicable requirements under Section 204(B) and Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act, and Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
§ 112-81. Wastewater discharges; permit required.
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the JMIPCF without having a valid
wastewater discharge permit issued by the Superintendent. Significant industrial users shall
comply fully with the terms and conditions of their permits in addition to the provisions of this
chapter. Violation of a permit term or condition is deemed a violation of this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits required for significant industrial users. All Significant industrial
users proposing to connect to or to discharge to the JMIPCF shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or discharging to the JMIPCF. Existing significant industrial users shall
make application for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of this
chapter and shall obtain such a permit within 90 days after making application.
§ 112-82. Other industrial users.
The Superintendent may issue wastewater discharge permits to other industrial users of the JMIPCF.
§ 112-83. Discharge to storm sewer permits; authority.
The Village of Albion does not have the authority to issue permits for the discharge of any wastewater
to a storm sewer. However, the Village shall be notified of any connection to the storm sewer. This
authority rests with the NYSDEC.
§ 112-84. Permit application.
Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the
Superintendent an application in the form prescribed by the Village of Albion. The application shall
be accompanied by a fee, as set forth in § 112-124. In support of any application, the industrial
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
Name, address and location (if different from the address).
SIC code of both the industry and any categorical processes.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in
Article X of this chapter and which are limited in the appropriate Categorical Standard, as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory approved by the New York State Department of
Health. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with standard methods.
Time and duration of the discharge.
Average daily peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any.
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections and appurtenances.
Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials
which are or could be discharged to the JMIPCF.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 89/376
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(12)
(13)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation
of the pretreatment system.
The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any
county, state or federal standards and a statement whether or not the standards are being
met on a consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet all applicable standards.
If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the standards, the shortest
schedule to accomplish such additional treatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, beginning operation and beginning routine
operation).
No increment referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) above shall exceed nine months, nor
shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months.
No later than 14 calendar days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Superintendent.
Any other information as may deemed by the Superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the
permit application.
The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Village of Albion
may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
§ 112-85. Permit modifications.
Wastewater discharge permits may be modified by the Superintendent, upon 30 days notice to the
permittee, for just cause. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to:
Promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard;
Revision of or a grant of a variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13;
Changes in general discharge prohibitions and local limits as per § 112-74 of this chapter;
Changes in processes used by the permittee or changes in discharge volume or character;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 90/376
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Changes in design or capability of any part of the JMIPCF;
The discovery that the permitted discharge causes or contributes to pass-through or
interference; and
Changes in the nature and character of the sewage in the JMIPCF as a result of other
permitted discharges.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance as set forth in § 112-84A(12)(a).
§ 112-86. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the Village of Albion. Permits may
contain the following:
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation
and equalization.
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics, including
concentration or mass discharge limits.
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater
discharged to the JMIPCF.
Requirements for installation and maintenance (in safe condition) of inspection and sampling
facilities.
Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
Compliance schedules.
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge, as
specified by the Village of Albion, and affording the Superintendent access thereto.
Requirements for notification of the Village of Albion of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the JMIPCF.
Requirements for the notification of the Village of Albion of any change in the manufacturing
and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.
Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental or slug discharges.
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Village of Albion to ensure compliance with this
chapter and state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
§ 112-87. Term of permit.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for
a period less than five years.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 91/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 112-88. Permit reissuance.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
Superintendent during the term of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as identified in § 112-85,
or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his/her permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the reissued
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as established in § 112-84A(12)(a).
§ 112-89. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation or discharge at a
specific location. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.
§ 112-90. Permit revocation.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
Tampering with monitoring equipment.
Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to the industrial premises.
Failure to meet effluent limitations.
Failure to pay fines.
Failure to pay user charges.
Failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 112-91. Public notification.
The Village of Albion will publish, in the Village of Albion official daily newspaper(s), informal notice of
intent to issue a wastewater discharge permit at least 14 days prior to issuance.
§ 112-92. Reporting requirements for permittee.
The reports or documents required to be submitted or maintained under this section shall be subject to:
Statute.
The provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;
The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements,
representation or certification; and
The provisions of Subsection (c)(6) of the Act, as amended, regarding corporate officers.
Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after promulgation of an applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, a user subject to that standard shall submit to the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 92/376
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
Superintendent the information required by § 112-84A(8) and (9).
Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of
the introduction of wastewater into the JMIPCF, any user subject to pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration
of all pollutants in the discharge, from the regulated process, which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements, and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in
the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The report
shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
Periodic compliance reports.
Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment
standard or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the
JMIPCF, shall submit to the Superintendent during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which,
during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 112-84. At the
discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow
rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Superintendent may agree to alter the months during
which the above reports are to be submitted, however, no fewer than two reports shall be
submitted per year.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of
mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection D(1) above
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the
user. These reports shall contain the results of discharge sampling and analysis, including the
flow, and the nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the
Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with standard methods
and by a laboratory certified by New York State Department of Health to perform the
analyses.
Violation report. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation of this chapter and/or the
user's discharge permit, the user shall notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if the JMIPCF performs monitoring of the user's discharge at
least once a month for the parameter which was violated or if the JMIPCF performs sampling for
the parameter which was violated between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives
the results of this sampling.
Other reports. The Superintendent may impose reporting requirements equivalent to the
requirements imposed by Subsection D above for users not subject to pretreatment standards.
§ 112-93. Slug discharge prohibited; flow equalization.
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs to the JMIPCF. Each person discharging into the JMIPCF
greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater than 5% of the average daily flow in the JMIPCF,
whichever is lesser, shall install and maintain, on his/her property and at his/her expense, a suitable
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 93/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty-four-hour period. The
facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with
alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
Superintendent. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
§ 112-94. Monitoring stations.
All significant industrial users and other industrial users whose industrial waste discharge has
caused or may cause interference or pass-through shall install and maintain a suitable monitoring
station, on their premises at their expense, to facilitate the observation, sampling and
measurement of their industrial wastewater discharge.
If there is more than one street lateral serving an industrial user, the Superintendent may require
the installation of a control manhole on each lateral.
The Superintendent may require that such monitoring station(s) include equipment for the
continuous measurement and recording of wastewater flow rate and for the sampling of the
wastewater. Such station(s) shall be accessibly and safely located, and the industrial user shall
allow immediate access, without prior notice, to the station by the Superintendent or his/her
designated representative.
§ 112-95. Design and maintenance of monitoring stations.
Preliminary treatment and flow equalization facilities or monitoring stations, if provided for any
wastewater, shall be constructed and maintained continuously clean, safe and continuously operational
by the owner at his/her expense. Where an industrial user has such treatment, equalization or
monitoring facilities at the time this chapter is enacted, the Superintendent may approve or disapprove
the adequacy of such facilities. Where the Superintendent disapproves of such facilities and
construction of new or upgraded facilities for treatment, equalization or monitoring are required, plans
and specifications for such facilities shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and
submitted to the Superintendent. Construction of new or upgraded facilities shall not commence until
written approval of the Superintendent has been obtained.
§ 112-96. Vandalism.
No unauthorized person shall negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with,
prevent access or render inaccurate or cause or permit the negligent breaking, damaging, destroying,
uncovering, defacing, tampering with, preventing access or rendering inaccurate to:
Any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Village of Albion JMIPCF, or
Any measuring, sampling and/or testing device or mechanism installed pursuant to any
requirement under this chapter, except as approved by the Superintendent.
§ 112-97. Sampling and analysis.
Sampling shall be performed so that a representative portion of the wastewater is obtained for
analysis.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required in any
section of this chapter shall be carried out in accordance with standard methods and by a
laboratory certified by New York State Department of Health to perform the analyses. Such
samples shall be taken at the approved monitoring stations described in § 112-94, if such a station
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 94/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
exists. If an approved monitoring station is not required, then samples shall be taken from another
location on the industrial sewer lateral before discharge to the public sewer. Unless specifically
requested otherwise, or unless specifically not allowed in federal regulation, samples shall be
gathered as flow proportioned (where feasible) composite samples made up of individual samples
taken not less than once per hour for the period of time equal to the duration of industrial
wastewater discharge during daily operations (including any cleanup shift).
§ 112-98. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide for protection from accidental or slug discharges of prohibited materials or
discharges of materials in volume or concentration exceeding limitations of this chapter or of an
industrial wastewater discharge permit. Users shall immediately notify the Superintendent of the
discharge of wastes in violation of this chapter or any permit. Such discharges may result from:
Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
Accidents caused by mechanical failure or negligence.
Other causes.
Where possible, such immediate notification shall allow the Superintendent to initiate appropriate
countermeasure action at the JMIPCF. The user shall prepare a detailed written statement
following any accidental or slug discharge, which describes the causes of the discharge and the
measures being taken to prevent future occurrences, within five days of the occurrence, and the
Superintendent shall receive a copy of such report no later than the fifth calendar day following the
occurrence. Analytical results and their interpretation may be appended to the report at a date not
exceeding 45 calendar days after the occurrence.
When required by the Superintendent, detailed plans and procedures to prevent accidental or slug
discharges shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval. These plans and procedures
shall be called a "Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan." The plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the JMIPCF of any accidental or slug discharge. Such
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any provision of the
permit and any National Prohibitive Discharge Standard;
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
Posting notices. In order that the industrial user's employees be informed of the Village of Albion
requirements, a notice shall be permanently posted on appropriate bulletin boards within the
user's facility advising employees of the Village of Albion requirements and whom to call in case of
an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.
§ 112-99. Sample splitting.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 95/376
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
When so requested in advance by an industrial user, and when taking a sample of industrial
wastewater, the Village of Albion representative(s) shall gather sufficient volume of sample so that the
sample can be split into two nearly equal volumes, each of size adequate for the anticipated analytical
protocols, including any quality control (QC) procedures. One of the volumes shall be given to the
industry whose wastewater was sampled, and the other shall be retained by the Village of Albion for its
own analysis.
§ 112-100. Access required.
Access to information.
When requested, the Superintendent shall make available to the public for inspection and/or
copying information and data on industrial users obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permit and monitoring programs and inspections, unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that
such information, if made public, would divulge processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
reports of accidental discharges shall not be recognized as confidential.
Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/or copying by the
public but shall be disclosed, upon written request, to governmental agencies for uses related
to this chapter or the SPDES Permit, provided that the governmental agency making the
request agrees to hold the information confidential, in accordance with state or federal laws,
rules and regulations. The Superintendent shall provide written notice to the industrial user of
any disclosure of confidential information to another governmental agency.
Access to property. The Superintendent and other authorized representatives of the Village of
Albion, representatives of Environmental Protection Agency, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, New York State Department of Health and/or County Health
Department, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
nonresidential properties at all times for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, flow
measurement and testing to ascertain a user's compliance with applicable provisions of federal
and state law governing use of the Village of Albion JMIPCF and with the provisions of this
chapter. Inspections of residential properties shall be performed in proper observance of the
resident's civil rights. Such representative(s) shall have the right to set up, on the user's property
or property rented/leased by the user, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or flow
measurement. Guard dogs shall be under proper control of the user while the representatives are
on the user's property or property rented/leased by the user. Such representative(s) shall
additionally have access to and may copy any records the user is required to maintain under this
chapter. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification
and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
Access to easements. The Superintendent, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private premises through which the Village of Albion holds an easement for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the Village of Albion public sewer system lying within the easement. All entry and
subsequent work on the easement shall be done in accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private premises involved.
§ 112-101. Liability of property owner.
During the performance on private premises of inspections, sampling or other similar operations
referred to in § 112-100A and B, the inspectors shall observe all applicable safety rules established by
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 96/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
C.
the owner or occupant of the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall be held harmless for personal
injury or death of the inspector and the loss of or damage to the inspector's supplies and/or equipment;
and the inspector shall indemnify the owner and/or occupant against loss or damage to property of the
owner or occupant by the inspector and against liability claims asserted against the owner or occupant
for personal injury or death of the inspector or for loss of or damage to the inspector's supplies or
equipment arising from inspection and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions.
§ 112-102. Special agreements.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Village of Albion and any user of the JMIPCF whereby wastewater of unusual
strength or character is accepted into the JMIPCF and specially treated, subject to any payments
or user charges, as may be applicable. In entering into such a special agreement, the Village of
Albion Board shall consider whether the wastewater will:
Pass-through or cause interference.
Endanger the public municipal employees.
Cause violation of the SPDES permit.
Interfere with any purpose stated in § 112-2.
Prevent the equitable compensation to the Village of Albion for wastewater conveyance and
treatment and sludge management and disposal.
No discharge which violates the Federal Pretreatment Standards will be allowed under the terms
of such special agreements.
Article XI. Enforcement; Penalties
§ 112-103. Enforcement response plan.
The Superintendent shall prepare an enforcement response plan. The enforcement response
plan, in a step-by-step fashion, shall outline the procedures to be followed to identify, document
and respond to violations by users of the JMIPCF. All violations by users of the JMIPCF shall be
met with some type of enforcement response. The response shall be comprehensive and
effective.
The enforcement response plan shall:
Describe how the Superintendent will investigate instances of noncompliance.
Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the Superintendent will take in
response to all anticipated types of user violations and the time periods within which to initiate
and follow-up these actions.
Adequately reflect the Village of Albion Board's responsibility to enforce all applicable
standards and requirements.
The enforcement response plan shall contain:
Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling visits to JMIPCF users.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 97/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
E.
A.
Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a manner which will enable the
information to be used as evidence.
Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones and pending enforcement
actions.
Criteria, responsible personnel and procedures to select and initiate an enforcement action.
The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall be based on the nature and severity of the
violation and other relevant factors, such as:
Magnitude of the violation.
Duration of the violation.
Effect of the violation on the receiving water.
Effect of the violation on the JMIPCF.
Effect of the violation on the health and safety of the JMIPCF employees.
Compliance history of the user.
Good faith of the user and shall promote consistent and timely use of enforcement remedies.
The Village of Albion Board shall approve the enforcement response plan. The enforcement
response plan shall be reviewed at least every five years.
§ 112-104. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter or any
wastewater discharge permit, order, prohibition, limitation or requirement permitted by this chapter, the
Superintendent may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
10 calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails the notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof shall be submitted to the Superintendent by
the user. The correction and prevention plan shall include specific actions. Submission of this plan in
no way relieves the user of liability for any violations caused by the user before or after receipt of the
notice of violation.
§ 112-105. Consent orders.
The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the
noncompliance. Such orders shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as an administrative order.
§ 112-106. Administrative or compliance orders.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a
permit or administrative order issued thereunder, he/she may issue an administrative order to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service
shall be discontinued, severed and abated unless the violation is corrected and that there is no
reoccurrence of the violation. Administrative orders may also contain such other requirements as
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 98/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices.
The user may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of such order, petition the Superintendent to
modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall then:
Reject any frivolous petitions;
Modify or suspend the order; or
Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 112-111 and may, as part of the show
cause notice, request the user to supply additional information.
§ 112-107. Penalties for offenses.
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is found to have violated any
provision of this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit or administrative order issued
hereunder shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day on which
noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
The user may, within 15 calendar days of notification of the Superintendent's notice of such fine,
petition the Superintendent to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form
and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall then:
Reject any frivolous petitions;
Modify or suspend the fine; or
Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 112-111 and may, as part of the show
cause notice, request the user to supply additional information.
§ 112-108. Cease and desist orders.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any
permit or administrative order issued hereunder, the Superintendent may issue an administrative
order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
Comply forthwith.
Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge.
The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails notification of such
order, petition the Superintendent to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written
form and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall
then:
Reject any frivolous petitions;
Modify or suspend the order; or
Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 112-111 and may, as part of the show
cause notice, request the user to supply additional information.
§ 112-109. Termination of permit.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 99/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit or
administrative order, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination:
Violation of permit conditions.
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring
or sampling.
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified, by registered mail, of the proposed termination of
their wastewater permit.
The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails such notification,
petition the Superintendent to permit continued use of the JMIPCF by the user. Such petition shall
be in written form and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The
Superintendent shall then:
Reject any frivolous petitions; or
Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 1109 and may, as part of the show
cause notice, request the user to supply additional information.
§ 112-110. Water supply severance.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or an order or
permit issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed and service will only
recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
The user may, within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the Superintendent to reconnect
water supply service. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the
Superintendent by registered mail. The Superintendent shall then:
Reject any frivolous petitions;
Reconnect the water supply; or
Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 112-111 and may, as part of the show
cause notice, request the user to supply additional information.
§ 112-111. Show cause hearing.
The Superintendent may order any user appealing administrative remedies for violations of this
chapter to show cause before the Village of Albion Board why an enforcement action initiated by
the Superintendent should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place of a hearing to be held by the Village of Albion Board regarding the violation, the
reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to
show cause before the Village of Albion Board why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the hearing,
in accordance with § 112-113 of this Article. Service shall be made on any principal or executive
officer of a user's establishment or to any partner in a user's establishment. The notice of the
hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the hearing, in accordance with § 112-
113.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 100/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
(1)
A.
The Village of Albion Board may itself conduct the hearing or may designate any of its members or
any officer or employee of the Village of Albion to conduct the hearing and:
Issue, in the name of the Village of Albion Board, notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in such hearings.
Take the evidence.
Take sworn testimony.
Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the Village of Albion Board for action thereon.
After the Village of Albion Board has reviewed the evidence and testimony, it may order the user
to comply with the Superintendent's order or fine, modify the Superintendent's order or fine or
vacate the Superintendent's order or fine.
§ 112-112. Failure of user to petition.
In the event that the Superintendent issues any administrative order, terminates the user's permit or
makes any fine as set forth in this Article and the user fails, within the designated period of time set
forth, to petition the Superintendent, as provided in appropriate sections of this Article, the user shall
be deemed in default, and its rights to contest the administrative order or fine shall be deemed waived.
§ 112-113. Notice.
The notices, orders, petitions or other notification which the user or Superintendent shall desire or be
required to give pursuant to any sections of this chapter shall be in writing and shall be served
personally or sent by certified mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and
the notice, order, petition or other communication shall be deemed given upon its mailing as provided
herein. Any notice, administrative order or communication mailed to the user pursuant to the sections
of this chapter shall be mailed to the user where the user's effluent is discharged into transmission
lines to the Village of Albion's JMIPCF. Any notice, petition or other communication mailed to the
Superintendent shall be addressed and mailed to the Village of Albion Hall of the Village of Albion.
§ 112-114. Multiple remedies.
The Superintendent shall have the right, within the Superintendent's sole discretion, to utilize any one
or more appropriate administrative remedies set forth in this Article. The Superintendent may utilize
more than one administrative remedy established pursuant to this Article, and the Superintendent may
hold one show cause hearing combining more than one enforcement action.
§ 112-115. Judicial remedies.
Civil actions for penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform any duty imposed by
this chapter or any administrative order or determination of the Superintendent promulgated
under this chapter, or the terms of any permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the Village
of Albion for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each such violation, to be assessed after
a hearing (unless the user waives the right to a hearing) held in conformance with the
procedures set forth in this Article. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 101/376
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
and, in the case of continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be recovered in an action brought by the
Village of Albion Attorney, or his/her designated attorney, at the request of the Superintendent
in the name of the Village of Albion, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving preference to
courts local to the Village of Albion. In addition to the above-described penalty, the
Superintendent may recover all damages incurred by the Village of Albion from any persons
or users who violate any provisions of this chapter or who fail to perform any duties imposed
by this chapter or any administrative order or determination of the Superintendent
promulgated under this chapter, or the terms of any permit issued hereunder. In addition to
the above described damages, the Superintendent may recover all reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Village of Albion in enforcing the provisions of this Article, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred in any action to recover penalties and damages, and the
Superintendent may also recover court costs and other expenses associated with the
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into account all relative
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other relative factors as justice
may require.
Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the Superintendent before the matter
has been referred to the Village of Albion Attorney, and where such matter has been referred
to the Village of Albion Attorney, any such penalty may be released or compromised and any
action commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued by the Village of
Albion Attorney, with the consent of the Superintendent.
Court orders.
In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this Article, the Superintendent
shall have the power, following the hearing held in conformance with the procedures set forth
in this Article, to seek an order:
Suspending, revoking or modifying the violator's wastewater discharge permit; or
Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation.
Any such court order shall be sought in an action brought by the Village of Albion Attorney, at
the request of the Superintendent, in the name of the Village of Albion, in any court of
competent jurisdiction giving precedence to courts local to the Village of Albion.
The Village of Albion Attorney, at the request of the Superintendent, shall petition the court to
impose, assess and recover such sums imposed according to this Article. In determining
amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the
compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires.
Criminal penalties.
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter or any final determination or
administrative order of the Superintendent made in accordance with this Article shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both. Each
offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and, in the case of a continuing offense, each
day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 102/376
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
B.
to this chapter or wastewater permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
No prosecution under this section shall be instituted until after final disposition of a show
cause hearing, if any, was instituted.
Additional injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the Superintendent, through counsel, may
petition the court, in the name of the Village of Albion, for the issuance of a preliminary or
permanent injunction, or both (as may be appropriate), which restrains the violation of or compels
the compliance with any order or determination thereunder by the Superintendent.
Summary abatement.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this chapter, whenever the Superintendent
finds, after investigation, that any user is causing, engaging in or maintaining a condition or
activity which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, presents an imminent danger to the
public health, safety or welfare or to the environment or is likely to result in severe damage to
the JMIPCF or the environment, it therefore appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to
allow the condition or activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity for a hearing can
be provided, the Superintendent may, without prior hearing, order such user by notice, in
writing, wherever practicable or in such other form as practices are intended to be proscribed,
to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity, and thereupon such person shall
immediately discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity; or where the giving of
notice is impracticable, or in the event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily with an
emergency order, the Superintendent may take all appropriate action to abate the violating
condition. As promptly as possible thereafter, not to exceed 15 calendar days, the
Superintendent shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
If the user is not within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Albion, the right of
summary abatement to discontinue, abate or alleviate conditions or activities shall be those
prescribed in the inter-municipal agreement.
The Superintendent, acting upon the belief that an emergency exists, shall be indemnified
against any personal liability that may arise in the performance of his/her duties to protect the
public health, safety or welfare or to preserve the JMIPCF or the environment.
Article XII. Administration
§ 112-116. Delinquent payments.
If there shall be any payments which are due to the Village of Albion or any department thereof,
pursuant to any Article or section of this chapter, which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in
part, for a period of 30 calendar days from the date of billing by the Village of Albion, the same
shall constitute a default, and there shall be added to the entire amount of the original bill a
penalty equal to 10% of the original bill.
In the event that there are any sewer taxes, assessments or other service charges which shall
have been delinquent for a period of at least 60 calendar days as of April 15 of any year, the
Village Clerk shall report the names of the defaulting persons to the Village of Albion Mayor and
Village Board, the Village of Albion Assessor, on or before April 15 of the same year. The Village
of Albion Clerk/Treasurer is hereby directed to add the entire amount of the sewer tax,
assessment or other service charge which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 103/376
C.
A.
B.
provided for in this chapter, to the real property taxes due and owing to Village of Albion in the
next succeeding year, and the Village of Albion Tax Collector is directed to collect the same in the
same manner as real property taxes due and owing to the Village of Albion are collected.
Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the Village of Albion or is
located outside the geographical boundaries of the Village of Albion, then the Village of Albion
attorney is authorized to seek recovery of charges, including punitive damages, in a court of
competent jurisdiction or make arrangements with the appropriate county where the user is
located to add the amount of the sewer assessment or other charges which shall be in default,
plus penalty and interest, as provided for in the law, to the real property taxes due to the county in
the next ensuing year.
§ 112-117. Performance bonds.
The Superintendent may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files
with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the JMIPCF, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the
Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 112-118. Liability insurance.
The Superintendent may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair JMIPCF damage
caused by its discharge.
§ 112-119. Informant rewards.
The Superintendent is authorized to pay up to $500 for information leading to the discovery of
noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or
civil penalty levied against the user, the Superintendent is authorized to disperse up to 10% of the
collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $10,000,
including the discovery reward.
§ 112-120. Public notification of noncompliant users.
The Superintendent shall provide public notification, in the daily newspaper with the largest circulation
in the Village of Albion, of users which were in significant noncompliance of local or federal
pretreatment standards or requirements since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall
be at least once per year.
§ 112-121. Contractor listings.
Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the
Village of Albion.
Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Village of Albion held by a user found to
be in significant violation with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the
Village of Albion Board.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 104/376
[1]
Article XIII. Charges
§ 112-122. Normal sewage service charges.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes into the public sewers shall pay a sewer service charge
based upon water consumption, which charge shall be collected as a sewer rent.
§ 112-123. Surcharge for abnormal sewage.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes with concentrations in excess of the pollutant
concentrations in normal sewage shall pay a surcharge.[1]
Editor's Note: The current surcharge rate is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 112-124. Total sewer service charge.
The total sewer service charge, which shall be called the "user charge", is comprised of two parts, as
follows:
UC(t) = UC(n) + UC(an)
Where:
UC(t) = Total user charge for JMIPCF operation and maintenance
UC(n) = User charge associated with normal sewage
UC(an) = User charge associated with abnormal sewage
UC(n) = OM x (OQ/100) x (QIA/QA)
UC(an) = OM {[OB/100 x (BIA-Bn)/BA] + [OS/100 x (SIA-Sn)/SA] + [OP/100 x (PIAPn)/
PA] + (ONH/100 x (NHIA-NHn)/NHA] + [OTK/100 x (TKIA-TKn)/TKA]}
Where:
OM = Total annual JMIPCF operation and maintenance costs
OQ = Percentage of OM attributable to flow (Q)
OB = Percentage of OM attributable to BOD5
OS = Percentage of OM attributable to suspended solids
OP = Percentage of OM attributable to total phosphorus
ONH = Percentage of OM attributable to ammonia
OTK = Percentage of OM attributable to total kjeldahl nitrogen
QIA = Average daily flow rate [millions of gallons per day (mgd)] from discharger
BIA = Average daily BOD5 loading [pounds per day (lb/day) from discharger
SIA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) from discharger
PIA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) from discharger
NHIA = Average daily ammonia loading [pounds of nitrogen per day (lb N/day)
from discharger
TKIA = Average daily total kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb N/day) from discharger
QA = Average daily flow rate (mgd) at the JMIPCF
BA = Average daily BOD5 loading (lb/day) at the JMIPCF
SA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) at the JMIPCF
PA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) at the JMIPCF
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 105/376
A.
NHA = Average daily total ammonia loading (lb N/day) at the JMIPCF
TKA = Average daily total kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb N/day) at the JMIPCF
Bn = BOD5 loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were normal sewage
Sn = Suspended solids loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were normal sewage
Pn = Total phosphorus loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were normal sewage
NHn = Ammonia loading (lb N/day) in discharge if it were normal sewage
TKn = Total kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb N/day) in discharge if it were normal
sewage
NOTES:
A. If any difference of terms in the equation above is negative, then that portion of the equation
shall not be used, that is, the difference shall be set to zero when it is negative.
B. All averages are arithmetic averages determined from available data during the billing period.
§ 112-125. Segmenting the JMIPCF.
The service area of the JMIPCF may be segmented to assist in a fair distribution of user charges,
especially if there is a pump station serving a segment.
§ 112-126. Computation of charges; measurement of flow.
The volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges and abnormal sewage surcharges
shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown on the records of meter readings
maintained by the Village of Albion Water Department. In the event that a person discharging wastes
into the JMIPCF produces evidence, to the Superintendent, demonstrating that a substantial portion of
the total amount of metered water does not reach the JMIPCF, then the Superintendent shall either
establish a percentage of the total metered water to be used as a basis for such computations or direct
the installation of appropriate flow measuring (and totalizing) devices to measure and record the actual
amount of flow into the JMIPCF. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the JMIPCF
procures all or part of his/her water supply from unmetered sources, the Superintendent shall either
direct the installation of water meters on the other sources of water supply or direct the installation of
appropriate flow measuring devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow into the JMIPCF.
Any water meters and/or flow measuring devices installed pursuant to this section shall be of a type
and design acceptable to the Superintendent and shall be installed, maintained and periodically tested
as required by the Superintendent, at the owner's expense. All such meters and/or flow measuring
devices shall be subject to periodic inspection, testing and reading by the Superintendent. Any person
discharging wastes into the JMIPCF may install a flow measuring device at his/her option, of the type,
design, installation and maintenance standards of the Superintendent, at the owner's expense.
§ 112-127. Billing period.
The billing period shall be quarterly for industrial and nonindustrial users.
§ 112-128. Pretreatment program costs.
The additional charges and fees associated with the operation of the pretreatment program shall be
assessed the user, and include:
Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 106/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
Issuing permits.
Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
Costs of equipment and supplies.
Reviewing accidental discharge procedures.
Construction inspections.
Filing appeals.
Application for consistent removal status as outlined in 40 CFR 403.
Other reasonable expenses to carry out the program to satisfy the requirements of this chapter,
the NYSDEC and the federal government.
§ 112-129. Charges for trucked and hauled wastes.
The charge for dumping septage into the JMIPCF shall be $0.03 per gallon dumped. The manner
of determining the volume dumped shall be at the discretion of the Superintendent. The charge for
dumping sludges into the JMIPCF shall be as follow:
Sludge Composition
[percent (%) solids] Cost per Gallon
Less than 5% $0.05
Over 5% but less than 7.5% $0.075
Over 7.5% but less than 10% $0.10
Over 10% but less than 12% $0.15
Sludges greater than 12% will not be accepted. The rates are based on the highest solids content
of the loads. A Part 360 sludge analysis must be completed annually by the discharger.
The charge for recreation vehicle (RV) waste discharged into the Village of Albion JMIPCF will be
$10 (200 gallons maximum) for non-village residents.
§ 112-130. Capital recovery.
The Village of Albion may institute an equitable procedure for recovering the costs of any capital
improvements of those parts of the JMIPCF which collect, pump, treat and dispose of industrial
wastewaters from those persons discharging such wastewaters into the JMIPCF.
§ 112-131. Collection of charges.
Provisions of Article XI of this chapter relating to the collection of penalties shall apply to the collection
of sewer service charges and abnormal sewage service surcharges, unless where otherwise provided
by application of the Sewer Rent Law by Village of Albion.
§ 112-132. Fiscal year for system.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 107/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The JMIPCF shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on the first day of June and
ending on the 31st day of May.
§ 112-133. Impact fees.
The Village of Albion Board shall have the authority to impose impact fees on new development, which
development may:
Cause enlargement of the service area of the JMIPCF.
Cause increased hydraulic and/or treatment demands on the JMIPCF.
§ 112-134. Fees.
The fees set forth in the Fee Schedule, on file in the village offices, shall be paid by the applicant
for the sewer connection.
The charges shall be evaluated by the Village Board periodically and changes to these charges
will be made by methods prescribed by Village Municipal Law.
§ 112-135. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from user charges and associated penalties, and impact fees, shall be credited to a
special fund. Moneys in this fund shall be used exclusively for the following functions:
For the payment of the operation and maintenance, including repair and replacement costs of the
Village of Albion JMIPCF.
For the discovery and correction of inflow and infiltration.
For the payment of interest on and the amortization of or payment of indebtedness which has
been or shall be incurred for the construction or extension of the Village of Albion JMIPCF.
For the extension, enlargement, replacement of and/or additions to the Village of Albion JMIPCF,
including any necessary appurtenances.
§ 112-136. Records and accounts; annual review; insurance.
The Village of Albion shall maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts for the
JMIPCF, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct
entries of all transactions relating to the JMIPCF. The Village of Albion will cause an annual audit
of such books of record and account for the preceding fiscal year to be made by a recognized
independent certified public accountant and will supply such audit report to authorized officials and
the public, on request.
In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system to
determine if it is adequate to meet expenditures for all programs for the coming year.
Classification of old and new industrial users should also be reviewed annually.
The Village of Albion shall maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the JMIPCF,
of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities
engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. All moneys received for losses under any
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 108/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property
damaged or destroyed.
Article XIV. Public Disclosure
§ 112-137. Operations open to the public.
It shall be the policy of the Village of Albion Board to conduct all business with full disclosure to the
public.
§ 112-138. Procedural requirements available.
The nature and requirements of all formal procedures for applying for a permit and for requesting a
permit under this chapter and for requesting a hearing shall be formulated by the Village of Albion and
be made available to any resident of the Village of Albion upon request.
§ 112-139. Validity through public inspection.
The Village of Albion shall formulate procedures to make available to the public for inspection such
orders, statements of policy and interpretations used by the Village of Albion in administration of this
chapter. No rule, regulation or civil order shall be valid until it has been available for public inspection.
Chapter 116. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-14-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 112.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 280.
§ 116-1. Application for use; tapping.
All applications for the introduction of or use of water on any premises or for the extension of any
water pipe shall be in writing and signed by the owner of such premises or by his or her duly
authorized agent and must fully and truly state the purpose for which such water is required and
all the expenses incident to the introduction or use of water on any premises, except for tapping
the water main, must be paid by the applicant.
No tapping of the water main shall be done until the application for water has been approved.
Tapping shall be done by Village employees or its contractors.
Each consumer desiring water service from the Village of Albion water system shall make written
application therefor on forms provided by the Village prior to receiving such water supply.
Any premises where water service has been terminated for a period of six months shall be
inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer or agent to ensure compliance with the requirements
for a certificate of occupancy.
[Added 12-14-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005]
§ 116-2. Water meter required; liability.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 109/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Every owner of each premises utilizing water from the Village water system shall be required, for each
service, to install a water meter of a brand or manufacturer approved and furnished by the Village.
Charge shall be made for all water registered by the meter, whether used, consumed or wasted,
including any leaks or malfunctions on owners premises, and the owner shall be liable for the same.
§ 116-3. Responsibilities regarding pipes.
All water pipes between the water main and the existing curb valve, together with all fixtures
connected therewith, shall be kept in good repair and protected from freezing by the Village of
Albion at the expense of the Village of Albion. All water pipes from the existing curb valve to the
premises where the water is used, together with all fixtures connected therewith, are the property
of the owner of the premises and must be kept in good repair and protected from freezing, and all
unnecessary waste or leakage of water must be prevented, at the expense of the owner.
A stop and waste cock for shutting off the water must be located immediately within the wall of the
building and between such wall and the water meter, and the pipes must be so arranged that the
water can be drawn from them whenever and wherever there is danger of freezing.
The owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred due to violations of this section or to the
malfunctions of fixtures, pipes or equipment belonging to owners or occupants, including, but not
limited to, repair costs, damages and water loss.
§ 116-4. Installation of meters.
The setting of meters must be under the supervision of the person in charge of the operation of the
Village of Albion water system or his or her representative. Wherever a meter is to be installed, a
suitable place must be provided by the owner and must be a place free from frost and accessible at all
times. If it is impossible to place the meter where it will be free from frost, a suitable boxing must be
built and the meter packed to prevent freezing, at the expense of the owner of property. This ruling
applies to all meters installed, whether they are sold or on rental basis.
§ 116-5. Reading of meters; inspections.
Each owner and occupant shall provide authorized Village employees access to read meters
without notice where no remote reader is installed.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Every owner or occupant of premises where Village water shall be used shall, at all reasonable
times and whenever, in their judgment, it shall be necessary so to do, permit authorized
employees of the Village to enter any and all portions of the premises or building, where
necessary, upon reasonable notice for the purpose of examining the meter, the water pipes or
fixtures or the manner in which the water is used.
§ 116-6. Multiple parties on water service line.
In case two or more parties or families are supplied with water from the same service pipe, each
party so served will be considered as a separate service, and a minimum bill will be rendered for
each party so served, provided that the amount of water consumed does not exceed the amount
allowed each individual under minimum rate.
Notice of delinquency and/or shutoff of water service shall be given to the owner and tenant. The
owner shall be responsible for all costs, including charges, penalties or fees of any kind in regard
to the turn off and reinstatement of the water services.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 110/376
C.
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
(a)
[1]
(b)
(1)
A.
The owner shall indemnify the Village of any claims by tenants or other persons due to the
shutting off of such water services.
§ 116-7. Cross-connection prohibited; civil penalty.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; 12-14-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005]
Cross-connection between different water supplies in or on any premises receiving Village of
Albion water service is prohibited. A cross-connection is an arrangement or installation of water
supply pipes, fixtures or equipment which allows or may allow the transfer of water to or from the
Village of Albion water service to any other water service or supply of any type whatever.
In the event that it is determined by employees of the Village that a cross-connection does exist in
or on any premises, the Village water service shall be immediately terminated without notice to the
owner or tenants. In addition, the owner of any premises in or upon which a cross-connection is
determined to exist shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
Any Village water service terminated as above provided for in Subsection B shall not be reinstated
until:
The premises have been repaired to remove the cross-connection.
A new application for water service has been made to the Village and approved.
The premises have been inspected by a Village employee or agent.
All penalties due have been paid.
All costs incurred by the Village have been paid.
A potable water supply within the Village of Albion will be supplied by a Public Water System as
defined by Part 5, Subpart 5-1, of the New York State Sanitary Code. A public water supply means
a community water system which supplies water to the public for human consumption through
pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least five service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days of the year.
§ 116-8. Backflow prevention program; penalties.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The legal basis for the following program is Part 5-1.31 of the New York State Sanitary Code.
The Village of Albion will protect the public water system by containing potential contamination
within the premises of the customer in the following manner:
By requiring an approved air gap, reduced pressure zone device, double-check valve
assembly or equivalent protective device according to the degree of hazard posed by the
service connection.
Service connection can be new or existing.
The Village of Albion will determine the degree of hazard as being:
Hazardous, which will require, as a minimum, an air gap or a reduced pressure
zone.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 111/376
[2]
[3]
[1]
(a)
(b)
(2)
[2]
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
[3]
E.
Aesthetically objectionable, which will require as a minimum a double-check valve
assembly.
Nonhazardous, which will require internal plumbing controls.
By requiring the users of such connections to submit plans for the installation of protective
devices to the Village of Albion.
A fee established by the Village Board shall accompany the application.[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
The installation must be designed by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed
architect.
By assuring that all protective devices be tested annually. Records of such test shall be made
available to and maintained by the Village of Albion. Such test shall be conducted by certified
backflow prevention testers certified by the New York State Department of Health in
accordance with Subdivision 5-1.31(a)(3) of Subpart 5-131 of the State Sanitary Code. The
Village of Albion will supply the needed tests for a fee established by the Village Board per
unit per year.[2]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
By making announced inspections of any customers facility.
The Village of Albion will not allow a customer to establish a separate source of water. However, if
the customer justifies the need for a separate source of water, the Village of Albion shall protect
the Village water system from the customer who has a separate source of water and does not
pose a hazard as detailed in Subsection A in the following manner:
By requiring the customer to regularly examine the separate water source as to its quality.
By approving the use of only those separate water sources which are properly developed,
constructed, protected and found to meet the requirements of Sections 5-1.51 and 5-1.52 of
Subpart 5 of the New York State Sanitary Code.
By filing such approvals with the state annually.
All customers of the Village of Albion shall prevent cross-connections between the potable water
piping system and any other piping system within the premises.
Water service will be terminated if:
The customer does not submit the required application for a new installation.
After notice by the Village to an existing facility for the need for a backflow prevention device,
an application is not received within 90 days or installation is not complete within 180 days.
The customer fails to complete required annual testing.
Test results indicate a device is not passing the required annual certification test.
The customer refuses to allow scheduled inspection of premises to the Village of Albion.
Penalties. A civil penalty as set forth from time to time by the Board of Trustees will be levied if a
backflow situation occurs.[3]
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
§ 116-9. Water rates; billings.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 112/376
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The rates charged for water provided consumers by the Village of Albion water system shall be as
from time to time established by resolution of the Village of Albion Board of Trustees for the
various classification of consumers.[1]
Editor's Note: The current rates are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
Consumers shall be given one billing cycle notice of anticipated changes in the established water
rates for their classification.
The schedule of reading of meters and billing shall be as from time to time established by the
Village of Albion Board of Trustees by resolution.
Water rents. In addition to the charges for water herein provided for, there shall be water meter
rental paid to Village with each payment for water service in such amount as from time to time is
established by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 116-10. Payments; penalty for delinquency.
All payments for water rental and charges, including penalties and interest, and sewer charges
shall be payable in full.
A penalty of 10% will be imposed on all unpaid water bills and services after the 10th day of the
month following the month of billing.
§ 116-11. Termination of service.
[Amended 12-14-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005]
If a water bill is not paid after a two-month period following the period of the unpaid billing, a
shutoff notice will be forwarded by regular mail to the responsible consumer. If the unpaid water fill
is not paid within 20 days, commencing with the day of mailing said notice, the water supply to the
premises of the delinquent consumer will be terminated. Wherever a water supply is terminated for
nonpayment of a water bill, an additional charge for services, as is from time to time established
by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees, payable in advance, will be imposed before water
service to the premises of the delinquent consumer will be restored.
When any Village water service is terminated as above, the Code Enforcement Officer will be
notified of the termination of the potable water supply. Whenever any water service is terminated
for a period of 24 hours, the certificate of occupancy shall be removed and not be reinstated until:
The premises have been inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer or agent and it is shown
to meet the requirements of a certificate of occupancy.
The provision of § 116-12 have been met.
§ 116-12. Restoration of service.
If water service has been terminated with respect to any property or premises, be it residential or
commercial, and water charges are delinquent with respect to that particular property, whether said
delinquent charges are the responsibility of the owner of a nonowner consumer, water service will not
be reinstated to that property until all delinquent charges have been paid in full. This provision shall not
apply to or affect applications by creditworthy nonowner consumers who were not responsible for
incurring the original delinquent charges unless such delinquent charges have become a lien for which
the owner is responsible.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 113/376
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
§ 116-13. Unpaid bills levied against property.
In all cases where water rents remain due and unpaid at the time the annual tax roll of the Village
is made out, the same shall be included therein and levied against the real property on which the
water shall have been used and shall be collected with and in the same manner as other Village
taxes, with the additional charges, fees and penalties incident to the collection of such taxes and
including the termination of the collection of water service for that particular property.
Upon such billings being added to the tax roll, any service to the premises shut off pursuant to
§ 116-11 hereof shall be restored. Costs of such restoration shall be the responsibility of occupant
and owner.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 116-14. Nonpayment of charges by nonowner consumers.
In all instances where arrangements have been made pursuant to § 116-1 of this chapter for water
rents to be chargeable to a consumer or consumers not the owner of the property where the water
service is furnished and the water charges chargeable to the said nonowner consumer or consumers
are in any way delinquent, water service will not be furnished at any other property chargeable to the
same nonowner consumer or consumers until such delinquent charges shall have been paid in full.
§ 116-15. Notice of right to dispute billing.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Appearing on each water bill and each notice of termination shall be the following statement: "If
disputed, you have 10 days to file a written complaint; the Clerk will give you copies of § 116-16 telling
you how to proceed." Bills against which no complaints have been entered within 10 days after
presentation must be paid as rendered.
§ 116-16. Disputed bills.
Any consumer making complaint as to the correctness of water bills and claiming to be
overcharged may, by applying at the office of the Water Department within 10 days after
presentation of the bill, have the meter examined and the dial reread; or, by depositing a fee, as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees at the above office and making a
written request, have the meter tested. If the meter is found to be correct or to underregister, said
deposit will be retained by the Water Department as payment for testing the meter. Should the
meter be found to overregister, the deposit will be returned to the complainant and proper
correction made in the bill.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996][1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to correct any charge so shown to be due to a fault in the
meter or to incorrect reading of the dial, but shall have no power to reduce water rents for any
other reason whatsoever. Bills against which no complaints have been entered within the 10 days
after presentation must be paid as rendered.
§ 116-17. Appeals.
If, after the procedures outline in § 116-16 above are completed, the consumer is not satisfied with
the determination of Village, the consumer may, within five days of the completion of the rereading
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 114/376
B.
[1]
testing procedures set forth in § 116-16 above, serve a demand, in writing, for a hearing before the
Water Committee of the Village Board. Within 10 days of receipt of such demand, the Committee
shall set a place date and time of the hearing and shall give the complaining consumer 10 days
written notice mailed by certified mail to the address to which water billings for the premises
concerned in the complaint are mailed to.
The complainant shall have the right to representation and to present any statement, evidence or
documents supporting his or her said claim, and the Village, by its Water Department and/or
Village Clerk, shall have similar rights and obligations; and upon hearing the evidence and
reviewing the matter, the Water Committee shall approve, disapprove or modify the bill or debt and
adjudicate the complaint based upon the merits and advise the party within 10 days of the hearing,
in writing, of the decision.
§ 116-18. Private fire connections.
All connections for private fire protection will be sealed by the authorized Village representative. Seals
must not be broken except in case of fire when a broken seal shall at once be reported to the Village
office. Any seals found broken and not so reported will subject the owner of said premises to a civil
penalty in an amount from time to time established by resolution of the Village Board for each offense.
[1] Each day such offense is allowed to continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
§ 116-19. Bypasses prohibited; public hydrants.
No addition to or alteration in any public or private pipe, conduit or other fixture between the public
water main and the individual water meter shall be made by any person, nor shall the water main be
tapped or any portion of the water works system, including, but not limited to, the public hydrants and
water meters, be interfered with without permission, in writing, of some person directly connected with
the Water Department, nor shall any person open nor interfere with any public hydrant or tamper with
or otherwise in any way interfere with any water meter without the permission of the Superintendent,
the Village Board of Trustees or the Chief of the Fire Department or some other person duly authorized
by such authority.
§ 116-20. Use of water at Bullard Park.
No public water supply provided by the Village of Albion for the benefit of the general public at the
Village recreation area commonly known as "Bullard Park" shall be used by any individual for any
purpose other than for drinking or cooking water to be utilized at Bullard Park.
§ 116-21. Boilers.
Steam boilers taking water from the waterworks will be required to have tanks that will contain an
ample supply of water for 10 hours in case the water is shut off for any purpose. The Village of Albion
shall not be responsible for any accidents or damages should such be sustained by a violation of this
rule. All houses and boilers shall be fitted with a suitable check valve to prevent accidents from
collapse or damage in case the water is suddenly drawn from the mains.
§ 116-22. Shut off of water; emergencies.
The Municipal Board reserves the right to shut off the water, without notice, for alterations, extensions
and repairs and to stop and restrict the supply of water whenever it may be found necessary, and the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 115/376
[1]
[1]
Village shall not be liable under any circumstances for a deficiency or a failure in the supply of water,
whether occasioned by shutting off water to make repairs or connections or for any other unavoidable
cause. The Village will make attempts, reasonable under the circumstances, to notify users affected by
such shutoffs. No notice shall be required in case of an emergency determined by Superintendent of
Streets or his or her designee.
§ 116-23. Damage to meters.
The cost of any repair or replacement necessitated by damage which may have been sustained to a
meter resulting from carelessness of the owner, tenant or agent of premises, or from neglect of either
of them to properly secure and protect the same, as well as any damage that may result from allowing
said meter to become frozen, burned or injured by hot water or steam, shall be added to the next water
billing and partial payments will be accepted.
§ 116-24. New meters.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
No new or additional water meter shall be installed without prior approval by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the affected plumbing. This shall not pertain to replacement meters.
§ 116-25. Outside users.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Special contracts shall be written for consumers outside the corporate limits of the Village of Albion,
New York, at rates not less than 120% of those set forth in the then current rate schedule; and in the
absence of such special contracts, in addition to the rates charged such outside consumers for water
consumed on their premises, each said user and, in the case of multiple parties pursuant to § 116-6,
each party served and supplied with water shall be charged an additional maintenance charge of as
from time to time determined by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 116-26. Civil penalties.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any consumer and owner violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the Village of Albion a civil penalty as set forth from time to time by
the Board of Trustees.[1] Each day a violation to continue shall constitute a separate violation.
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
Part III: Property Maintenance Legislation
Chapter 121. Abandoned, Junked, Discarded and
Unregistered Motor Vehicles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-27-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exterior property maintenance — See Ch. 155.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 116/376
[1] Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Ch. 121, Abandoned, Junked, Discarded an
Unregistered Motor Vehicles, adopted 11-14-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001.
§ 121-1. Statement of purpose.
The outdoor storage of abandoned, junked, discarded and unregistered motor vehicles on privately
owned property within the Village of Albion is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the community. The same also constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and in many ways imperils
their safety. Such storage also endangers the person and property of members of the community,
since fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily explode. Such storage is unsightly
and depreciates property values. The control of the outdoor storage of abandoned, junked, discarded
and unregistered motor vehicles on privately owned properties within the Village of Albion is therefore
regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 121-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
The intent of the owner of a motor vehicle not to use it on the public highways shall establish it as
abandoned. The intent of the owner shall be determined by all relevant facts, including but not
limited to any one of the following: the physical condition of the motor vehicle, any statements as
to its abandonment, the length of time since the motor vehicle was last used on the public
highways, whether the motor vehicle is inspected, and whether the motor vehicle is currently
registered. With respect to a motor vehicle not required to be registered or motor vehicles not
usually used on public highways, the intent of the owner shall be determined by the physical
condition of the motor vehicle, the length of time since it was last used for the purposes intended
and any statements as to its abandonment, and other relevant facts.
DISCARDED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which the owner thereof, as established by the surrounding circumstances,
does not intend to recover the possession of, or any motor vehicle whose owner cannot be found
after due and reasonable inquiry.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle in such condition as to cost more to repair and replace the same in operating
condition than the reasonable market value before such repair.
MOTOR VEHICLE
Every vehicle originally designed and intended to be operated, drawn or driven, or capable of
being operated, drawn or driven, upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "motor vehicle" shall include but not be limited to
automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles and trailers.
OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE
A person, firm or corporation having the property in or title to a motor vehicle, including a person
entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, and
also including any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the use thereof under lease or
otherwise.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
A person, firm or corporation being the owner, contract purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant,
undertenant, receiver or assignee of private premises or private property located within the Village
of Albion.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 117/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
PREMISES or PROPERTY
Includes all parcels of real property privately owned, situated in the Village of Albion, whether
occupied or vacant.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which may be registered with the State of New York and is not currently
registered. The fact that a motor vehicle which may be registered with the State of New York does
not display a current license plate or displays an expired license plate shall be presumptive
evidence of the fact that such motor vehicle is not currently registered.
§ 121-3. Outdoor storage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent,
tenant or otherwise of property within the Village of Albion, to store or deposit, or cause or permit
to be stored or deposited, an abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle, or part or piece
thereof, on any private property within the Village of Albion, unless such motor vehicle is stored or
deposited in a completely enclosed building.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent,
tenant or otherwise of any private property within the Village of Albion, to store or deposit, or
cause or permit to be stored or deposited thereon, an unregistered motor vehicle unless:
Such motor vehicle is the inventory or part of the inventory of a new or used motor vehicle
dealer located in compliance with the ordinances and local laws of the Village of Albion.
Such motor vehicle has been converted to and is actually used as a permanent building or
structure for carrying on purposes in such manner and circumstances as authorized by the
local laws and ordinances of the Village of Albion.
Such motor vehicle is a camping, house or board trailer otherwise stored and used in
compliance with the local laws and ordinances of the Village of Albion.
§ 121-4. Notice of violation.
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are believed to be violated, the Code Enforcement
Officer or any peace officer shall serve a written notice, either personally or by registered, certified
or ordinary mail, upon the owner, occupant or person having charge of such private property, to
comply with the requirements of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer or peace officer may
determine ownership of any parcel of land in the Village of Albion from the current assessment roll
of the Village and may serve written notice upon the owner thereof by mailing such notice to the
owner at the address listed on the current assessment roll. If the Code Enforcement Officer or
peace officer is unable to determine the ownership or address of the owner of said private
property, such notification may be made by publishing same in the official newspaper of the
Village.
This notice shall be in substantially the following form:
To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land within the Village of Albion briefly
described as follows:
(here describe subject property)
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that an abandoned, junked, discarded or unregistered motor
vehicle is stored or deposited on the above-described property in the Village of Albion. This
vehicle must be removed therefrom within five days from the date of this notice; provided,
however, that if this notice is served on you by publication - said motor vehicle shall be
removed within 10 days from the first publication date of this notice.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 118/376
§ 121-5. Violations.
Failure to remove the abandoned, junked, discarded or unregistered motor vehicle within the periods
prescribed above is a violation of this chapter.
§ 121-6. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 121-7. Removal of violating vehicles.
All motor vehicles shall be removed at the owner's expense. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
resist or obstruct the duly authorized agents, servants, officers and employees of the Village of Albion
in the removal and destruction of a motor vehicle by order of the Town Court of Gaines and/or Albion
shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided herein.
Chapter 124. Alarm Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Alarm Permit Law."
§ 124-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the Village of Albion by reducing the number of avoidable alarms to emergency agencies.
Avoidable alarms contribute to ineffective utilization of public safety manpower and equipment. In
addition, avoidable alarms require emergency responses which may contribute to a high accident rate
and delayed responses to genuine emergencies. This chapter seeks to ensure that communication
facilities will be available to dispatch personnel for actual emergencies and to alleviate the nuisance of
audible alarms to the surrounding community. Another purpose of this chapter is to contact responsible
people to notify them of the activation of the alarm. This chapter also requires registration of alarm
businesses and subscribers for the purpose of permitting the village to communicate with them
regarding the administration of this chapter.
§ 124-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in
this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
ALARM AGENT
Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties
include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 119/376
system from a fixed location and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be
installed nor designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the fire alarm system in a
specific location.
ALARM BUSINESS
The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed
any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
ALARM SYSTEM
Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of fire, smoke or
heat and/or unauthorized entry or intrusion, or attempts thereof, and which emits a sound or
transmits a signal or message when activated. "Alarm systems" include, but are not limited to,
direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not
designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected
building, structure or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices
installed by the telephone company or a cable television company to protect its systems which
might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system
APPELLANT
A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
APPLICANT
A person, firm or corporation who or which files an application for a new or renewal permit as
provided in this chapter.
AUDIBLE ALARM
A device designed for the detection of fire, intrusion or unauthorized entry which generates an
audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.
AVOIDABLE ALARM
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or
the negligence of the owner, user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system, or his or her
employees or agents, or through any other cause which, through direct connection to an
emergency agency or through notification of an emergency agency by a private answering point or
automatic dialing device or through notification to an emergency agency by any other second
party or means, indicates that an emergency situation exists requiring an emergency response
within the Village of Albion when, in fact, an emergency situation does not exist. An "avoidable
alarm" also includes the knowing or intentional activation of an alarm to an emergency agency
when the activator knows that an emergency situation does not exist. "Avoidable alarm" shall not
include alarms activated by violent conditions of nature, such as hurricanes, tornadoes,
earthquakes or any other similar cause beyond the control of the user or installer of an alarm
system; nor does it include an emergency or disaster drill conducted with prior notice to the
emergency agency. Activation of an alarm system under any circumstances in which the activator
reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists is not an "avoidable alarm," subject to the
above exceptions.
DAY
A calendar day.
FIRE MARSHAL
The Fire Marshal of the Village of Albion or his or her deputy.
NOTICE
Written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee or given by United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 120/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the
same in the custody of United States Postal Service.
PERMITTEE
Any alarm agent or alarm business who or which shall be granted a permit as provided herein,
and his or her or its agents and representatives.
PERSON
A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
SUBSCRIBER
Any person who owns, leases, contracts for or otherwise obtains an alarm system. A person or
entity may be both a "subscriber" and an alarm business.
VILLAGE
Village of Albion, Orleans County, New York, or any area outside the corporate limits of the Village
of Albion in which the Village of Albion is required by law or contract to provide fire-fighting,
emergency response or security services.
§ 124-4. Standards and regulations.
The Village Board hereby prescribes the following minimum standards and regulations for the
installation, construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the Village of
Albion:
Alarm equipment shall be securely mounted to the building structure. A suitable moisture
barrier shall be provided between equipment and exterior masonry walls.
All protective circuit wiring shall have conductors not smaller than No. 18AWG.
Wiring between a battery or power supply to an audible signal shall be of sufficient gauge to
have not greater than a fifteen-percent voltage drop.
Alarm wiring shall not be run in the same conduit as Class 1, 2 and 3 power lines. Burglar and
fire alarms conductors of Class 2 and Class 3 circuits shall not be placed in any enclosure,
raceway, cable tray, cable compartment, outlet box or similar fitting with conductors of light,
power and Class 1 circuits.
All splices shall be twisted and secured with solderless crimp conductors. Connection of wires
to screw terminals shall be made using a spade lug, either crimp or solder type. Terminal
boards with clamping washers will not require a spade lug or soldering. Wire nuts and punch
block connections will also be permitted.
Grounding shall be in accordance with the 1996 National Electric Code Section 250-5 under
conditions of Section 250-5(a)(1), (2) and (3), also pursuant to Section 760-6, which refers to
the above section.
There shall be no testing of alarms by any alarm business, alarm agents or subscribers of the
subscribers' agents that would normally summon fire services, unless such test is first cleared
and verified through the Fire Department.
Users of alarm systems are to be thoroughly instructed verbally and in writing in the operation
and testing of all equipment, standby power and procedures to be followed in the event of any
avoidable alarms and recommended replacement periods of dry cell batteries.
All wiring for fire alarm systems is to be in accordance with NFPA 70, Article 760, and in
accordance with New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 121/376
(10)
(11)
B.
A.
B.
C.
All equipment must be listed or labeled by a recognized testing agency such as Underwriters'
Laboratories Inc. F.M., Electric Testing Laboratories, C.S.A., etc. Any system installed in
accordance with these specifications shall be considered acceptable under these standards.
Authorized company identification shall include: name, height, recent photograph, company
name, address and phone number, signature of employee and company official's signature
and the issuing officer's signature.
All devices shall meet or exceed such standards and regulations before permits may be issued
pursuant to this chapter. The Fire Marshal may require inspection and approval of all alarm
systems installed within the village. The Fire Marshal may prescribe a certification form to be
completed by permittees certifying that an alarm system has been inspected an/or maintained by
the permittee and the alarm system conforms to said minimum standards.
§ 124-5. Requirements for audible alarms.
Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the names and
telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the
premises during any hour of the day or night that the alarm is actuated. Such notice shall be
posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible. In lieu thereof, such person may
maintain such information with the Albion Police Department and Orleans County's Sheriff's
Dispatch Office. This shall include the name and address and telephone number of any person
having a key to the premises.
Each audible alarm shall be designated so as to terminates its alarm within 15 minutes from its
initiation.
The Fire Marshal, the Fire Department officers or any peace officer may disable an audible alarm
that has not been silenced prior to the expiration of the fifteen-minute period, and neither the
Village of Albion, the Village of Albion Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention, the
Village of Albion Police Department, the Village of Albion Fire Department, The County of Orleans
and the Orleans County Sheriff's Department, nor any official, employee or volunteer thereof, shall
be liable for any damage that may result.
§ 124-6. Installers to possess permits.
Every person engaged in the business of repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, removing, designing,
selling, leasing, maintaining or installing alarms systems shall carry on his or her person at all times
while so engaged a valid identification card in a form issued pursuant to the New York State General
Business Law and shall display such permit to the Fire Marshal, Fire Department officer or any peace
officer upon request.
§ 124-7. Display of permits.
Such permit shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located. The Fire Marshal may
issue an appropriate permit identification tag and establish requirements for its posting.
§ 124-8. Alarm business permits required.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business without first applying for and
receiving an alarm business permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of the New York State
General Business Law, Article 6-D.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 122/376
A.
B.
[1]
§ 124-9. Alarm agent registration required.
No person shall engage in conduct or operate as an alarms agent unless he or she is first registered
with the Fire Marshal on the roster of an authorized alarm business. Such registration shall be invalid if
the alarms agent leaves the employ of said alarm business.
§ 124-10. Alarm system permit required.
No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm
permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that this section shall not be
enforced as against alarm systems installed and operating on the effective date of this chapter for a
period of 30 calendar days after said effective date.
§ 124-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles.
Permits shall be required for alarm systems located in any structures located within the village as
described herein. Alarm systems in structures of federal, state or local governmental agencies or
authorities shall meet the other requirements of this chapter, including liability for civil penalties for
its violations; provided, however, that such alarm systems shall be exempt from permit fees.
§ 124-12. Notice of change in status.
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by § 124-15 of this chapter,
the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the Fire Marshal within 20 days after such
change or at any hearing conducted under this chapter if such hearing is conducted before said notice
has been given.
§ 124-13. Permit-issuing authority.
The issuing authority shall be the Village Clerk. No permit shall be issued unless and until the
application for same has been approved in writing by the approving authority.
§ 124-14. Approving authority.
The approving authority shall be the Fire Marshal.
§ 124-15. Application; fees.
Application for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the requisite fee, as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
The fee is established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the applications and
permits and is not refundable. The Fire Marshal shall prescribe the form of the application and request
such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The form of the
permit application shall be approved by resolution of the Village Board. The application for alarm
systems shall require the name, address and telephone number of the person who will render service
or repairs during any hour of the day or night.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 123/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
§ 124-16. Denial of permit.
The application for the permit shall be denied by the Fire Marshal if the alarm system does not comply
with the standards and regulations adopted pursuant to § 124-4 of this chapter. Said permit shall be
issued to the person owning, using or possessing the alarm system. Said permit shall be revoked 90
days after the conveyance of the premises on which the alarm system is located, unless a permittee
shall certify that the fire alarm system has been inspected and/or maintained by the permittee after
said conveyance and it conforms to the standards and regulations set forth in § 124-4.
§ 124-17. Appeal procedure.
The Fire Marshal shall review the applications for permits required to be issued under this chapter.
The decision of the Fire Marshal shall be final.
The final determination of the Fire Marshal may be appealed pursuant to the Civil Practice Law
and Rules of the State of New York.
§ 124-18. Permit renewal fees.
The following fees shall be due and payable as indicated and at rates from time to time established by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees:
An annual permit fee shall be due and payable on January 1 occurring next after adoption of this
chapter and on January 1 of each subsequent year for each alarm. Said permit fee shall not be
prorated.
Each permit shall expire two years after issuance. Applications for renewals of permits shall be
renewed only upon the certification by a permittee that the alarm system has been inspected
and/or maintained by the permittee within the past 90 days and it conforms to the standards and
regulations set forth in § 124-4.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 124-19. Agents permitted to operate pursuant to business
permit.
An alarm agent shall be permitted to act pursuant to the authority of a valid alarm business permit if in
conformance with other provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-20. Suspension and revocation of alarm system permit.
The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and revocation of the alarm system permit of
a subscriber:
Where there is violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
Where there is failure to comply with standards or regulations set forth in § 124-4 of this
chapter.
Where his or her alarm system activates excessive avoidable alarms and thereby constitutes
a public nuisance, which shall be deemed to be three avoidable alarms in any one-hundred7/
14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 124/376
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
eighty-day period;
Where the subscriber, his or her employee or agent has knowingly made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any
report or record required to be filed with any village agency;
Where the subscriber has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within
the past year, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the
date of revocation;
Where a subscriber has failed to keep his or her alarm systems in good repair; or
Where a subscriber has failed to notify the Fire Marshal, the proper dispatching office and any
party who would receive direct communication of an alarms, prior to any service, test, repair,
maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation which might actuate an avoidable alarm.
For the purposes of these standards and regulations, any alarm actuated where such prior notice
has been given shall constitute an avoidable alarm.
The Fire Marshal shall be authorized to establish a cancellation code to be made available to
subscribers who desire the ability to avoid an alarm which might otherwise be deemed an
avoidable alarm. No penalty shall be imposed for alarms which are canceled in accordance with
such procedures.
§ 124-21. Investigation of alleged violations.
The Fire Marshal or his or her designee shall investigate written reports of each alleged avoidable
alarm or alleged violations of other provisions of this chapter. Notice of said written report alleging
violation shall be given to the subscriber.
The person alleged to be in violation of this chapter shall be given notice of the investigation and
an opportunity to be heard during the investigative process. The Fire Marshal may hold a hearing
if, in his or her sole discretion, it is deemed appropriate.
Upon completion of his or her investigation, the Fire Marshal shall make a determination which
shall be final. The Fire Marshal shall give notice of said decision to the person alleged to be in
violation and to the party who made the report which initiated the investigation.
A final determination of the Fire Marshal may be appealed pursuant to the Civil Practice Law and
Rules of the State of New York.
§ 124-22. Procedure upon determination of violation.
If a person is found to be in violation of this chapter, the following shall apply:
The Fire Marshal shall serve the person determined to be in violation with a written order of
suspension. Said order shall be effective immediately, if personally served, or three business days
after same has been deposited in the United States Postal Service.
Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the person in violation shall discontinue use
of any alarm system requiring a permit issued pursuant to this chapter and cease all operations
conducted under the authority of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
In the event that an order of suspension has been issued for violation of § 124-20A(3), the Fire
Marshal may reinstate an alarm system permit upon receipt of the certification that the alarm
system has been inspected and/or maintained subsequent to the issuance of the order of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 125/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
[1]
[2]
A.
suspension, and a further certification from a permittee that it conforms to the standards and
regulations set forth in § 124-4.
§ 124-23. Revocation of permits; appeals.
The order of suspension shall become a revocation 15 days after the order of suspension
becomes effective, unless the subscriber or permittee initiates an appeal from the determination of
the Fire Marshal.
Where an appeal has been initiated, the order of suspension shall be stayed pending the
determination of said appeal.
§ 124-24. Surrender of permit.
If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the subscriber or permittee shall surrender said permit
to the Fire Marshal.
§ 124-25. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to other provisions of this chapter, persons in violation thereof shall be liable for civil
penalties[2] for each violation as set forth from time to time by the Board of Trustees for the following:
Failure to have alarm business permit or alarm agent permit.
Failure to have an alarm system permit; provided, however, that until one year from the effective
date of this chapter, said penalty shall be deemed waived if the subscriber obtains an alarm
system permit within 10 days of notification of the violation.
Violation of § 124-5B.
Violation of § 124-20A(3) for the following:
A third avoidable alarm.
A fourth avoidable alarm.
Each avoidable alarm thereafter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
§ 124-26. Enforcement.
All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the village shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any
permit fee or civil penalty shall be deemed a debt to the village. An action may be commenced in the
name of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee or
civil penalty. All permit fees shall be due upon issuance of the permit.
§ 124-27. Confidentiality of records; access.
Information contained on applications for permits required under this chapter shall be confidential.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 126/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
Records of avoidable alarms of subscribers shall be deemed to be confidential.
Records of avoidable alarms on the equipment of any alarm business shall be indexed under the
alarm business which installed and/or who certified it to be in conformance with the standards and
regulations set forth in § 124-4. Said records shall be available to the public.
All information on applications pertaining to avoidable alarms shall not be deemed confidential
insofar as it is necessary to conduct any litigation under this chapter or to be provided to
appropriate officials for fire protection purposes.
The Fire Marshal shall be deemed custodian of the records pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
Chapter 128. Brush, Grass and Weeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 8 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 128-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Brush, Grass and Weeds Removal Ordinance of the Village of
Albion, New York."
§ 128-2. Purpose.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health by the removal of fire and health hazards by
requiring the owners of land to cut, trim or remove brush, grass or weeds.
§ 128-3. Maintenance requirements; noncompliance procedure.
[Added 8-12-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
Every owner of land within the Village of Albion shall cut, trim, or remove brush, grass or weeds of a
height of 10 inches or more from the premises owned by him or her to a depth of at least 75 feet from
any street and 75 feet from adjoining developed property lines; and, upon default, the Village of Albion
may cause such brush, grass or weeds or other materials to be cut, trimmed or removed by said
Village, and the total thereof shall be assessed upon the real property on which such brush, grass or
weeds are found.
Editor's Note: Former § 128-3, Maintenance requirements; noncompliance procedure, as amended,
was repealed 9-26-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007.
§ 128-4. Collection of costs; fees.
[Amended 8-12-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
The cost of cutting, trimming or removing such brush, grass or weeds shall constitute a lien and
charge upon the real property involved until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be
collected by the Village Treasurer in the manner provided by law for the collection of taxes.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The Village Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, establish, by resolution, the method by
which the cost shall be determined and shall include the power to establish minimum costs.[1]
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 127/376
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 128-5. Service of notice of violation; time for compliance.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Before the Village of Albion shall remove, cut or trim such brush, grass or weeds and assess the costs
thereof upon the real property upon which such brush, grass or weeds are found, notice shall be given
to the owner thereof by either personal service or by mail addressed to the last known owner at his or
her last known address as shown on the tax rolls of the village. Such service shall be sufficient for all
purposes. Such notice shall set forth the violations and direct compliance within five days from the date
of such notice. All such notices shall be signed and issued by the Village Code Enforcement Officer or
by the Village Clerk upon direction of the Village Board of Trustees. If there is a failure of compliance
within the said five-day period, the village may then cause the removal, trimming or cutting and assess
the cost as hereinabove provided.
§ 128-6. Exclusion of certain vegetation.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cultivated crops, shrubs, trees or other landscaping or
weeds or grass which may intermingle with growing cultivated crops, until such time as said crop is
harvested or should have been harvested.
§ 128-7. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 8-12-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
In addition to the rights hereinabove provided for the Village of Albion, any violator of this chapter
shall be assessed a civil penalty to be established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Albion.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. A295, Civil Penalties.
Each day a violation continues after notice of violation shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter. No additional notices shall be required for continuing violations, and an additional penalty
may be assessed against the owner of said premises for each day the violation exists. Penalties
may be collected in the same manner provided for in § 128-4 hereof.
Chapter 132. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 5-13-1974 as Ch. 48 of the
1974 Code; Art. II, at time of adoption of Code 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Article I. Number Designation
[Adopted 5-13-1974 as Ch. 48 of the 1974 Code]
§ 132-1. Philadelphia Block System.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 128/376
A.
B.
All streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places lying and being within the limits of the Village of
Albion as now laid out and existing, or as may be hereafter laid out, shall be numbered or renumbered
according to the Philadelphia Block System, so-called, modified so as to conform to the uniform
system recommended for use in the State of New York and which has been adapted to the conditions
existing in the said Village of Albion aforesaid.
§ 132-2. Districts and base lines.
The village aforesaid shall be divided into four districts or divisions by the application to the same of
two base lines. One of these shall run north and south along the center line of the thoroughfare known
as Main Street from the north line of the village to the south line of the same as now located and
existing, which base line shall denote the marking of the streets running east and west, and the other
shall run along the center line of the thoroughfares known as East State Street and West State Street,
from the east village line to the west village line as now located and existing, which base line shall
denote the dividing line between the marking of streets running north and south. Therefore, the
intersection of the two base lines referred to, which is in the geometrical center of said intersection of
the two streets named, that is, Main Street and East and West State Streets, is the initial point of the
numbering of the streets in the four directions named.
§ 132-3. Block numbering.
From the base lines as established by § 132-2 hereof, a uniform system of property numbering shall
commence, using 100 numbers, maximum, to each block, in each direction and continuing with a
consecutive hundred at each full intersection, it being the intent and purpose of this method of uniform
system that house numbers are assigned to property frontage in units only and not on the basis of
what is built on the property, applying to vacant property as well as to property that has been improved
by the construction of any structures of any kind upon the same.
§ 132-4. Unit dimensions.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The units of the uniform system as referred to in § 132-3 hereof shall be as follows:
Eighteen feet shall constitute a frontage unit in the business section of the Village of Albion, which,
for the purposes of this Article, shall be the area covered by the area defined by North Main Street
from the Erie Canal south to State Street; South Main Street from Route 31 north to State Street;
East Bank Street from Route 98 east to Ingersoll Street; West Bank Street from Route 98 west to
Liberty Street, so enlarged in all directions as to include the farther sides of the streets, alleys,
lanes, courts and public places and thus give proper effect to the numbering of said farther sides
of the said streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places, as well as to the near sides of same.
Forty feet shall constitute a frontage unit in a residential section of the Village of Albion, which, for
the purposes of this Article, shall be the balance of the area within the confines of the Village of
Albion and lying outside of the area referred to above herein in this section.
§ 132-5. Property numbering.
The numbering and renumbering shall be so made, assigned and placed that the odd numbers shall
be on the north side of the east and west streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places and on the
east side of the north and south streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places. Likewise, the even
numbers shall be on the south side of the east and west streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places
and on the west side of the north and south streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 129/376
A.
B.
[1]
§ 132-6. District designations in address.
All streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places shall have the proper label assigned to the same by
giving the prefix east or west or north or south to the streets, alleys, lanes, courts and public places in
each of the four districts or divisions formed by the base lines aforesaid already designated and
located as provided for in § 132-2 of this Article, thus giving the proper stamp of individuality to each
and every street, alley, lane, court and public place within the limits of the Village of Albion aforesaid.
§ 132-7. Numbering of apartments and other entrances.
All numbering and renumbering shall be so made that no numerical fraction number shall be given
to any unit or part thereof or to any entrance or stairway or stairways leading to apartments in the
rear or in the upper stories of any building or buildings fronting on any street, alley, lane, court or
public place, but such entrance to such stairway or stairways shall be given a number with an
alphabetical suffix, which suffix shall attach to the number or the unit in which said entrance is
located. Thus, if the entrance to such apartment or apartments shall occur in a unit that may carry
the number of 12, then said entrance shall be given the number 12A.
Likewise, where any subdivision or a unit may be made, the alphabetical suffix shall be applied,
and no numerical fractional number be given to any portion.
Article II. Design and Display
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996[1]]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 132-8. Title.
The title of this Article shall be the "Village of Albion Property Address Law."
§ 132-9. Display of street address required.
All principal structures located within the Village of Albion shall have or display at least one set of
numbers which correspond to the street address of the property as assigned by the village. Numbers
must be prominently displayed on the front of the structure, and in no case shall script design be
permitted. "Principal structure," as that term is utilized herein, shall include single- and two-family
residences, apartment buildings, businesses and commercial and industrial establishments and
municipal, government and religious buildings (e.g., fire departments, post office, schools, Village Hall,
churches, etc.).
§ 132-10. Location.
In the case where the principal structure is not clearly visible from the street or is back more than 75
feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, a post with the property numbers displayed upon it, not to
exceed five feet in height, shall be installed in close proximity to the property access, not less than five
feet or greater than 25 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way. All numbers must be clearly visible
from the street and unobstructed by shrubs, fences, trees and other objects.
§ 132-11. Design requirements.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 130/376
All numbers shall be Arabic in design, a minimum of four inches in height and shall sharply contrast in
color from the structure or post to which they are affixed.
§ 132-12. New construction.
In the case of new construction, no temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
Code Enforcement Officer verifies that the street numbers have been properly displayed.
§ 132-13. Acts to be considered violations.
The absence of address numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of any whole number thereof or
the use of any number not properly assigned by the village or the failure of address numbers to meet
visibility requirements shall all be considered violations of this Article.
§ 132-14. Determination of compliance.
Any structure having street numbers which are Arabic in design, logical in sequence, within the
distance required, a minimum of four inches in height and of contrasting colors as of the effective date
of this Article shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with this Article.
§ 132-15. Mailboxes.
Address numbers shall be placed on mailboxes at the curb, in a size not less than two inches in height.
§ 132-16. Grant of exemption.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to grant exemptions from the number size
requirement of this section where public safety is not adversely affected.
§ 132-17. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with the property numbering regulations hereby is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$250 or imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 132-18. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce this Article.
Chapter 135. Buildings, Unsafe
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 149.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 165.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 131/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 135-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING
Any structure, house, shed or other man-made structure or part thereof used for residential,
business, industrial or any other purpose.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL
Any employee of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention with enforcement
authority.
PERSON
Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, joint-stock companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 135-2. Enforcement.
This chapter will be enforced by the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention of the Village of
Albion.
§ 135-3. Conditions constituting dangerous buildings.
All buildings or structures situate within the corporate limits of the Village of Albion, New York, in
business, industrial, multiple-dwelling and residential sections that, from any cause, may now have or
shall hereafter have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings":
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage or deterioration of the
supporting member or members or 50% of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting
enclosing or outside walls or covering.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded or which have significant strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous
to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the
Village Albion, New York.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly
fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or
are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of those living therein.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient
stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of
the public or property.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 132/376
H.
[1]
I.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the Village of Albion, New York.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of any Building Code of the Village of Albion,
New York, now or hereafter adopted.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 135-4. Dangerous buildings deemed nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 135-3 of this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, demolished or removed as hereinbefore and hereinafter
provided.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to remove all unsanitary, flammable or
combustible materials and to board up all windows, doors and openings to the building. This shall
take place at the direction of the Code Enforcement Official after the building has been declared
unsafe, after the building has been declared uninhabitable or after the building has been vacant
for more than 60 days. In the event that the owner of the property fails to carry out these functions,
the Code Enforcement Official shall take action to cause the removal of all unsanitary, flammable
or combustible materials and to board up all windows, doors and openings so as to prevent
entrance. The cost of such action shall be a lien on the property and shall be collectible in the
same manner as delinquent taxes.
§ 135-5. Duties of Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire
Prevention.
The Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention shall:
Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any persons to the effect
that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this chapter.
Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the Albion Fire Department or any officer or
member thereof or reported by the Police Department of said Village or any officer thereof to
either the Code Enforcement Official or to the Board of Trustees as probably existing in violation of
the terms of this chapter or reported as aforesaid to be suspected to be existing in violation of the
terms of this chapter.
Inspect any building, wall or structure concerning which he or she has reasonable grounds to
suspect that the same is or may be existing in violation of this chapter.
As expeditiously as possible and not later than 30 days immediately following his or her
examination and inspection, report in writing and file such report with the Village Clerk, stating the
date of his or her inspection and stating the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe
or dangerous or violative of this chapter.
Serve or cause to be served, in the manner and upon such person or persons as prescribed by
§§ 135-6 and 135-7 of this chapter, all notices and orders hereafter specified in §§ 135-6 and 135-
7 hereof and attend to the posting of all notices, orders and surveys provided for by this chapter.
Act as one of the surveyors as an official of the Village of Albion, New York, in all cases where a
survey is required.
Perform such other and further duties as may lawfully be delegated by the Board of Trustees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 133/376
A.
§ 135-6. Notice and order to comply.
Upon the filing of his report with the Village Clerk, as heretofore provided in § 135-5D hereof, or at any
time thereafter whenever, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Official, any building or structure or
any part thereof in the business, industrial, multiple-dwelling or residential sections in the Village of
Albion, New York, is, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any other
cause, either structurally unsafe or from any cause dangerous or unsafe to the public or from any
cause violative of the terms of this chapter or from any cause is in such an unsafe condition as to
endanger life or property, the Code Enforcement Official shall have authority to order any owner, agent
or person in possession, charge or control of such building or structure or any part thereof to put the
same in a safe condition and to repair and secure the same or to take down and remove the same or
any part thereof within such reasonable time as may be determined by the Code Enforcement Official
in such order; provided, however, that in all cases such order shall fix the time when compliance
therewith shall commence at not more than 10 calendar days after the service thereof, and provided
further that, except in case of emergency, not less than 30 calendar days shall be allowed in such
order for completion of compliance therewith. The Code Enforcement Official shall serve or cause to
be served a notice, in writing, on the owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal
representatives, agents or lessees and upon any other person or persons having a vested or
contingent interest in such building or structure or any part thereof, which notice shall contain a
description of the premises and a statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous, and which notice shall be served as herein provided concurrently with an order
requiring said building or structure to be made safe and secure or removed. Such notice and order
shall be served or caused to be served either personally or by registered mail, addressed to the last
known address, if any, of the owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents or lessees and other person or persons having a vested or contingent interest in said building
or structure or any part thereof as shown by the records of the Orleans County Treasurer and the
Orleans County Clerk. The Code Enforcement Official shall post or cause to be posted conspicuously
on the outer exterior wall of such premises, at the time of such service of within a reasonable time
thereafter, a copy of such notice and order. Such notice and order shall remain posted until the
required changes have been made, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or
destroy such notices without permission of the Code Enforcement Official.
§ 135-7. Failure to comply with notice; survey of premises.
Upon the refusal or neglect of the person or persons served with the notice and order provided for
by § 135-6 of this chapter to comply with any or all of the requirements of such notice and order
within the time prescribed by such notice and order, then, upon order of the Village Board of
Trustees, a notice of survey shall be served upon such person or persons in the manner
prescribed by § 135-6 of this chapter, notifying such person or persons that a survey of the
premises described in such notice of survey will be made at the time and place specified in such
notice of survey, which time shall not be less than 24 hours from the time of the service of such
notice of survey, and which notice of survey shall further notify such person or persons that such
survey will be made at such time and place as are specified therein by the Code Enforcement
Official of the Village of Albion, New York, and an engineer or architect named by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Albion, New York, and designated in such notice and by an engineer or
architect appointed by the person or persons notified as herein provided. Such notice shall further
notify such person or persons that, in the event of the refusal or neglect of such person or persons
so notified to appoint such third surveyor and to cause his or her attendance at the time and place
of the survey as set forth in the notice of survey, then and in such event the Code Enforcement
Official of Albion, New York, and the engineer or architect named by the Board of Trustees and
designated in such notice of survey shall make the survey and report. Such notice of survey shall
state that in the event that the building or structure or any part thereof shall be reported unsafe or
dangerous under such survey, then an application will be made at a special term of the Supreme
Court in the Eighth Judicial District not less than five nor more than 10 calendar days thereafter for
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 134/376
B.
C.
D.
an order determining the building or structure or any part thereof to be a public nuisance and
directing that it shall be repaired and secured or taken down and removed.
[Amended 7-10-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
At the time and place set forth in the notice of survey provided for in Subsection A of this section,
the surveyors specified in such Subsection A shall survey the premises described in the notice of
survey and shall make a report, in writing, stating the particulars in which the building or structure
is unsafe or dangerous or violative of this chapter, and such report shall be signed by each of the
surveyors and filed with the Village Clerk of the Village of Albion, New York.
In case the premises referred to in such report shall be reported dangerous under such survey,
said report will be placed before the Supreme Court as indicated in such notice.
The failure, refusal or neglect of any surveyor to sign the report of the survey shall not affect the
validity thereof, and the same shall be filed, posted and placed before the Supreme Court as
provided herein, whether or not signed by all surveyors. The majority report of the survey shall be
sufficient and deemed the report of the survey hereunder. Any surveyor hereunder shall have the
right to file a minority or dissenting report with the Village Clerk concurrently with the majority
report of the survey hereunder.
§ 135-8. Posting of report of survey on premises.
A copy of the report of the survey shall be posted on the building which is the subject thereof by the
persons holding the survey immediately on their signing such report.
§ 135-9. Compensation of surveyors.
[Amended 7-10-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
The engineer or the architect named by the Board of Trustees as hereinbefore provided who may act
on any survey called in accordance with this chapter and the engineer or architect appointed as
hereinbefore provided by the person or persons notified as hereinbefore provided shall each be
entitled to and receive a fee to be fixed by the Village Board to be paid by the Village Treasurer. A
cause of action is hereby created for the benefit of the Village against the owner of said building or
structure and against the owner of the lot or parcel of land on which the same is situated for the
amount so paid with interest. The amount so collected shall be paid to the Village Treasurer in
reimbursement of the amount paid by him or her as aforesaid.
§ 135-10. Assessment of costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the proceedings to remove,
demolish, repair or vacate any dangerous building or structure as hereinbefore defined, including all
surveyor's fees, attorneys' fees, advertising costs, title searches and all other expenses necessarily
incurred in such proceedings, and all costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the
actual repair, vacating, demolishing or removal of any and all such buildings or structures under and by
the direction of the Board of Trustees shall, when properly certified by the Board of Trustees, be
audited and paid by the Village in the same manner as other claims against the Village are audited and
paid. A bill for such expenses incurred by the Village as aforesaid shall be presented to the owner
personally or by leaving the same at his or her residence with any adult person or, if he or she is a
nonresident of the Village, by mailing the same to him or her at his or her last known place of
residence or, if the name of such owner or his or her place of residence cannot be ascertained after
due diligence, by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the premises. If such owner shall fail to
pay the same within 10 calendar days thereafter, the Board of Trustees shall file, immediately
preceding the time for making the annual assessment roll, a certificate of the actual expenses incurred
as aforesaid, with a statement as to the property in connection with which such expenses were
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 135/376
A.
B.
incurred, with the Assessors of the Village, who shall, in the preparation of the last assessment roll of
general Village taxes, assess such amount of such actual expenses upon such property and against
each building or structure and the lot or land upon which the same is situate, and the same shall be
levied, collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time, under
the same penalties and having the same lien upon the property assessed as the general Village tax
and as a part thereof. The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty prescribed by this chapter or
by any existing ordinance shall not bar the right of the Village to collect such aforesaid actual expenses
as herein prescribed.
§ 135-11. Emergency conditions.
In cases of great emergency, where the delay of proceedings as herein before provided would result in
probable loss of life or property, the Board of Trustees shall have the power to proceed at once to take
such action as is needed to guard the safety of persons and property. In such cases, the Board of
Trustees shall have the full power and authority to provide all necessary means therefor, and all
expenses therefor shall be paid and collected as provided in § 135-10 hereof and in Article 5, § 78-b of
the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 135-12. Execution of court order.
Upon receiving an order from the Supreme Court of the State of New York as provided in § 135-7
hereof, the Code Enforcement Official shall immediately proceed to execute it as therein directed and
may employ such labor and assistance as may be necessary for that purpose.
§ 135-13. Remedies.
The remedies of the Village of Albion as herein set forth shall not be exclusive, but the Village shall
have any other and further remedies, at law or otherwise, now existing or as may be hereafter provided
for under the laws of the State of New York, and any and all such remedies shall be deemed
cumulative, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the
right to pursue any and all others.
§ 135-14. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to knowingly maintain or cause to be maintained
or to knowingly allow or permit any other person or corporation or agent, lessee or otherwise to
maintain, any dangerous, unsafe or hazardous building, residence or structure, as herein defined,
and any owner, occupant, lessee or other person or corporation who shall knowingly maintain or
cause to be maintained or knowingly allow or permit to be maintained any such dangerous, unsafe
or hazardous building, residence or structure and who shall fail to comply with any order or any
provisions of any order of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, obtained as herein set
forth, directing that such unsafe building, residence or structure be demolished or repaired shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, and, each and every day such failure to
comply continues beyond the date fixed for such compliance by an order of the Supreme Court of
the State of New York, obtained as herein set forth, shall constitute a separate offense. An
adjudication by the Supreme Court of the State of New York determining that the building,
residence or structure is dangerous and/or unsafe and a public nuisance shall be conclusive
evidence of the fact of the existence of such dangerous or unsafe building, residence or structure.
Any person removing any notice provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by imprisonment for not
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 136/376
more than 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Chapter 138. Burning, Outdoor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
§ 138-1. Burning of combustible material.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw or other combustible
material within the village limits of the Village of Albion, except for training exercises conducted by the
Fire Department with proper Department of Environmental Conservation permits. This section shall not
prohibit the use of recreational fires, provided that they do not create a nuisance, and in the event of a
legitimate complaint, the Albion Police, Albion Fire Department or the Fire Marshal shall cause the fire
to be extinguished.
§ 138-2. Notification; permit required.
The Fire Department shall notify the Fire Marshal of the date and time of any controlled burn pursuant
to Part 1191.2(c) of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. A demoolition
permit shall be obtained from the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention prior to the use of
a structure or building for such training exercise.
§ 138-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 143. Circuses, Carnivals and Parades
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 59.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 206.
§ 143-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CIRCUSES, STREET SHOWS AND FESTIVALS
Any temporary or traveling shows or exhibits held in any building, tent, enclosure or on any lot
where the following forms of amusement or entertainment are or may be conducted: riding devices
such as Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, carousels, whips, roller coasters or similar devices,
illusion shows, animal acts, trapeze acts, feats of daring, clowns, mechanical shows, freak shows,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 137/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
sideshows, funhouses or active games of skill such as ball-throwing games, pitch-till-you-win
games, swinging-ball games, hoop-throwing games or games of like character.
PARADE
Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind or any similar display in
or upon any street, park or other public place in the village.
§ 143-2. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or conduct any circus, street show or carnival or any
parade, and no such person, firm or corporation shall erect or cause to be erected any temporary
structure composed wholly or partly of canvas or similar material within the Village of Albion for use in
any such circus, street show or carnival in which there is a seating capacity for more than 30 people
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 143-3. Permit application requirements.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to procure such a permit shall file with the Village Clerk a
written application therefor, in duplicate, at least 10 days prior to the opening of such parade, circus,
street show or carnival. Such application shall state, among other things:
The name and address of the applicant.
The location of the principal place of business of such person, firm or corporation.
The names and addresses of the officers of such firm or corporation.
The length of time the parade, circus, street show or carnival is to be maintained within the village
and the location requested to be used therefor and the hours of the day or night during which such
circus, street show or carnival is to be opened to the public.
Whether any open flame is intended to be used within any tents or structures and, if so, what
precautions are to be taken to render it safe.
The location of all electrical controls.
The location of all exits within the structures above defined and the type of construction and
structural details of the seats and supports.
The formula of the solution which has been used to flameproof the structures above defined or the
name of the concern which has provided such flameproofing and a sworn statement to the effect
that such structure has been flameproofed.
That fire lanes at least 15 feet wide will be provided between and among the structures at such
point or places as the Fire Marshal of the village shall designate.
§ 143-4. Insurance requirements.
The applicant shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in amounts of not less than
$1,000,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for any one accident shall be in force and effect at the time
any such structure is to be occupied as a place of assembly by the public and likewise covering all
rides and other exhibitions and activities in any such circus, street show or carnival.
§ 143-5. Fees.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 138/376
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
The applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk fees as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 143-6. Site requirements.
A duplicate of any such application shall be delivered to the Fire Marshal of the village who shall
determine, with the assistance of the Health Officer whenever so requested, if the applicant has made
provision in any structure in which the public is invited for:
Adequate aisles, seats, platforms and poles.
Sufficient exits, well marked and properly lighted.
Lighted and unobstructed passageways to areas leading away from the structure.
Removal, before the structure is to be used as a place of public assembly, of any pole, rope or
other obstruction in any aisle or exit.
Proper safeguarding of any use of open flame or its use prohibited.
The clearing of straw, dry grass, sawdust and any combustible trash from the structure before it is
opened to the public and arrangements made to keep the areas where debris may be expected to
accumulate well serviced, especially under open seats.
Adequate fire lanes between and among the structures which shall be at least 15 feet wide and
shall be located at such point or places as said Fire Marshal shall designate.
§ 143-7. Issuance of permit.
If the approval of the Fire Marshal is secured, the Village Clerk shall, upon the payment of the abovementioned
fee, issue a permit for the purpose requested.
§ 143-8. Revocation of permit.
If the Fire Marshal determines that any structure or the premises on which such circus, street show or
carnival is located is being maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or in such a
manner to constitute a fire hazard[1], he or she may summarily revoke the permit.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 143-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for
each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Chapter 145. Clearing, Filling and Grading
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 11-14-2001 by L.L. No. 9-2001.
(This local law was adopted as Ch. 155, Art. II, §§ 155-15 through 155-24, but was renumbered to fit
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 139/376
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
into the organizational structure of the Code.) Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exterior property maintenance — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 145-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure
that the clearing, filling and grading of property is safely conducted in conformance with the Village
Zoning Law[1] and other applicable ordinances.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Zoning.
§ 145-2. Word usage; definitions; administration.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this section its most
reasonable application.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLEARING
The removal of trees over eight inches in diameter measured at four feet above ground level
and shall include the stripping of soil.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Village Code Enforcement Officer or other person so designated by the Village Board.
FILLING
The placement of soil, rubble, spoils, rocks and/or any other appropriate fill on any property
for the purpose of raising or elevating any portion of a property. Filling shall not include the
burying of garbage, demolition or construction waste, trash or hazardous materials of any
kind. The placement or transfer of unacceptable material is prohibited.
GRADING
The changing or alteration of the surfaces of slopes of lawns or grounds on a site.
Administration by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and
implement this chapter of the Village of Albion Code by processing all applications and, where
required, referring such applications to the Planning Board.
§ 145-3. Permit required.
No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted any land operations to clear, fill or grade any
property without securing a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 145-4. Application requirements.
The following information or exhibits are required in order to secure a permit.
Engineering drawings showing the tax lot upon which the activity will be conducted.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 140/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The names, addresses and section, block and lot numbers of all contiguous property owners and
the names, addresses and section, block and lot numbers of all property owners located within
500 feet of the proposed site.
A plan showing all existing and proposed contour lines, the amount of fill to be placed or
displaced, the location of trees over eight inches in diameter measured four feet from the ground,
and the road access to the site.
An erosion control plan.
Preliminary copies of any contracts to perform such clearing, filling and grading, which contract
shall state that it is subject to this chapter of the Village Code and that a copy of this section of the
Village Code shall be attached to and become a part of such contract.
Documentation regarding permit status with the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to the issuance of a permit. Any New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation permit required must be in effect prior to the Village issuing a permit.
Proof of insurance adequate to cover the intended work pursuant to the terms of the permit. The
Village shall be named as an additional insured on the applicant's policy. The applicant shall, by a
separate instrument, agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Village from any claims arising out
of the intended activity.
The completion date and any other information which the Planning Board deems reasonable in
reviewing the application.
§ 145-5. Additional requirements.
Operations shall be conducted only from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No operations shall be conducted
on Sundays or holidays.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on 10 business
days' notice. Whenever possible, this hearing shall be combined with the hearing for site plan or
subdivision approval.
The Planning Board shall refer the application and supporting documentation to the Code
Enforcement Officer and Village Engineer for their review and recommendation. The Board may
engage the services of an independent consultant to review the application and supporting
documentation, and the fees to be paid to such consultant shall be reimbursed to the Village.
Clearing, filling and grading shall be done in such manner as not to result in an increase of surface
water runoff onto any other properties, and shall not result in any condition which increases
erosion or results in any unstable conditions upon the site or adjacent properties or wetlands.
The Planning Board may condition its approval on appropriate surveillance of the site on a twentyfour-
hour, seven-day-week basis, until the activity is completed. The applicant shall be required,
as a condition of the permit to sign the permit authorizing Village employees or agents to enter
onto the applicant's property to conduct the appropriate surveillance. Any and all costs for this
service will be estimated by the Board prior to the issuance of a permit, and the applicant will then
be required to post a certified check to cover such costs.
The Planning Board may impose any other reasonable conditions on the permit, such as
screening, access controls, dust controls, site security, etc., which the Planning Board believes are
necessary in order to adequately maintain the site.
§ 145-6. Exceptions to permit requirement.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 141/376
The separate filling and grading permit shall not be required for the planting of landscaping, grading
lawn areas, normal repairs or occupied property, correcting hazards representing an imminent threat to
life or property, removal of dead wood or for land development pursuant to, but not prior to, an
approved site plan or subdivision plan showing finished grade elevations.
§ 145-7. Performance bond.
The applicant shall be required to post a performance bond or money security deposit in an amount to
be determined by the Village Board to be posted with the Village Clerk to guarantee the satisfactory
restoration of any state, county or Village roads or other public property which might be damaged as a
result of the activities of the applicant in clearing, filling and grading pursuant to the terms of this
chapter. In the event that the applicant fails or refuses to make the necessary repairs, the Village
Board shall forfeit the performance bond or money security deposit in order to underwrite the expense
in making such repairs.
§ 145-8. Penalties for offenses.
The Village Board may impose a fine of $5,000 or in an amount not to exceed 150% of the Village's
actual cost incurred in correcting the conditions caused by noncompliance with this chapter, including
consequential damages paid by the Village, whichever is higher. The fine of 150% shall be of the total
costs to the Village, regardless of any and all reimbursement to the Village by the applicant to cover
those initial cost estimates.
§ 145-9. Severability.
If any part of this chapter is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall be confined to the part directly involved in such judgment and shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of this chapter.
§ 145-10. Permit expiration; extension.
The special permit shall expire 12 months after the date of issue. The Planning Board may grant an
extension of 12 months duration following a public hearing, provided that all terms and conditions of
this chapter are in compliance.
Chapter 149. Electrical Standards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 20 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
§ 149-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Inspection Ordinance."
§ 149-2. Electrical Inspector.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 142/376
[1]
A.
B.
[Amended 4-9-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979]
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed Inspectors of the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters and New York Atlantic-Inland, Inc., and any other electrical inspection agencies are
hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the Village of Albion to make inspections and
reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or
disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and
reinspections be a charge against the Village of Albion.
§ 149-3. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report in writing to the Village of Albion Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of this chapter,
all violations or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions of the Building Code[1]
applicable to the Village of Albion and of all local laws and the Building Code as referred to in this
chapter insofar as any of the same apply to electrical wiring. The Inspector shall make inspections
and reinspections of electrical installations in and on properties of the Village of Albion upon the
written request of an authorized official of the Village of Albion or as herein provided. The
Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring installations,
devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties within the Village of Albion where he or
she deems it necessary for the protection of life and property. In the event of an emergency, it is
the duty of the Inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or
officer of the Village of Albion.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the proper officials of the Village of
Albion and owners and/or lessees of property where defective electrical installations and
equipment are found upon inspection. He or she shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with this chapter. He or
she shall direct that a copy of the certificate of compliance be sent to the Village of Albion to the
attention of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
§ 149-4. Exclusions from applicability; fees.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation engaged in the conduct of
manufacturing in or on properties in the Village of Albion who hires or employs one or more
journeymen electricians, whose principal duties are installation, maintenance and repair of electrical
machinery, appliances or electrical distribution (hereafter called "electrical work"). The term
"journeyman electrician" shall mean a person who has completed an apprentice course or received
equivalent training or had equivalent experience of at least three years in electrical work and is
deemed qualified by an official of the facility by reason that his or her work performance is acceptable
by the various codes and inspections that said person, firm or corporation are subject to. By January 1
of each year a list of such "journeymen electricians" shall be submitted to the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention of the Village of Albion in order that the person, firm or corporation
shall be released from or not subject to the provisions as set forth in the chapter pertaining to the filing
of applications or the penalties for noncompliance. There shall be no assessments or fees in
connection with the filing of this certificate for journeymen electricians.
§ 149-5. Violations; application for inspection and certificate of
compliance.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 143/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Except for a person, firm or corporation excluded from the application of this chapter by § 149-4
hereof, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to install or cause to be
installed or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on properties in the Village of Albion
until an application for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or any
other electrical inspection agency, and it shall likewise be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm
or corporation to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or
power to any source of electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a
certificate of compliance by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or any other electrical inspection
agency.
§ 149-6. Penalties for offenses.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 152. Environmental Quality Review
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-11-1977 as L.L. No. 2-1977
(Ch. 21A of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words and their derivatives used in
this chapter shall have the same meanings as those defined in § 8-0105 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
"Village" shall mean the Village of Albion.
§ 152-2. Compliance required.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
No decision to carry out or approve an action other than an action listed in § 152-3B hereof or Section
617.13 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations as a Type II action shall be made by
the village or by any department, board, commission, officer or employee of the village until there has
been full compliance with all requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as
prohibiting:
The conducting of contemporaneous environmental, engineering, economic feasibility or other
studies and preliminary planning and budgetary processes necessary to the formulation of a
proposal for action which do not commit the village to approve, commence or engage in such
action; or
The granting of any part of an application which relates only to technical specifications and
requirements, provided that no such partial approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to
commence the action until all requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations have been fulfilled.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 144/376
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
A.
B.
A.
§ 152-3. Types of actions.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations and the criteria
therein, the following actions, in addition to those listed in Section 617.13 of Title 6 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations as Type I actions, are likely to have a significant effect on the
environment:[1]
Editor's Note: There were no actions listed after the colon in L.L. No. 2-1977.
Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations and the criteria
therein, the following actions, in addition to those listed in Section 617-13 of Title 6 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations as Type II actions, are deemed not to have a significant effect
on the environment:[2]
Editor's Note: There were no actions listed after the colon in L.L. No. 2-1977.
§ 152-4. Filing of statement.
For the purpose of assisting in the determination of whether an action may or will not have a significant
effect on the environment, applicants for permits or other approvals shall file a written statement with
the Village Board setting forth the name of the applicant; the location of the real property affected, if
any; a description of the nature of the proposed action; and the effect it may have on the environment.
In addition, applicants may include a detailed statement of the reasons why, in their view, a proposed
action may or will not have a significant effect on the environment. Where the action involves an
application, the statement shall be filed simultaneously with the application for the action. The
statement provided herein shall be upon a form prescribed by resolution by the Village Board and shall
contain such additional relevant information as shall be required in the prescribed form. Such
statement shall be accompanied by drawings, sketches and maps, if any, together with any other
relevant explanatory material required by the Village Board.
§ 152-5. Determination; time limit.
The Village Board shall render a written determination on such application within 15 days following
receipt of a complete application and statement; provided, however, that such period may be
extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Village Board. The determination shall
state whether such proposed action may or will not have a significant effect on the environment.
The Village Board may hold informal meetings with the applicant and may meet with and consult
any other person for the purpose of aiding it in making a determination on the application.
The time limitations provided in this chapter shall be coordinated with, to the extent practicable,
other time limitations provided by statute or local law, law or regulation of the village.
§ 152-6. Application; fees.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Every application for determination under this chapter shall be accompanied by payment of a
reasonable fee to defray the expense incurred by the village in reviewing the application and rendering
a determination. Such fee shall be as determined and approved by resolution of the Village Board[1]
and shall be in three parts, as appropriate:
Part 1: initial fee to accompany the application. This fee is to be used by the village in establishing
the magnitude of work to be undertaken by the village, its employees and agents in reviewing the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 145/376
B.
C.
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
project.
Part 2: an estimated fee which will be based upon the amount of review work anticipated to be
undertaken by the village. Normally this fee will be estimated by the Village Clerk, working with the
Village Attorney, Village Consulting Engineer and consulting environmentalists or other specialists,
depending upon the nature of the application.
Part 3: any overrun which may occur because of inordinate circumstances of environmental
concerns not apparent or anticipated at the time of establishing Part 2 of the fee structure.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 152-7. Procedure upon determination.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
If the Village Board determines that the proposed action is not an exempt action, not an action listed in
§ 152-3B hereof or Section 617.13 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations as a Type
II action and that it will not have a significant effect on the environment, the Village Board shall
prepare, file and circulate such determination as provided in Section 617.6 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations, and thereafter the proposed action may be processed without further
regard to this chapter. If the Village Board determines that the proposed action may have a significant
effect on the environment, the Village Board shall prepare, file and circulate such determination as
provided in Section 617.6 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, and thereafter the
proposed action shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 152-8. Procedure for actions having significant effect.
Following a determination that a proposed action may have a significant effect on the
environment, the Village Board shall, in accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations:
In the case of an action involving an applicant, immediately notify the applicant of the
determination and request the applicant to prepare an environmental impact report in the form
of a draft environmental impact statement.
In the case of an action not involving an applicant, prepare a draft environmental impact
statement.
If the applicant decides not to submit an environmental impact report, the Village Board shall
prepare or cause to be prepared the draft environmental impact statement or, in its discretion,
notify the applicant that the processing of the application will cease and that no approval will be
issued.
§ 152-9. Actions involving more than one agency.
Where more than one agency is involved in an action, the procedures of Sections 617.4 and 617.8 of
Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations shall be followed.
§ 152-10. Exemptions.
Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law for local agencies shall be exempt from this chapter and the provisions of Article 8
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 146/376
A.
B.
A.
of the Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations; provided, however, that if after such dates a Village Board modifies an action undertaken
or approved prior to that date and the Village Board determines that the modification may have a
significant adverse effect on the environment, such modification shall be an action subject to this
chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 152-11. Certain state laws.
[Added 10-13-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982]
For the purpose of keeping this chapter of the Albion Village Code in conformity with New York State
mandates relative to environmental quality review, this chapter is and the same is hereby amended to
specifically incorporate any and all changes in Article 8 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law and 6 NYCRR 617, including but not limited to those changes adopted September
1, 1978. It is the intention of the Village Board of Trustees by this chapter to incorporate said state
mandated changes, now and in the future, into this chapter, as each change or modification becomes
effective.
Chapter 155. Exterior Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-2-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 128.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 135.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 138.
Solid waste — See Ch. 191.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
§ 155-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a minimum standard for the maintenance of the exterior
grounds and visible facades of all properties within the Village. This chapter is intended to help
provide stable and inviting neighborhoods and business and commercial districts and to promote
public health and safety by prohibiting certain deficiencies in exterior property maintenance which
create or contribute to unhealthy or hazardous conditions. This chapter is also intended to ensure
that property owners or their delegated agents perform such repair and maintenance of properties
as will prevent deficiencies that could become an attractive nuisance with regard to children,
trespassers or household pets or that may attract insect or animal pests.
The adoption and enforcement of this chapter is intended to serve as a deterrence to substandard
exterior property maintenance and as a tool for protecting property investment, the tax base and
the health, safety and welfare of all Village residents.
§ 155-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPOSTING MATERIALS
Yard trimmings, vegetable wastes and other organic matter managed for the purpose of natural
transformation into compost and stored in a container or compact pile that:
Contains no sewage, sludge or septage;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 147/376
B.
C.
Contains no inorganic materials, such as metal, plastic or glass; and
Is maintained in a manner to minimize odors and the attraction of insect and animal pests.
GARBAGE
Food wastes, food wrappers, containers, nonrecyclables or other materials resulting from the use,
consumption and preparation of food or drink, as well as other expended, used or discarded
materials, such as paper, plastic, metal, rags or glass, etc., or any other wastes generated from
day-to-day activities of a household, business or public or quasi-public facility. The term "garbage"
does not include properly prepared and stored recyclable materials or properly maintained
compost areas.
GROUNDS AND EXTERIOR PROPERTY
Any area of a building or lot, excluding porch areas, not enclosed within the walls of a building.
These terms include any public rights-of-way which pass through or are adjacent to a property,
including the sidewalk and any area between the sidewalk, if there is one, and the street
pavement.
JUNKYARD
An area, lot or unenclosed shed where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, sorted, baled, packed, disassembled, handled or abandoned, including auto
wrecking or dismantling yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for
use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but not including
pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture, household
equipment and clothing, for the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of
manufacture operations, or for the sale, purchase or storage of used motor vehicles or salvaged
machinery to be reused for the purpose for which originally manufactured.
[Added 8-14-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
OWNER
Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal title in any form whatsoever to any premises or
part thereof, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge,
care or control of any lot, premises, building or structure or part thereof as owner or agent of the
owner or as a fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee in possession, regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person, group of persons or entity who is a lessee,
sublessee or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building, structure or land shall be
deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes of this chapter and shall have
responsibility over the portion of the premises so sublet, leased or assigned.
[Added 8-14-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
PORCH AREA
Includes any open and/or partially enclosed porches or decks, as well as any entranceways or
exitways which are in the public view.
PUBLIC VIEW
Areas of any property that are visible by pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right-of-way or
visible from the exterior ground level of adjoining properties or properties within 100 feet of the
subject property.
SOLID WASTE
Includes materials or substances that are discarded or rejected as being spent, worthless, useless
or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or rejection, including but not limited to
materials or substances such as garbage, refuse, industrial and commercial wastes, sludge from
air or water treatment facilities, rubbish, tires, ashes, incinerator residue, construction and
demolition debris, discarded motor vehicles, discarded household and commercial appliances and
discarded furniture. An object shall be presumed to be discarded or rejected solid waste when the
object is stored, placed or left on the grounds or exterior of the property in the view of neighbors or
passersby under circumstances which meet any of the following criteria:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 148/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
E.
The object produces an offensive smell.
The object is of a type designed for interior use or made of materials which are suitable only
for interior use and the object is left outside and exposed to precipitation.
The object has reached a degree of dilapidation or disrepair that can reasonably be presumed
to render the material unsuitable for or incapable of being used for its original intended
purpose or some other reasonable purpose.
The object is left, placed or stored in a manner which appears likely to cause injuries.
§ 155-3. Standards for grounds and exterior property.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all owners of property in the Village of Albion to ensure that:
That all grounds and exterior property are kept clean and free of solid waste.
All garbage, when stored outside, is completely contained in nonabsorbent, watertight, durable
containers having a tight-fitting lid in place. Plastic bags are not considered durable containers.
Strong, waterproof plastic bags may be used to place garbage at the curbside on the evening
before scheduled collections or may be taken to an approved refuse disposal site. Composting
materials, so long as they are maintained as defined by this chapter, shall not be considered
garbage.
Garbage cans, garbage bags and discarded bulk items shall not be placed on the curb before
12:00 noon the day before the scheduled pickup. Garbage containers and any materials not
removed by garbage collectors shall be removed from the curb before 9:00 a.m. the day after
pickup. Any materials not removed as required by this section shall be removed by the Village.
Solid waste, other than garbage stored in proper containers described above, is not stored in the
public view, except that construction and demolition debris related to an ongoing construction
project with a valid building permit may be stored in the public view for not more than 30 days.
Residents may place reusable materials on the tree lawn for purposes of informal scavenging, not
to be observable for more than two successive days.
[1]Collection of brush and tree parts.
[Added 7-28-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to provide for the collection of brush and
tree parts at such times and in such manner as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time
provide.
The authorization provided for in the preceding Subsection E(1) shall apply only to brush and
tree parts produced by the individual activity or efforts of the owner or occupant of the
property or designee (e.g., lawn mowing contractor).
Brush and tree parts produced by commercial tree-trimming contractors must be removed
from the property by the contractor or by the owner or occupant of the property. Such brush
and tree parts may not be placed at or near the curb or street right-of-way, except temporarily
as may be necessary in the course of the work which produced the brush and tree parts.
The Village of Albion will not collect or remove brush or tree parts produced by commercial
contractors.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, restricting the storage of unlicensed motor vehicles, was
repealed 11-14-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001. See now Ch. 121, Abandoned, Junked, Discarded and
Unregistered Motor Vehicles.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 149/376
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
Grass, weeds or other vegetation on grounds and exterior property are maintained in accordance
with provisions of Chapter 128, Grass, Brush and Weeds.
The area along public rights-of-way adjacent to or on the property, including but not limited to the
area between the front property line or sidewalk and the curb or street pavement, is maintained in
a reasonably clean and sanitary condition free of garbage and/or solid waste, with any grass,
weeds and brush in said area cut or trimmed in compliance with Subsection F above. The planting
of annuals and perennials in these areas shall not be permitted without the approval of the
Superintendent of Streets. Premises situated at street intersections or on curved streets shall be
kept in such a condition as to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the intersection or curve.
Trees, shrubs or other vegetation are pruned such that they will not obstruct the passage of
pedestrians on sidewalks. The maintenance of Village trees, including trees between the sidewalk
and curb, must be left to the Department of Streets.
Fences and walls are maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition.
Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and other similar paved areas are maintained pursuant to
provisions elsewhere in the Village Code.
Sidewalks are kept substantially clear of snow, ice and other obstructions, including but not limited
to free flowing water from drains, ditches and/or downspouts located on the property except during
flooding, pursuant to provisions regulating the use of streets and sidewalks elsewhere in the
Village Code.
§ 155-4. Standards for porch areas.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all owners of property in the Village of Albion to ensure that:
Porch areas are kept free of garbage, unless stored and completely contained in durable,
nonabsorbent, watertight containers having tight-fitting lids in place. Plastic bags are not
considered durable containers.
Construction and demolition debris be located on porch areas for no longer than 30 days.
§ 155-5. Responsibilities of agents delegated by property
owners.
The responsibilities outlined in § 155-3 may be delegated to an agent by the property owner, so
long as, at the time of any violation of this chapter, an agency agreement is on file in the Village
Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention which contains the following information:
The identity of the owner and the agent.
The owner's and agent's addresses and current phone numbers.
The property or properties the agent is accepting responsibility for.
The beginning and ending date of the agreement.
The exact sections of this Code assigned to the agent.
The signatures of both property owner and agent, along with each party's date of birth.
The agent must be a resident of or maintain an office for the transaction of business in Orleans
County or an adjoining county. Post office boxes will not be accepted as addresses for agents.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 150/376
A.
B.
§ 155-5.1. Junkyards.
[Added 8-14-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
No junkyards will be allowed in the Village of Albion.
§ 155-6. Village to correct violations; costs.
In any case in which the Village intends to correct a violation of this chapter and then bill the property
owner for the correction of the violation, the Code Enforcement Official or his/her designee shall notify
the owner of the property and, where relevant, the registered agent who has assumed responsibility as
outlined in § 155-5 of this chapter, in writing, of any violation of this chapter. Following such notice, the
Village may correct the violation and bill the property owner for the cost of such correction. Unpaid bills
shall be added to the yearly tax bill.
§ 155-7. Penalties for offenses.
The penalties for violation of this chapter shall be established by resolution by the Village Board.
Chapter 156. Garage Sales
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 6-24-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 156-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Garage Sale Law."
§ 156-2. Purpose.
The occasional conduct of sales of personal property from residential areas of the Village known as
"garage sales," "lawn sales," "attic sales," "yard sales" or by any other similar designation has
proliferated and, in some cases, created traffic congestion problems. Such sales often have continued
for extended periods of time, resulting in ongoing retail operation to the detriment and degradation of
the character of residential neighborhoods. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict the
conduct of such garage sales in order to protect the safety, health and welfare of the Village residents
and to preserve the character of residential neighborhoods.
§ 156-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
GARAGE SALE
The sale or offering for sale of new, used or secondhand items of tangible personal property
from any one residential premises.
The sale of tangible personal property from residential premises entitled "garage sale," "yard
sale," "tag sale," "porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage sale," "flea
market" or any similar casual or occasional sale advertised to the public at large as such.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 151/376
A.
B.
C.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, family group, unincorporated association or a corporation.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES
A single- or multiple-family dwelling unit used for residential purposes which is not located in an
area of the Village zoned for commercial, industrial, business, manufacturing or mercantile uses.
VILLAGE
The Village of Albion.
§ 156-4. Days allowed.
Except as provided in § 156-7 hereof, it shall be unlawful after the effective date of this chapter for any
person to conduct a garage sale from residential premises of the Village on days other than Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday
§ 156-5. Hours of operation.
Garage sales pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only on the days allowed.
§ 156-6. Advertising signs.
An advertising sign no greater in size than two feet by two feet may be installed on the premises on
which the garage sale will be conducted. Such sign shall be displayed only during the hours of the sale
and shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale is concluded. No sign or other display advertising
the sale shall be placed on any public place or right-of-way of the Village, and no illuminated or lighted
sign may be used to advertise a garage sale.
§ 156-7. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A person selling personal property pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction or to any public official acting pursuant to and within the scope of his/her authority.
Any person advertising in a publication of general circulation the sale of tangible personal
property, not displayed to the public, for a period not to exceed two weeks in any continual sixmonth
period.
Any sale of personal property authorized or licensed to do so pursuant to any state statute or any
other local law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 156-8. Additional requirements.
The owner of the property where a garage sale is held shall be responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of the garage sale and shall not permit the
parking of motor vehicles on or about the public streets or such premises which would impede the flow
of vehicular traffic, and shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks of the Village.
§ 156-9. Enforcement.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 152/376
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
This chapter shall be enforced by any code enforcement officer or any police officer of the Village. It
shall be the duty of any such officer to investigate any violation of this chapter coming to his/her
attention and to prosecute the same before the Town Justice of the Town of Albion.
§ 156-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $250 or imprisoned
for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered and
constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 161. Fire Prevention and Building Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 135
Electrical standards — See Ch. 149.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 161-1. Title; legislative intent.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Village of Albion Code Enforcement and Fire
Prevention Code."
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
all laws, codes, regulations and orders applicable to:
The location, design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use, maintenance,
occupancy, removal and demolition to buildings, structures and appurtenances located in the
Village of Albion.
Fire prevention and firesafety regulations consistent with the nationally recognized good
practices for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from hazardous
conditions in the use and/or occupancy of buildings or premises and from the storage and use
of hazardous materials, substances and devices.
§ 161-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
[Amended 9-12-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001]
There is hereby adopted by the Village of Albion, New York, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing building construction and conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion or
other causes, the regulations and standards set forth in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code (henceforth known as the "Uniform Code").
§ 161-3. Definitions.
All technical terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in the Uniform Code, except
as such terms may otherwise be defined in this chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 153/376
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(d)
(3)
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET
A written notice issued and subscribed by a police officer or other public servant authorized
by state or local law enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law to
issue the same, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court
at a designated future time in connection with his or her alleged commission of a designated
offense. A notice conforming to such definition constitutes an "appearance ticket," regardless
of whether it is referred to in some other provision of law as a summons or by any other name
or title.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any employee of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention with enforcement
responsibilities.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms with provisions for living, sleeping or cooking arranged for the use of one
or more persons.
FAMILY
One, two, three or four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together as
a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a single dwelling unit
who are not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption do not constitute the functional
equivalent of a traditional family.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional equivalent of a
traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure and function
resembles a traditional family unit.
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and cook together as a
single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the various occupants act as separate
roomers may not be deemed to be occupied by the functional equivalent of a
traditional family.
The group shares expenses for food, rent or ownership costs, utilities and other
household expenses.
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency and stability may
include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing in the household
who are enrolled in local schools.
Members of the household have the same address for the purposes of voter's
registration, driver's license, motor vehicle registration and filing taxes.
Members of the household are employed in the area.
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or more, whether in
the current dwelling unit or other dwelling units.
Common ownership of furniture and appliances among the members of the
household.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 154/376
[6]
(e)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is the functional
equivalent of a family.
Article II. Administration and Enforcement
§ 161-4. Designation of Bureau.
[Amended 4-12-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
There is hereby designated a Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention to administer the
Uniform Code and all other laws, rules and regulations as may be applicable for the prevention of fires,
location of buildings and structures and protection of the general public from health and safety
hazards. The Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Fire Marshal (henceforth known as "Director of Community Development").
§ 161-5. Designation of Fire Marshal as public official.
There is hereby designated in the Village of Albion a public official, known as the "Fire Marshal," who
shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Village of Albion, with the approval of the Village of Albion
Board of Trustees at a compensation fixed by the Village of Albion Board of Trustees.
§ 161-6. Duties and powers of Fire Marshal.
Except as specifically provided by law, rule or regulation or except as herein otherwise provided,
the Fire Marshal shall administer and enforce all laws, codes, regulations and orders applicable to
fire prevention and firesafety. The Fire Marshal shall enforce and administer all provisions of the
Uniform Code applicable to plans, specifications or permits for the construction, alteration,
conversion and repair of buildings and structures and the installation and use of materials and
equipment therein and to the location, use and occupancy thereof.
The Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention shall oversee and direct the activities of the
Fire Marshal. As the Bureau chief, the Code Enforcement Officer shall prepare and maintain
standard operating procedures for the Fire Marshal.
[Amended 4-12-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000; 3-14-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; 7-10-2013 by L.L. No. 4-
2013]
The Fire Marshal shall maintain records and reports generated by the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention that pertain to properties within the Village of Albion or that are
owned an/or operated by the Village of Albion which may be outside of the Village of Albion.
These reports shall include, but not be limited to, permits, fire reports, investigative reports,
complaints and inspection reports.
The Fire Marshal shall prepare and provide written reports to the Village of Albion Board of
Trustees on monthly activities by the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
The Fire Marshal may make recommendations to the Village of Albion Board of Trustees to adopt,
amend or repeal such rules and regulations as they may relate to efficient administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or provide for protection of the general public from health and
safety hazards.
The Fire Marshal shall perform or cause to be performed firesafety inspections of all buildings and
structures within the Village of Albion or those that are owned and/or operated by the Village of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 155/376
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
[1]
Albion that may be outside of the Village of Albion for the purpose of determining compliance with
the requirements of the Uniform Code and other pertinent laws, codes, rules, regulations and
orders under the following schedule:
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), regarding the inspection schedule for all dwelling units
in a building consisting of three or more such units, was repealed 9-26-2007 by L.L. No. 4-
2007.
All buildings or structures with areas of public assembly as defined in Part 701.1 of the
Uniform Code shall be inspected every 12 months.
All other buildings, structures or uses, with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings,
shall be inspected every 24 months.
The Fire Marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected any building, use, occupancy, structure or
dwelling unit at any other time upon:
The request of the owner, agent or tenant.
The receipt of a written statement specifying grounds upon which the subscriber believes a
violation or violations of the Uniform Code or any other applicable local or state law, rule or
regulation exists.
The Fire Marshal shall create, administer and maintain, in conjunction with other local, county and
state officials, a Village of Albion Disaster Plan.
The Fire Marshal shall serve as the Village Safety Manager and oversee the Village safety
policies, rules and regulations.
§ 161-7. Acting Code Enforcement Officer.
In the absence of a Code Enforcement Officer or in the case of a Code Enforcement Officer's
inability to act for any reason, the Fire Marshal shall exercise all the powers conferred upon a
Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
In the event that no employee of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention is available
or able to act, the Mayor shall have the power to act on behalf of the Code Enforcement Officer
and to exercise all of the powers conferred upon him by this chapter.
§ 161-8. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 161-8, Designation of Code Enforcement Officer as public official, as amended,
was repealed 9-12-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001.
§ 161-9. Duties and powers of a Code Enforcement Officer.
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, rule or regulation or except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, officials of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention shall administer and enforce
all of the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Chapter 290,
Zoning, and other laws, rules and regulations applicable to plans, specifications or permits for the
construction, alteration and repair of buildings and structures and the installation and use of materials
and equipment therein and to the location, use and occupancy thereof.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 156/376
A.
B.
§ 161-10. Appointment of inspectors.
The Fire Marshal may appoint one inspector or more as the need may appear to act under the
supervision and direction of a Code Enforcement Officer and to exercise any portion of the powers and
duties of a Code Enforcement Officer as a Code Enforcement Officer may direct. The compensation of
such inspectors shall be approved by the Village of Albion Board of Trustees and compensated at a
rate affixed by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 161-11. Restrictions on employees.
The Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement Officer, inspectors or any employee of the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention directly involved in code enforcement shall not engage in any
activities inconsistent with the duties of an individual involved in code enforcement or with the interests
of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention; nor shall the Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement
Officer, inspector or any employee of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention during their
term of employment be engaged directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of
labor, materials, supplies or appliances for or supervision of, the construction, alteration, demolition or
maintenance of a building or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the Village of
Albion, except that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from engaging in any such activities
in connection of a building or structure owned by the employee, for the employee's own personal use
and occupancy or for the use and occupancy of members of the employees immediate family and not
constructed for sale, nor shall this section prohibit an employee from participating in any such activities
in connection of a building or structure over which the Village of Albion Bureau of Code Enforcement
and Fire Prevention has no jurisdiction.
§ 161-12. Adoption of further rules and regulations.
The Village of Albion Board of Trustees may, after public notice and publication at least 10 days prior to
the effective date thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village of Albion, adopt such
further procedural/administrative rules and regulations as the Village of Albion Board of Trustees
deems reasonable to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Any Code Enforcement Official employed
by the Village of Albion may make recommendations to the Village of Albion Board of Trustees to
adopt, amend or repeal such rules and regulations as they may relate to efficient administration and
enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Such rules and
regulations shall not conflict with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this
chapter or any other provisions of law.
§ 161-13. Review Board.
Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship may result from the enforcement of the strict
letter of any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
applications for variances consistent with the spirit of the Code may be made to the Regional
Board of Review in accordance with Part 440 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations
entitled "Uniform Code; Board of Review," as promulgated by the New York Department of State.
The Code Enforcement Official shall maintain a copy of such rules and regulations for public
inspection and shall obtain and retain a copy of all decisions rendered by the Board of Review
pertaining to matters affecting the Village of Albion.
Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship may result from enforcement of the strict letter
of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation herein under which provision is not also
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, application for
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 157/376
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
(e)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
variances consistent with the spirit of such law, rule or regulation may be made to the Village of
Albion Board of Trustees.
§ 161-14. Permits.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, corporation, association or partnership shall
commence the construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition of any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, install a swimming pool as described in Chapter 280,
Swimming Pools, or install a solid-fuel-burning heating apparatus, chimney or flue in any dwelling
unit, or change the occupancy classification of a building or structure, as described in Part 701.1
of The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, without first obtaining a
building permit from the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
No permit shall be required for:
Necessary repairs which do not materially affect structural features.
Alterations to existing buildings or structures, provided that the alterations:
Cost less than $2,000.
Do not affect firesafety features such as but not limited to smoke detectors, sprinklers,
required fire separations or exits.
Do not materially affect structural features.
Do not involve the installation or extension of electrical systems.
Do not involve the installation of solid fuel heating appliances and associated chimneys
or flues.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), regarding small, noncommercial structures not
intended for use by one or more persons for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, as
amended, which immediately following this subsection, was repealed 9-26-2007 by L.L.
No. 4-2007.
The application for a building permit, and its accompanying documents, shall contain sufficient
information to permit a determination that the intended work is in accordance with the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all other
applicable local laws, rules and regulations.
The form of the permit and application thereof shall be described by resolution of the Village of
Albion Board of Trustees. The application shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent of the
building and shall contain at least the following:
Name and address of the property owner.
A description of the use of the property and all buildings and structures, including new or
altered buildings or structures.
A description of the use or occupancy of the property and existing or proposed building.
A description of the proposed work.
The estimated cost of the proposed work.
A statement that the work shall be performed in compliance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and local laws and regulations.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 158/376
[2]
(7)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
[3]
K.
A.
The required fee.[2]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
The application shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications and any other
documents that the applicant shall deem adequate and appropriate for determining compliance
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all other local codes,
rules and regulations or as the Code Enforcement Official may require as being necessary or
appropriate in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Official. The applicant may confer with a
Code Enforcement Official in advance of submitting their application to discuss the requirements
of the Code Enforcement Official.
Any plans, including plat plan, or specifications which comprise a portion of the application,
whether submitted subsequently, upon request of the Code Enforcement Official or submitted with
the application, shall be stamped with the seal of an architect or professional engineer or land
surveyor (in the case of a plat plan) licensed in the State of New York if the plans or specification
are for a building or structure that exceed the standards set forth by § 7209 of the Education Law
of the State of New York.
The applicant or the applicant's agent shall notify the Code Enforcement Official of any changes in
the information contained in the application during the period for which the permit is in effect. A
permit will be issued when the application has been determined to be complete and when the
proposed work is determined to conform to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and other applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations.
The authority conferred by such permit may be limited by conditions, if any, contained therein.
A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently displayed on the property or
premises to which it pertains.
A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked (see § 161-27,
Stop-work orders) if it is determined that the work is not being completed within the scope of the
permit; if the work is not in conformance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, other state and local laws, rules and regulations or with any conditions contained
within the permit; and/or if there has been misrepresentation or falsification of a material fact in
connection with the application for the permit.
A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire six months from the date of issuance
if no work has taken place within the scope of the permit. The Code Enforcement Official shall
notify the applicant of such revocation, in writing. The applicant can request that the permit be
renewed, provided that:
Such request must be made in writing and a fee, if required, is paid.
The permit has not been revoked or suspended at the time the application for renewal has
been made.
The relevant information contained in the application is up to date.
Fees for building permits shall be fixed by the Village Board of Trustees and listed in the fee
schedule.[3]
Editor's Note: The fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 161-15. Certificate of occupancy.
No building or structure hereinafter shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate
of occupancy shall have been issued by a Code Enforcement Official.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 159/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
No building or structure hereafter enlarged, extended or altered or upon which work has been
performed which required the issuance of a building permit shall be occupied or used after the
completion of the work authorized by the building permit, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by a Code Enforcement Official.
No change shall be made in the occupancy of an existing building or structure unless a certificate
of occupancy shall have been issued by a Code Enforcement Official. A Code Enforcement
Official shall have the right to request a building permit application be submitted, outlining said
change in occupancy, to verify that the requested change is in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and other applicable state and local laws, rules and
regulations.
Certificate of occupancy with condition. If it is found that the proposed work has not been
completed, but that the work not yet ccupleted does not affect the structural elements of the
building or structure, or the work not yet completed does not affect the safety of the occupants, a
Code Enforcement Official may issue a certificate of occupancy with condition. The certificate of
occupancy with condition shall expire three months after the date of issuance, or upon issuance of
a permanent certificate of occupancy. The applicant for the building permit may request, in writing,
for an extension of the certificate of occupancy with condition. For good cause the Code
Enforcement Official may grant two extensions not exceeding three months each. The certificate
of occupancy with condition shall list those items that shall be completed to cause the building or
structure to qualify for a permanent certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 4-12-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, where appropriate, within 30 days after written
application for a certificate of occupancy is made.
The certificate of occupancy shall signify that the work or change in occupancy authorized by the
building permit has been completed and that the proposed use and occupancy is in conformity
with the provisions of the applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations and shall specify
the use or uses and the extent to which the building or structure or its several parts may be put to
use.
§ 161-16. Certificates at time of sale.
Prior to transfer of title to a new owner or execution and recording of a mortgage, no structure,
building or property, with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings, shall be occupied or
utilized, in whole or in part, until the issuance of a current certificate of occupancy by the Fire
Marshal of the Village of Albion certifying that said dwelling substantially conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
Chapter 290, Zoning, and all other applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations. A
"current certificate of occupancy," as used in this subsection, shall mean a certificate of occupancy
issued no sooner than 60 days prior to transfer of title to a new owner or the execution and
recording of a mortgage.
Certificate of occupancy with conditions. The Fire Marshal, in his or her discretion, may issue a
certificate of occupancy with conditions where:
The subject property, building or structure is in compliance with Chapter 290, Zoning.
The subject property, building or structure is near substantial compliance with applicable state
and local laws, rules and regulations.
The work required to bring the property, building or structure into full compliance is not
essential to making the building habitable and does not pose a threat to life safety.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 160/376
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Temporary certificate of occupancy. Upon written request of the owner or the owner's authorized
agent, the Fire Marshal may, in his or her discretion, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy,
provided that there is full compliance with the Chapter 290, Zoning, and that such temporary use
or occupancy would not in any way jeopardize life or property.
Contents of certificate of occupancy.
The certificate of occupancy shall state that the subject property, building or structure
complies with provisions of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and all of the applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations. In addition,
certificates of occupancy shall state the purposes for which the property, building or structure
may be used in its several parts.
If a certificate of occupancy with conditions is issued, in addition to the contents required in
Subsection D(1), it shall state the specific work remaining to be done to bring the property,
building or structure into substantial compliance with the laws, rules and regulations therein,
the date by which the work shall be completed and a warning that the failure to complete the
work on that date shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the certificate of occupancy
without further notice to the owners and other interested parties.
Time limitations set forth in certificates of occupancy with conditions shall constitute
amendments to time limitations imposed by prior notices and orders by the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after written application thereof, if the
dwelling at the time of such application is not in violation of applicable state and local laws, rules
and regulations.
§ 161-17. Certificate of compliance.
In those cases where a certificate of occupancy is not appropriate, such as the installation of solid fuel
heating appliances, the extension of electrical systems or the installation of a swimming pool, a Code
Enforcement Official may issue a certificate of compliance, provided that the installation of the
equipment or apparatus is in compliance with all applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations.
§ 161-18. Records for certificates; copies.
A record of all certificates of occupancy, certificates of occupancy with condition, temporary certificates
of occupancy and certificates of compliance shall be kept the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire
Prevention. Copies shall be furnished upon written request to any owner, co-owner, tenant or
mortgagee of the subject building or structure upon payment of the fee, as listed in the fee schedule.[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 161-19. Special permits.
Upon payment of a fee as in hereafter set forth in the Village of Albion fee schedule,[1] a special
permit shall be issued by and bear the name and signature of the Fire Marshal, provided that all
conditions for said permit are met by the applicant, and shall specify:
The name and address of the permittee.
The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
The address or location where the activity or operation is to be conducted.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 161/376
(4)
(5)
[1]
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(9)
D.
The permit number and date of issuance.
The period of permit validity.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
Special permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation, location,
ownership or use shall require a new special permit.
Permits shall continue for the period of time designated at the time of issuance, unless revoked for
good cause.
Special permits shall be obtained for the following:
Acetylene generators. For the operation of an acetylene generator having a calcium carbide
capacity exceeding five pounds.
Bowling establishments. For bowling pin refinishing and bowling lane resurfacing operations
involving the use and application of a flammable or combustible liquid or material.
Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film. For storage or having-on-hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
For storage, keeping or having on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin).
For manufacturing articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin) which shall include the
use of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembly of other
articles.
Combustible fibers. For the storage, handling or use of combustible fibers in quantities in
excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products on a farm.
Combustible materials. For the storage of combustible materials, including, but not limited to,
empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, baled
cotton, rubber, cork or other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume, on
any premises.
Compressed gases. For the storage, handling or use:
At normal temperatures and pressures of more than:
Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gases.
Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
Of any quantity of liquefied natural gas or liquefied hydrogen gas.
Cryogenics. For the storage, handling or use of cryogenic fluids, except cryogenics used as
motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle fuel tanks, as follows:
Production, sale or storage of cryogenic fluids.
Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic oxidizers or liquefied oxygen in
excess of 10 gallons.
Dry-cleaning plants. For the use in excess of four gallons of solvents or cleaning agents
classified as flammable or combustible.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 162/376
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(a)
(b)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(a)
(b)
(20)
Dust producing plants. For the operation of any grain elevator, flour, starch or feed mill,
woodworking plant or plant pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices,
sugar, sulfur or other materials producing explosive-potential dust.
Explosive ammunition and blasting agents.
To permit those individuals who manufacture and store explosive ammunition and
blasting agents for the purpose of resale.
For the of use explosives or blasting agents.
For the operation of a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
Flammable finishing. For spraying, coating or dipping operations that utilize flammable or
combustible liquids.
Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. To conduct fumigation or thermal insecticidal
fogging operations.
Hazardous materials. For the storage, handling or use of:
More than 55 gallons of corrosive liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials;
or more than 50 pounds of nitromethane or 100 pounds or more of ammonium nitrate,
ammonium nitrate fertilizer mixtures containing 60% or more ammonium or any other
amount of toxic material or poisonous gas.
Any quantity of air-reactive, water-reactive or unstable materials.
Liquefied petroleum gas. For each installation of liquefied petroleum gas employing a
container or aggregate of interconnected containers of 500 gallons or more water capacity
and for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of the containers, made at buildings
in which 20 or more persons congregate for civic, political, social, educational, religious or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all installations and for
replacement cylinders and have said records available for inspection.
Magnesium. For melting, casting, heat-treating, machining or grinding of more than 10
pounds of magnesium per working day.
Matches.
To manufacture matches.
For the storage matches in excess of 25 cases. Note: one case equals one matchman's
gross of 14,400 matches.
Organic coatings. For performing organic coating operations utilizing more than one gallon of
organic coating on any working day.
Ovens and furnaces. For the operation of industrial processing ovens and furnaces operating
at approximately atmospheric pressures and temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F. which are
heated with oil or gas fuel or which, during operation, contain flammable vapors from the
material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
Storage of certain substances. For the storage, handling or use of the following materials in
the following amounts:
Poison gas: any amount.
Poison and irritant: any amount.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 163/376
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(21)
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
Flammable solids: any amount.
Radioactive material: any amount.
Dangerous-when-wet material: any amount.
Etiological material: any amount.
Waste oil heaters. For the operation, maintenance or use of a waste oil heater in any service
station or self-service station or repair garage.
Consolidate permits. When more than one permit is required for the same property or premises, a
single permit may be issued listing all materials or operations covered. Revocation of a portion or
portions of such consolidated permit, for specific hazardous materials or operations, shall not
invalidate the remainder.
Location of permits. Permits shall be kept on the property or premises covered by the permit.
Revocation of permits. Permits may be suspended or revoked when it is determined that there is a
violation of a condition under which the permit was issued or that there has been
misrepresentation or falsification of material facts in connection with the permit application or a
condition of the permit.
§ 161-20. Obstruction of fire lanes and fire hydrants prohibited;
towing.
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle in a designated fire lane, except to avoid conflict with
other traffic or pedestrians or in obedience to direction of a peace officer or stop sign; nor shall any
person, in any manner, obstruct any fire lane or other means of access to a building or premises
or otherwise obstruct a source of water or other service necessary for fire-fighting purposes.
Whenever the Fire Marshal, or his or her duly authorized assistant, peace officer or law
enforcement officer discovers any vehicle or other obstruction standing, parked or left in a fire lane
or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or creating an obstruction to a source of water or other service
necessary to fire-fighting purposes in such a way it may constitute a distinct hazard to life or public
safety or interfere with fire-fighting activities, said vehicle will be ticketed for parking violation
and/or removed, towed away and stored. Any such removal, towing and storage as herein
provided may be performed by a towing contractor, and any and all expenses related thereto shall
be at the full responsibility of the owner or person entitled to possession of said vehicle or
obstructing object.
§ 161-21. Supplementary regulations.
Whereas the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code makes references to various
subjects dealing with fire protection and for fire prevention practices and provides only general
procedures for administering said Code, it is hereby deemed necessary and appropriate to set forth
additional administrative and enforcement procedures for the Village of Albion to enable the Fire
Marshal to effectively enforce the provisions of this chapter. The specific areas of fire protection and/or
fire prevention which are the subject of these additional administrative provisions are set forth herein,
and each subject is referenced to the applicable section of the Uniform Code where such subject is
addressed.
Fire lanes.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 164/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
All premises and buildings in the Village of Albion which, in the discretion of the Fire Marshal,
are not accessible from the public roads, shall be provided with suitable access roads and fire
lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible. The location, size, layout and
nature of said roads and fire lanes shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal. In
those areas where new construction is being undertaken, suitable roads shall be constructed
and maintained so as to provide access to the Fire Department and other emergency vehicles
prior to the commencement of any aboveground construction.
Fire lanes for shopping centers, office buildings, places of assembly and other
commercial/industrial buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and 25 feet in width in
multiple residence districts. In the event of a conflict, the location and width of such fire lane
shall be determined by the Fire Marshal so as to provide reasonable access to the building for
emergency vehicles. Fire lanes shall be of such construction as determined by the Fire
Marshal and shall be located so as to be accessible to the nearest public road or highway.
Fire lanes shall be clearly designated by suitable approved pole- or building-mounted signs to
be provided by the owners or occupants of the premises. Failure to replace or repair
damaged, rusted or faded signs within 30 days after written notice shall have been served
upon the owner or occupant shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
The signs required to be posted by this subsection shall conform to the color and size
requirements for parking signs as set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices of
the New York State Department of Transportation. In addition, said signs shall also:
Have arrows pointing in the direction of the area designated as a fire lane.
Be posted not more than 50 feet apart.
Be neither of a portable or movable type, except where otherwise directed by the Fire
Marshal.
Fire protection equipment; water supply. The Fire Marshal and Fire Chief shall review all plans
submitted to the Village of Albion for subdivisions, multiple residences, commercial and industrial
areas, schools and churches. Such approval shall be in line with the following standards:
The contractor or owner is to furnish the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention
with maps or plans showing street and water main locations, together with other site
information.
The Fire Marshal and Fire Chief will be allowed up to 30 days to review said plans. The Fire
Marshal's and Fire Chief's comments shall be plainly shown on the plans and signed by them.
One complete copy of the plans shall be returned to the Bureau of Code Enforcement and
Fire Prevention upon final approval.
The foregoing recommendations shall be forwarded to the appropriate governing agencies for
final approval in conformance with the laws as in such cases are made and provided.
The Fire Marshal and Fire Chief will be allowed 30 days to review building plans for changes,
alterations or conversions in commercial or industrial buildings where no Planning Board,
Zoning Board or Village Board review is required and to make stipulations within the
guidelines set forth in this chapter.
Residential districts.
Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum of 500 feet apart on each street in either direction and
shall be located at intersections whenever possible.
Hydrants must be installed and flow-tested before aboveground construction is commenced.
Flow tests shall comply with the specifications of the Insurance Services Office of New York to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 165/376
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
E.
produce an A-rating.
Temporary exceptions may be made during construction by the Fire Marshal.
Multiple residency, commercial and industrial districts, including expansion of same.
Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum of 300 feet apart and shall be so located so that all
buildings can be reached by comparatively short hose lays from more than one hydrant.
Hydrants must be installed and flow-tested before aboveground construction is commenced.
Flow tests shall comply with the specifications of the Insurance Services Office of New York to
produce an A-rating.
No aboveground construction is to commence until an approved roadway base capable of
carrying the weight of fire apparatus is installed.
Temporary exceptions may be made by the Fire Marshal.
Fire hydrants.
The location of public or private hydrants shall not exceed the maximum distances
established by this chapter. Hydrants located in subdivisions and other residential areas shall
be located at intersections whenever possible.
In new areas where new construction is being undertaken and public or private water mains
and hydrants do not exist, water mains and hydrants shall be installed and be in proper
operating condition prior to the commencement of any aboveground construction. Upon
written application and for good cause shown, the Fire Marshal may grant temporary
exceptions to this requirement, the length and extent of said temporary exception being
subject to the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal. In the event that the terms and conditions of
said permission are not complied with, the Fire Marshal, in his or her sole discretion, may
revoke said permission.
No person shall cause any obstruction to be placed within 15 feet of any public or private fire
hydrant, except in the event of an emergency situation with the approval of the Fire Marshal.
No person, except those officially authorized to do so, shall intentionally cause snow to be
placed around any public or private hydrant so as to unreasonably interfere with its use.
Privately owned water mains and fire hydrants on property devoted to public use, including,
but not limited to, multiple dwelling complexes, churches, commercial buildings, schools,
places of assembly and shopping centers, shall be regularly maintained and annually
serviced by the owner or person generally in charge of the subject premises. Such
maintenance and annual servicing shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted
standards, and records of such annual maintenance shall be kept on the premises so that the
same is available for examination.
In addition to such other penalties as may be provided herein, should the hydrant
maintenance and servicing provided for in this chapter not be carried out as required herein,
the Village of Albion or its duly authorized agents or employees may cause said maintenance
and servicing to be carried out at the expense of the owner of the subject premises. All costs
and expenses incurred by the Village of Albion in connection therewith shall be assessed
against the land on which said water mains and hydrants are located as set forth in this
chapter, provided that written notice shall have been given to the owner of the premises as
set forth herein. The notice shall contain the following:
A description of the premises.
A statement that the annual servicing or maintenance as required by this chapter has not
been performed.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 166/376
(c)
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
H.
An order requiring that said servicing or maintenance be completed by a certain time and
date, which date shall be not less than three working days from the date of service of the
notice.
Standpipe systems.
Hoses shall be inspected once a year and so noted in a record which shall be kept on the
premises and made available for examination. Valves, other than hose stations, shall be
secured in the open position by means of a chain and lock.
Fire Department connections for standpipe and sprinkler systems are to be maintained
accessible at all times. No large shrubbery, fences or barriers of any type shall be placed
within 10 feet of connections. This shall also apply to snow removal and plowing.
Commercial ovens. All new and existing equipment, when altered or changed, shall be approved
by the Fire Marshal.
Storage and handling of hazardous liquids.
Portable containers for motor vehicle fuel shall be clearly marked with the name of the
product contained. This marking shall have been applied to such container by the
manufacturer of the same.
Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, oil or other liquid that generates a flammable
vapor at normal temperatures and having individual capacity of up to 15,000 gallons may be
installed. The maximum aggregate capacity at any site shall not exceed 35,000 gallons in
total capacity.
[Amended 2-11-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
The Fire Marshal or his or her designated representative is further authorized to order the
owner or occupants of premises having hazardous liquid storage tanks contained thereon to
have such tanks tested by methods prescribed by the Fire Marshal to determine if such tanks
are leaking, if the Fire Marshal has reason to believe that said tanks may be leaking. The Fire
Marshal shall notify the Fire Chief, in writing, of such order issued under this subsection.
Aboveground storage tanks for flammable and combustible liquids shall be prohibited, except
as permitted by Subsection I(2).
Underground storage tanks containing Class 1 liquids shall be prohibited in areas designated
as residential districts by Chapter 290, Zoning.
Installation or alteration permit. No installation, alteration or replacement of underground or
aboveground tanks, pumps, piping or other equipment relating to the storage of hazardous
liquids shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Marshal. The Fire
Marshal shall notify the Fire Chief, in writing, whenever a permit is issued under this
subsection.
Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be sufficient cause for the
suspension or revocation by the Fire Marshal of any permit issued hereunder, in this chapter.
Leaking tanks, pumps or piping shall be repaired or replaced immediately, and it shall be
within the discretion of the Fire Marshal as to whether the station or facility must cease any
and/or all operations while repairs or replacement take place. The Fire Marshal shall notify the
Fire Chief of said order.
There is to be no more than one tank truck delivering flammable liquids on the premises of a
flammable liquids servicing facility at any one time. Before making any deliveries to
underground tanks, the driver or other authorized person shall set the brakes of the vehicle
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 167/376
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
I.
and shall turn off the engine of the vehicle. Evertite or OPW fill couplings or the equivalent
must be used when unloading flammable liquids from tank truck to the storage tank. The
driver shall remain at the point of delivery to prevent spillage and overflow. In the event of a
spill or overflow, the Albion Fire Department and Albion Fire Marshal shall be immediately
notified.
In the event of an accidental spill or leak of a flammable liquid in quantities of five United
States gallons or greater, whether or not it has entered the sewer systems, the Albion Fire
Department and Albion Fire Marshal shall be notified immediately.
A sufficient quantity of stay-dry absorbent shall be kept on the premises at all times for
flammable liquid spills and should be used for this purpose, instead of flushing with water.
The telephone number of the owner, lessee or station operator shall be posted on the door in
a conspicuous location so that proper notification can be made in the event of an emergency.
All tanks containing flammable liquids must be tested weekly for water infiltration, and records
shall be kept on the premises showing the date, hour, person completing the test and the test
results. This record must be kept on the premises for examination by the Fire Marshal. In the
event that any test shows water present in the tank, the Fire Marshal shall be notified
immediately. Such water may not be removed until released by the Fire Marshal. The Fire
Marshal shall provide a report to the Fire Chief within 48 hours of the initial report.
Accurate daily inventory records shall be maintained and reconciled on all Class 1 liquids and
diesel fuel storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or piping. The records
shall be maintained on the premises for examination by the Fire Marshal and shall include, at
a minimum, records showing, by product, daily reconciliation between sales, use, receipts and
inventory on hand. If there is more than one tank system for any one product, the
reconciliation shall be maintained separately for each tank system.
Dispensing restrictions.
The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit the dispensing of Class 1 and Class 2
liquids in the open from a fuel-dispensing system supplied by an aboveground storage tank,
not to exceed 2,000 gallons, located at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing
establishments and intended for fueling vehicles used in connection with their business. Such
dispensing may be permitted, provided that:
An inspection of the premises and operations has been made and approval for said
operation granted by the Fire Marshal.
The tank is safeguarded against collision, spillage and overfill to the satisfaction of the
Fire Marshal.
The tank is listed or approved for such aboveground use by the Fire Marshal.
The tank complies with requirements for emergency relief venting and the tank and
dispensing system meet the electrical classification requirements of the National
Electrical Code.
Aboveground storage tanks.
Aboveground storage tanks may be installed upon the approval of the Fire Marshal and
as provided for in this subsection.
Except as modified by the provisions of this subsection, aboveground storage tanks and
their piping systems shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapters 2 and 3 of
NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 168/376
(c)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(c)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(a)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
Only aboveground storage tanks shall be used. Tanks designed and built for
underground use shall not be installed for aboveground use. All aboveground storage
tanks shall be enclosed in a vault which is in compliance with this subsection.
Tank location and capacity.
Tanks storing Class 1 or Class 2 liquids at an individual site shall be limited to a
maximum individual capacity of 2,000 gallons and an aggregate capacity of 4,000
gallons.
Tanks shall be located at least:
Twenty-five feet from the nearest principle use located on the same property.
Twenty-five feet from any fuel dispenser.
Twenty-five feet from the nearest side of a public way.
One hundred feet from any property line that is or can be built upon, including the
opposite side of a public way.
Tanks shall not be permitted on properties occupied as one- or two-family dwellings.
Vaults.
Definition. "Vault" shall be defined as an enclosure, either above or below ground grade,
that contains an aboveground storage tank and meets the requirements below:
The vault shall completely enclose each tank. There shall be no openings in the
vault enclosure except those necessary for access to, inspection of and filling,
emptying and venting of the tank. The walls and floor of the vault shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete at least six inches (15 centimeters) thick. The top
shall be constructed of noncombustible material. The top and floor of the vault and
the tank foundation shall be designed to withstand the anticipated loading. The walls
and floor of any vault installed below grade shall be designed to withstand
anticipated soil and hydrostatic loading. The vault shall be substantially liquidtight,
and there shall be no backfill around the tank.
Each vault and its tank shall be suitably anchored to withstand uplifting by
groundwater or flooding, including when the tank is empty.
The vault shall be designed to be wind and earthquake resistant, in accordance with
good engineering practice. The vault shall be resistant to damage from impact of a
motor vehicle or suitable collision barriers shall be provided.
Each tank shall be in its own vault. Adjacent vaults may share a common wall.
Connections shall be provided to permit ventilation of each vault to dilute, disperse
and remove vapors prior to entering the vault.
Tank filling operations.
Delivery operations shall comply with applicable requirements of NFPA 385, Standard for
Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible Liquids.
The delivery vehicle shall be separated from any aboveground tank by at least 25 feet.
Tank filling shall not begin until the delivery operator has determined ullage (available
capacity).
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 169/376
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(8)
J.
If the delivery hose is connected directly to the tank, the fill line at the tank shall be
equipped with a tight-fill device for connecting the hose to the tank to prevent or contain
any spill at the fill opening during delivery operations. Exception: a tank that has a
capacity that does not exceed 1,000 gallons need not meet this requirement.
Dispensing of motor vehicle fuel.
Each service station open to the public shall have an attendant or supervisor on duty
whenever the station is open for business.
Dispensing devices for Class 1 or Class 2 flammable liquids shall be of the type
approved by the Fire Marshal.
Dispensing of Class 1 or Class 2 flammable liquids by persons other than the service
attendant or supervisor shall be prohibited, except at the self-service island.
All dispensing units shall be equipped with the following:
A control device which will permit the pump to operate only when the dispensing
nozzle is removed from its bracket on the dispensing unit and the switch for this
dispensing unit is manually activated. Said control device shall also stop the pump
when the nozzle has been returned to its bracket.
A means of being locked or otherwise inoperable when the station is not open for
business.
Service stations. In addition to the requirements set forth herein for the storage and handling
of motor vehicle fuel, service stations shall also be subject to the following:
At the time of the application for a permit, the applicant shall submit a full site plan or
instrument survey of the property, showing all tank locations, island setbacks and such
other and further information that may be necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Fuel dispensing pumps and nozzles shall be confined to service islands with no more
than three dispensing units per island, each of which dispensing units shall utilize no
more than two hoses and nozzles per unit. Approved dispensing devices, such as, but
not limited to, coin-operated, card-operated and remote-preset types, shall be permitted,
provided that the dispensing of liquids is under the direct supervision of a qualified
attendant whose duties and qualifications are set forth in the standards and guidelines
established by the Fire Marshal.
Self-service fuel dispensing stations. In addition to the requirements of this chapter and the
Uniform Code, self-service fuel dispensing stations shall also be subject to the following:
The area where said liquids are actually dispensed shall be equipped with the following:
A traffic mirror, of sufficient size, located on each end of each pump island to give the
attendant or supervisor a clear and unobstructed view of each island, said mirrors to
be installed in locations approved by the Fire Marshal.
Closed circuit television monitoring of the pump island may be permitted in place of
the mirrors, provided that the system meets with the approval of the Fire Marshal.
A two-way communication system of the public-address type to facilitate direct
communication between the attendant or supervisor of the site and each pump island at
all times that Class 1 liquids are being dispensed.
Hazardous chemicals.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 170/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
L.
The transportation of hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles by motor vehicles
shall comply with the Department of Transportation regulations.
Shipments whose origin and destination are outside the Village of Albion are confined to the
use of state highways.
Shipments of an intratown nature, either originating in or destined for a Village of Albion
location, shall follow a route designated by the Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall notify the Fire Chief, in writing, of said shipment and route to be
traveled.
Explosives and blasting agents.
The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited.
Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosive and blasting agents.
Shipments whose origin and destination are outside of the Village of Albion are confined
to the use of state highways.
Shipments of an intratown nature, either originating in or destined for a Village of Albion
location shall follow a route established by the Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall notify the Fire Chief, in writing, of said shipment and route to be
traveled.
Handicap parking.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall establish and assign the specific number of designated
handicap parking spaces for public and private parking lots and public and private streets,
when applicable. The specific number of handicap parking spots shall be established
pursuant to the criteria established in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and other generally accepted standards.
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle in designated handicap parking space, unless
the vehicle has been authorized to do so, using the generally accepted standards.
Whenever a peace officer or law enforcement officer discovers an unauthorized vehicle
parked in a designated handicapped parking spot, the vehicle will be ticketed for a parking
violation and/or removed, towed away and stored. Any such removal, towing and storage
herein provided may be performed by a towing contractor, and any and all expenses related
thereto shall be at the full responsibility of the owner or person entitled to possession of said
vehicle.
§ 161-22. Applicability.
The provisions of the Uniform Code and this chapter relating to maintenance, housekeeping and
behavior so as to protect life and property against hazards of fire, explosion and release of toxic gases
or materials arising from storage, handling or use of combustible, flammable or hazardous substances,
materials or devices shall apply equally to new and existing buildings and conditions.
§ 161-23. Continuance of preexisting conditions.
The Code Enforcement Official shall have the authority to permit the continuance of preexisting
conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this chapter where the exceptions do not constitute
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 171/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
a distinct hazard to life and/or property.
§ 161-24. Modification; appeals.
The Fire Marshal, with the approval of the Planning Board, may modify any provision of this
chapter upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee or duly authorized agent when there
are practical difficulties in the way of applying the strict letter of this chapter, provided that the spirit
of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. A copy of the
decision from the Planning Board shall be filed with the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire
Prevention.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Official shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for when it is claimed that the provisions of the Uniform Code do not apply or that
the intent and meaning of the Uniform Code have been misconstrued or misinterpreted, the
person affected may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement Official to the New York State
Board of Review, established under the applicable provisions of the New York State Executive
Law, § 381.
The procedures set forth herein for appeals shall not prohibit the Fire Marshal from immediately
removing a hazard or ordering the immediate closing of a building or premises until a violation of
this chapter or the Uniform Code has been corrected, when such hazard or existence of such
violation constitutes, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, a distinct hazard to life and property or
public safety.
§ 161-25. Inspections.
Work for which a building permit has been issued under this chapter shall be subject to
inspections by a Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal for approval prior to enclosing or
covering any portion thereof and upon completion of each stage of construction, including, but not
limited to, building location, site preparation, excavation, foundation, framing, superstructure,
electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning. It shall be the responsibility of the owner,
applicant or the agent thereof to inform the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention that
the work is ready for inspection and to schedule such inspection.
An inspection of a building, dwelling or structure shall be performed at any other time upon:
The request of the owner or authorized agent.
The receipt of a written statement specifying grounds upon which the subscriber believes one
or more violations of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code exists.
The receipt of other reasonable and reliable information which leads the Code Enforcement
Officer or Fire Marshal to believe such violations exist.
§ 161-26. Department records and reports.
The Code Enforcement Official shall keep permanent official records of all transactions conducted
by the officer, including all applications received, plans approved, permits and certificates issued,
fees charged and collected, inspections reports, all rules and regulations promulgated by the
Village of Albion and notices and orders issued. All such reports be public information and
available for public inspection during normal business hours.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall submit a monthly written report on all business conducted to
the Director of Community Development of the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 172/376
A.
A.
B.
C.
An annual report shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development recapping
business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer from June 1 through May 31.
[Amended 4-12-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
§ 161-27. Stop-work orders.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal has reasonable grounds to believe that
work on any building or structure is being performed in violation of the provisions of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or other applicable state and local laws, rules
and regulations or is not being performed with the provisions of an application, plans or
specifications of a building permit which has been issued under this chapter or is being performed
in an unsafe and dangerous manner, the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal shall notify the
owner or the owner's authorized agent to suspend all work. Such persons shall immediately stop
such work and suspend all building activities until such time as the stop-work order has been
rescinded. All stop-work orders and notices shall be in writing and shall state the conditions under
which the stop-work order will be rescinded and work resumed. A stop-work order shall be served
upon a person to whom it is directed, either by delivering it personally or by posting the same upon
the building or structure in a conspicuous place and sending a copy to the person, firm or
corporation responsible for the work by certified mail.
§ 161-28. Penalties for offenses; appearance ticket; warrant.
Any person who shall willfully fail to comply with a written order of the Code Enforcement Officer
or Fire Marshal within the time frame fixed for compliance herewith and any owner, builder,
architect, contractor, subcontractor, plumber, construction superintendent, tenant or their agents or
any other person taking part or assisting in the construction or use of any building or structure who
shall violate any applicable provisions of this chapter or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit
or certificate issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal or, in addition to any other
penalties provided for in this chapter, any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter,
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, any rules, regulations or laws
adopted pursuant to this chapter or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder by the Code Enforcement Officer or
Fire Marshal shall severally, for each and every violation, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment of not more than one year, or both such fine
and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that the prohibited
condition(s) or violation(s) continue shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any such
penalty shall not be held to prohibit the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions by any
appropriate remedy as specified by this or other state or local laws, rules, regulations or by
immediate application of an injunction.
An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Albion, Orleans County, New York, may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain by
injunction the violation of any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code; this chapter; any local law, rules or regulation adopted subsequent to this chapter;
or violation order or to vacate the occupancy or building in the case of imminent danger to life or
property. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Marshal shall have the authority, pursuant to Article 150 of
the Criminal Procedure Law, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by the Code Enforcement
Officer or Fire Marshal directing a designated person to appear in a designated criminal court at a
designated future time in connection with the alleged commission of a designated violation of this
chapter, The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or any other applicable
local or state law, rules, regulation or any order made thereunder.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 173/376
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Marshal are hereby granted authority to request a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law, when
the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal is denied access to a building or structure, where
there is probable cause to carry out the inspection of the building or structure as the result of a
bona fide complaint, requirement of this chapter or as a result of the issuance of a building permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal shall be accompanied by a police officer, who shall
deliver the search warrant and accompany the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal during
the inspection.
Chapter 165. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 165-1. Findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Albion finds that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding
and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village of Albion and that such damages may
include destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and
privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages
and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 165-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards
or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which
are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion of flood
damages.
Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
Qualify and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 165-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
Protect human life and health.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 174/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public.
Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone,
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood-blight areas.
Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard.
Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
§ 165-4. Definitions; word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL
A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
A designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base
flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
THE LAND IN THE FLOODPLAIN WITHIN A COMMUNITY SUBJECT TO A 1% OR GREATER
CHANCE OF FLOODING IN ANY GIVEN YEAR. THIS AREA MAY BE DESIGNATED AS ZONE
A, AE, AH, AO, A1
99, V, VO, VE OR V1
30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
BASEMENT
That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing
damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING
Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for occupancy or storage.
CELLAR
The same meaning as "basement."
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 175/376
(1)
(2)
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA
THE AREA SUBJECT TO HIGH VELOCITY WATERS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
HURRICANE WAVE WASH. THE AREA IS DESIGNATED ON A FIRM AS ZONE V1
30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING
A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by
means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls.
FLOOD OR FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM)
An official map of the community published by The Emergency Management Agency as part
of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The "FBFM" delineates a regulatory floodway
along watercourses studied in detail in the flood insurance study.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but no water
surface elevation data is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report
contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface
elevations of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage, to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR
The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the basement, i.e., the top of a
slab in concrete-slab construction or the top of wood flooring in wood-frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 176/376
A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest level, including basement or cellar of the lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement or cellar is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure which incorporates structures or components designed for residential occupancy,
constructed by a method or system of construction whereby the structure or component is
wholly or in substantial part manufactured in a manufacturing facility and is intended for
permanent installation on a building site. A "manufactured home" shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with the requirements of Subchapter B of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body
feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on a site, is 320 or
more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and
shall be constructed in accordance with Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards 24 CFR Part 3280, dated April 1,
1993.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)
As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing elevations within
the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND
At least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height, as determined by the Federal Emergency
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 177/376
(1)
(2)
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 165-
12B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES
Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
The initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration
of the property, and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes the placement and/or
installation on the property of accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage trailers and
building materials.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure, excluding land values, either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damage and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to commence when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local building,
fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction or use in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
§ 165-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Albion.
§ 165-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood Insurance Study for the Village of Albion, of
Orleans County, New York," with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps is hereby adopted and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and FIRM are on file at the County of
Orleans Department of Planning and Development.
§ 165-7. Abrogation; greater restrictions to apply.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 178/376
A.
B.
A.
This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program effective
October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining eligibility for flood insurance.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
§ 165-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall
be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable
regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more that $250 or
imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Albion from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received
an approved variance under §§ 165-16 and 165-17 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 165-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village of
Albion, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 165-10. Local administrator designated.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Albion is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 165-11. Development permits.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or any other development
within the area of special flood hazard as established in § 165-6. Application for a development permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to,
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing.
Application stage. The following information is required where applicable:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 179/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement
or cellar) of all structures.
The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed.
When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the utility
floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 165-13C(1).
A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in § 165-14B.
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing by whatever means, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any further work undertaken
prior to submission and approval of the certificate shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stopwork
order for the project unless immediately corrected.
§ 165-12. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
Review all development permit applications to determine that the requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied.
Review all development permit applications to determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development
adversely affects the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adverse
affects" means physical damage to adjacent properties. A hydraulic engineering study may be
required of the applicant for this purpose.
If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation measures shall be made a
condition of the permit.
Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions of § 165-13E,
Encroachments.
Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided
in accordance with § 165-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 180/376
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to § 165-
13D(4) in order to administer § 165-14, Specific standards, and § 165-15, Floodways.
Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator shall:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including basement or cellar, of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or
not the structure contains a basement or cellar.
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the
structure has been floodproofed.
Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 165-13 and 165-14.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter including
variances, when granted, and certificates of compliance.
Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Regional Director, Federal Energy Management Agency, Region II, 26
Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
Interpretation of FHBM, FIRM or FBFM boundaries.
The local administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations when there appears to
be a conflict between the limits of the federally identified area of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 66-6 and/or Subsection B of this section,
when available, shall be used to accurately delineate the area of special flood hazards.
The local administrator shall use flood information from any other authoritative source,
including historical data, to establish the limits of the area of special flood hazards when base
flood elevations are not available.
Stop-work orders.
All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved permit shall be subject to the
issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall
be subject to the penalties described in § 165-8 of this chapter.
All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this law and/or the
conditions of the approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard for a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties described
in § 165-8 of this chapter.
Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Certificate of compliance.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 181/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(a)
(1)
D.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been
issued by the local administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements
of either the development permit or the approved variance.
All other development occurring within the area of special flood hazard will have upon
completion a certificate of compliance issued by the local administrator.
All certificates shall be based upon the inspections conducted subject to Subsection G and/or
any certified elevations, hydraulic information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
§ 165-13. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required;
Anchoring.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. Manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of overthe-
top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind factors.
Construction materials and methods.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
Utilities.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. When designed for location
below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer's or architect's certification is
required.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwater into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall
Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 182/376
(b)
(c)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater
than either 50 lots or five acres.
Encroachments.
All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood elevation data is available
(unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed to determine the effects on the flood-carrying
capacity of the area of special flood hazards set forth in § 165-12A, Permit application review.
This may require the submission of additional technical data to assist in the determination.
In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data is available pursuant to
§ 165-12B or Subsection D(4) of this section and no floodway has been determined, the
cumulative effects of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point.
In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is provided or available pursuant
to § 165-12B, the requirements of § 165-15, Floodways, shall apply.
§ 165-14. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
§ 165-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, and § 165-12B, Use of other base flood
data, the following standards are required:
Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any resident structure
shall:
Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Nonresidential construction.
New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either have
the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood elevation or
be floodproofed to the base flood level.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 183/376
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall
be designed to automatically (without human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or a licensed architect or meet the following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
If the structure is to be floodproofed:
A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specification and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
to make the structure watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor shall certify the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is floodproofed.
The local administrator shall maintain in record a copy of all such certificates noted in this
subsection.
Construction standards for areas of special flood hazards without base flood elevations.
New construction or substantial improvement of structures, including manufactured homes,
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically (without human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed
architect or meet the following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 165-15. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways (see definition of
"floodway" in § 165-4B). The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to high velocity floodwaters
carrying debris and posing additional threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is
available for a particular site, as provided by §§ 165-6 and 165-12B, all encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, are prohibited within the limits of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 184/376
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
D.
E.
F.
the floodway, unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 165-16. Appeals Board.
The Village Board of Trustees, as established by the Village of Albion, shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
The Village Board of Trustees shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Village Board of Trustees may appeal such decision to the
Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
In passing upon such applications, the village shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management
program of that area.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
The costs to local governments and the danger associated with conducting search and
rescue operations during periods of flooding.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
search and rescue operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors in Subsection D and the purpose of this chapter, the village may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 185/376
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
[1]
§ 165-17. Conditions for variances.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that § 165-16D has been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures and
contributing structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
A showing of good and sufficient cause.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or laws.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the base
flood elevation shall be given written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk.
Chapter 173. Historic Preservation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 8-10-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exterior property maintenance — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 278.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Ch. 173, Preservation of Historic Areas, adopted 11-10-
1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999, as amended.
§ 173-1. Purpose.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 186/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
landmarks and historic districts is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and
general welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded on its past, and
inasmuch as Albion has many significant historic, architectural and cultural resources which constitute
its heritage, this chapter is intended to:
Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which represent distinctive elements of
Albion's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage;
Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
Protect and enhance Albion's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the
economy thereby provided; and
Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the Village.
§ 173-2. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Albion Historic Preservation Commission."
Membership.
The Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed, to the extent available in
the community, by the Mayor as follows:
At least one shall be an architect experienced in working with historic buildings.
At least one shall be an historian.
At least one shall be a resident of an historic district.
At least one shall have demonstrated significant interest in and commitment to the field of
historic preservation evidenced either by involvement in a local historic preservation
group, employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or other
serious interest in the field.
All members shall have a known interest in historic preservation and architectural
development within the Village of Albion.
Commission members shall serve for a term of four years, with the exception of the initial term of
one of the seven members, which shall be one year, one which shall be two years, and one which
shall be three years.
The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be elected by and from among the
members of the Commission.
The powers of the Commission shall include:
Recommending employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to carry out
duties of the Commission.
Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic, architectural, and cultural
landmarks and for the delineation of historic districts.
Conducting surveys of significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and historic
districts within the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 187/376
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
B.
Designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and historic districts.
Acceptance on behalf of the Village government of the donation of facade easements and
development rights and the making of recommendations to the Village government
concerning the acquisition of facade easements or other interests in real property as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by
developing and participating in public education programs.
Making recommendations to Village government concerning the utilization of state, federal or
private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the Village.
Recommending acquisition of a landmark structure by the Village government where its
preservation is essential to the purposes of this chapter and where private preservation is not
feasible.
Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this
chapter.
The Commission shall meet at least monthly, but meetings may be held at any time on the written
request of any two of the Commission members or on the call of the Chairman or the Mayor.
A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of the majority of the members of the
Commission's members, but not less than a majority of the full authorized membership may grant
or deny a certificate of appropriateness or hardship relief.
Any member of the Commission shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before said Commission
with respect to a property in which a member has an interest.
§ 173-3. Designation of landmarks or historic districts.
The Commission may designate an individual property as a landmark if it:
Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the cultural,
political, economic or social history of the locality, region, state or nation; or
Is identified with historic personages; or
Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style; or
Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an age; or
Because of unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established and
familiar visual feature of the neighborhood.
Designation of historic districts.
The Commission may designate a group of properties as an historic district if it:
Contains properties which met one or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark;
and
By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct section of the Village.
The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be specified in detail and
shall be filed, in writing, in the Village Clerk's office for public inspection.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 188/376
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner of the property proposed for designation, describing the property and announcing a public
hearing by the Commission to consider the designation. Where the proposed designation involves
so many owners that individual notice is infeasible, notice may instead be published at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days, but no more than 20 days, prior to the date
of the public hearing. Once the Commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no
building permits shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer until the Commission has made
its decision.
[Amended 8-11-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010; 9-22-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any landmark or historic
district. The Commission, owners and any interested parties may present testimony or
documentary evidence at the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or historic district. The record may
also contain staff reports, public comments, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing.
The Commission shall forward notice of each property designated as a landmark and the
boundaries of each designated historic district to the office of the Orleans County Clerk for
recordation.
§ 173-4. Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition
or new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration, reconstruction, demolition, new
construction, or moving of a landmark or property within an historic district, nor shall any person make
any material change in the appearance of such property, its light fixtures, freestanding lights, signs,
sidewalks, fences, stairs, outbuildings, walls, driveways or alleys, paving or any other exterior element
which affects the appearance and cohesiveness of the landmark or historic district without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 173-5. Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness.
In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall not consider changes to interior spaces, unless they are open to the public. The
Commission's decision shall be based on the following principles:
Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district shall be retained, with their
historic features altered as little as possible;
Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with their historic character, as well as
with the surrounding district; and
New construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is located.
In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
The general design, character and appropriateness to the property of the proposed alteration
or new construction;
The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to the property itself,
surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;
Texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar features of other properties in the
neighborhood;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 189/376
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including proportion of the property's front
facade, proportion and arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade, roof
shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets, including setback; and
The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the significance of the property.
§ 173-6. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness, the owner shall
file an application for such a certificate with the Historic Preservation Commission. The application
shall contain:
Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
Location and photographs of property;
Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available;
Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent properties, if available;
Samples of color or materials to be used;
Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering
to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of
illumination, and a plan showing the sign's location on the property; and
Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary in order to visualize the
proposed work.
No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a certificate of appropriateness
has first been issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. The certificate of appropriateness
required by this chapter shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be
required by any other ordinance of the Village of Albion.
The Commission shall approve, deny or approve the permit with modifications within 62 days from
receipt of the completed application. The Commission may hold a public hearing on the
application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the
application to present their views.
All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant by
registered mail and a copy filed with the Village Clerk's office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying any application.
Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for 12 months, after which the owner must reapply if
he still wishes to undertake work on the property.
§ 173-7. Hardship criteria for demolition.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition has been denied may
apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that:
The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return
represents the most profitable return possible;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 190/376
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a
purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and
Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
§ 173-8. Hardship criteria for alteration.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration has been denied may apply
for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall
establish that the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that
return represents the most profitable return possible.
§ 173-9. Hardship application procedure.
After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, an applicant may commence the hardship process with the Commission by
making a written request for relief to the Commission within 30 days. No building permit or
demolition permit shall be issued unless the Commission makes a finding that a hardship exists.
The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship application at which an opportunity
will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views.
The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commissions, local preservation groups and
interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the
property.
All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant by
registered mail and a copy filed with the Village Clerk's Office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting of denying the hardship application. If
the application is granted, the Commission shall approve only such work as is necessary to
alleviate the hardship.
If the application is granted, the Village Board shall approve only such work as is necessary to
alleviate the hardship and effect substantial justice. If demolition is approved by the Village Board,
the Commission shall have the right to issue a delayed certificate of appropriateness. Such
certificate shall not permit demolition or razing for a period of up to 10 months from the date of the
Village Board's granting of hardship, during which time the Commission and the applicant shall
undertake serious and continuing discussion for the purpose of finding a method to save such
property. During such period, the Applicant and the Commission shall cooperate in attempting to
avoid demolition of the property. At the end of this ten-month period, if no mutually agreeable
method of saving the subject property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success is
underway or if no formal application for funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit organization
to preserve the subject property is pending, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue the permit to
demolish the property.
§ 173-10. Enforcement.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this chapter shall conform
to any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the Building Code Enforcement Officer to
inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is found that is not being
performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the
Historic Preservation Commission, the Building Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a stop-work
order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long
as a stop-work order is in effect.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 191/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
§ 173-11. Maintenance and repair required.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any
exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within an historic district which does not
involve a change in design, material, color or outward appearance.
No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as landmark or included within an
historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Historic
Preservation Commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district
as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include:
Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical support.
Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations, including broken windows or
doors.
Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the
claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety.
§ 173-12. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation and the
violator shall be liable to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each day the violation
continues.
Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs, or permits a designated property to fall into a
serious state of disrepair in violation of this chapter shall be required to restore the property and its
site to its appearance prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection shall be brought
by the Village Attorney. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
§ 173-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission relating to hardship or a
certificate or appropriateness may, within 15 days of the decision, file a written application with the
Village Board for review of the decision. Reviews shall be conducted based on the same record that
was before the Commission and using the same criteria.
Chapter 179. Mobile Homes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 59.
Sewers — See Ch. 112.
Water — See Ch. 116.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 192/376
A.
B.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 128.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 149.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 161.
Animals — See Ch. 208.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 179-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Mobile Home Ordinance of the Village of Albion."
§ 179-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village of Albion by regulating the occupancy and maintenance of mobile homes and
mobile home parks.
§ 179-3. Scope.
This chapter establishes minimum standards for mobile home parks and requirements for the design,
construction, alteration, extension and maintenance of mobile home parks and related utilities and
facilities; authorizes the issuance of permits for construction, alteration and extension and operation of
mobile home parks; authorizes the inspection of mobile home parks; limits the use of mobile homes
outside of mobile home parks; and fixes penalties for violation.
§ 179-4. Definitions; word usage.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include the word "building"; the word "used"
shall include "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or
"intended to be used," and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation
and administration of this chapter:
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion.
MOBILE HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body
feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on a site, is 320 or
more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and
shall be constructed in accordance with the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR Part 3280, April 1, 1993.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its
occupants.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 193/376
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned for the placement of mobile
homes, appurtenant structures or additions.
MOBILE HOME STAND
That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home,
appurtenant structures or additions.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation or other
entity.
SERVICE BUILDING
A structure housing sanitary, operational, office, recreational, maintenance and other facilities
built to conform to required standards.
SEWER CONNECTION
Pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewer system serving the mobile home park.
SEWER RISER PIPE
That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.
STREET LINE
All measurement referring to public streets or highways shall be made from the center line of
said street or highway.
WATER CONNECTION
All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE
That portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point of each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE
Consists of all pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from the water main of the park
distribution system to the water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
Article II. Permits
§ 179-5. Placement.
Mobile homes shall not be placed on a lot within the village limits of the Village of Albion, except in an
approved mobile home park. Existing, nonconforming mobile homes may continue, but shall not be
replaced by another mobile home.
§ 179-6. Operating permit required; renewal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the
limits of the Village of Albion unless he or she holds a valid operating permit issued by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Albion. Operating permits are issued and valid only for a twelve-month
period, but may be renewed as provided for herein.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 194/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(4)
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
§ 179-7. Application requirements; fees.
All applications for permits or for renewal of permits shall be submitted to the Village of Albion
Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
All original applications for permits shall contain the following:
The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers and directors.
The name and address of the owner of the land.
The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
Two sets of engineering and/or architectural plans and specifications of the proposed park
showing:
The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
The number, location and size of all mobile home lots.
The location and width of roadways and parkways.
The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.
The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities.
Plans and specification of all buildings to be constructed, altered or extended within the
mobile home park.
The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
All applications for permits or renewals of permits shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
Upon review of the application and subject to evidence that the mobile home park meets the
minimum requirements of the New York State Department of Health, the Village Board shall issue
or renew a permit when a review of the application and inspection of the site demonstrates that
the proposed or existing mobile home park meets the requirements of this chapter.
All applications for original permits shall be reviewed by the Planning Board of the Village of Albion
for approval before being submitted to the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to § 179-7D of this
chapter.
§ 179-8. Inspections.
The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to
determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
The Fire Marshal shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this
chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 195/376
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
The Fire Marshal shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of
the mobile home park.
§ 179-9. Revocation of operating permits.
Any operating permit for a mobile home park may be revoked when it is found to be in violation of this
chapter.
Should the Fire Marshal find that conditions exist which are in violation of any provision of this
chapter, he or she shall give notice, in writing, to the permittee that, unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within 10 days, the permit will be revoked.
If, at the end of 10 days, a further inspection reveals that the conditions or practices have not been
corrected, the Fire Marshal shall then revoke the permit and give notice of such suspension, in
writing, to the permittee. Upon notice of revocation, the permittee shall cease operation of the
mobile home park.
§ 179-10. Applicability to existing parks.
Mobile home parks operating under a valid operating permit issued prior to the effective date of this
chapter may continue to operate under the terms of such permit until it expires. Before a renewal
permit may be issued, such parks shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
except where existing conditions are permitted to continue, as specified by this chapter.
§ 179-11. Appeals.
Petition. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Albion, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Village Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days
after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice and the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under § 179-12. Upon receipt of
such petition, the governing body shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof.
Hearing. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why
such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10
days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the petitioner,
the governing body may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such tenday
period when, in the judgment of the governing body, the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement.
Order of the governing body. After such hearing, the governing body shall make findings as to
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue
an order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served in writing. Upon
failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the license of the mobile home
park affected by the order shall be revoked.
§ 179-12. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the Fire Marshal finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect
the public health, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 196/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he or she may deem necessary to meet
the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the governing body, he or she shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of § 179-11 shall be applicable to such
hearing and the order issued thereafter.
Article III. Site Conditions and Improvements
§ 179-13. General site conditions; minimum size of parcel.
The condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the
property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable
smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or
sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose
persons or property to hazards.
All mobile home parks shall be located on a parcel of land having an area of not less than 10
acres. Existing mobile home parks which occupy an area of less than 10 acres may continue.
§ 179-14. Ground cover.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing
soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
§ 179-15. Grading and draining of site.
The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all
surface water in a safe, efficient manner and to prevent standing water from accumulating under each
mobile home.
§ 179-16. Nonresidential uses.
No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except as permitted by this chapter
or by Chapter 290, Zoning.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located
on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities.
§ 179-17. Lot and area requirements.
No lot in any mobile home park shall be less than 50 feet wide and less than 100 feet deep,
exclusive of easements and rights-of-way. No structure or mobile home or any part thereof shall
be located on any lot closer to any front lot line than 30 feet to any side lot line than 10 feet nor to
any rear lot line than 10 feet. Lots within existing, approved mobile home parks which do not meet
the requirements of this section may continue.
Tapered lots occurring along curvilinear roads and culs-de-sac shall have a median lot width of 60
feet. The "median lot width" is defined as the average of the front and back lot lines. In no case,
however, shall the front lot width on such a tapered lot be less than 35 feet. The minimum
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 197/376
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
requirements for the total area and yard dimensions as hereinabove stated shall apply to such
tapered lots.
An accessory structure which covers an area exceeding 25 square feet and is attached to a
mobile home or is located within 10 feet of a window in such mobile home and has an opaque top
or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall be considered a part of said mobile home for
the purpose of determining its distance from lot lines.
§ 179-18. Recreation areas.
In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate mobile homes, there shall be one
recreation area for every 150 lots. The recreation area(s) shall be easily accessible to all park
residents.
The size of such recreation areas shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet.
Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the
topography permits, be centrally located.
Playground equipment shall be installed in each required recreation area.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 59, Parks and Recreation.
§ 179-19. Setbacks; buffer strips; screening.
All mobile homes shall be located at least 100 feet from any park property boundary line abutting
upon a public street or highway, unless otherwise approved by the Village of Albion Planning
Board, and at least 10 feet from other park property boundary lines.
There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between an individual mobile home and adjoining
pavement of a park walk, street or common parking area or other common areas.
All mobile home parks shall be provided with screening, such as attractive and well-maintained
fences or natural growth along the property boundary line separating the park and adjacent uses.
Existing, approved mobile homes shall be exempt from § 179-20A through C.
§ 179-20. Street system.
General requirements. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient shall
be properly adopted to topography.
Access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at
the entrances or exits and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road
connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width
of 34 feet where parking is permitted on both sides or a minimum road pavement width of 27 feet
where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than 100 feet long
and does not provide access to abutting mobile home lots within such distance, the minimum road
pavement width may be 24 feet, provided that parking is prohibited on both sides.
Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic
and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 198/376
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
All streets, except minor streets, shall have a width of 20 feet.
Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 1,000 feet and shall be provided at the closed
end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 60 feet.
Street construction and design standards.
Pavement. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be
durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be
protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surfaces and shifting of the pavement base.
Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards.
Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage but shall
be not more than 8%. Short runs with a maximum grade of 10% may be permitted, provided
that traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of
lateral curves.
Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately right angles.
A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting
streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 196, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 179-21. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of park occupants
and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least one and one-fourths (11/4) car
spaces for each mobile home lot.
Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the mobile
home, but shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that it is intended to
serve.
Overnight parking on park streets is prohibited.
§ 179-22. Building permit; fees; certificate of occupancy.
No mobile home or accessory building shall be installed within any mobile home park within the
Village of Albion without having applied for and been issued an installation permit from the Bureau
of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention. All applications shall be accompanied by the fee as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Village of Albion Board of Trustees. The building permit
application must be signed by park management. No mobile home shall be removed from a site
until a demolition permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
No mobile home shall be occupied until such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Village of Albion Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention for each mobile home;
provided, however, that no certificate of occupancy shall be denied by the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention if all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations
and codes are complied with, provided that it shall not be necessary for skirting to be installed
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Skirting approved for use on mobile homes
shall be installed within three months of issuing the certificate of occupancy.
§ 179-23. Mobile home stands.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 199/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the
placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift sliding,
rotation and overturning.
The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile
home or due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the
superstructure. The mobile home stand shall be either drilled piers or trench footers in accordance
with the specifications hereinafter set forth:
Such drilled piers shall be:
Constructed of cast in place concrete having a minimum load-carrying capacity of 3,000
pounds per square inch;
A diameter of not less than 18 inches;
A depth of not less than 42 inches; and
Spaced at intervals of not more than eight feet to 10 feet and centered to the mobile
home frame rails.
Such trench footers shall be:
Constructed of cast in place concrete have a load-carrying capacity of not less than
3,000 pounds per square inch;
A width of not less than 18 inches;
A depth of not less than 42 inches;
Spaced at intervals of not more than eight feet to 10 feet; and
Of sufficient length to accommodate the width of the mobile home frame rails.
The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place
concrete "dead men," eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations. All anchors shall meet the
requirements of state and local codes.
Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand, and each
shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800 pounds.
§ 179-24. Water supply.
General. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each
mobile home park. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is
available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively.
Distribution system.
The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all mobile
homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water.
All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and local regulations.
The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water
supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back siphonage.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 200/376
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than 20
pounds per square inch under normal operating conditions at service buildings and other
locations requiring potable water supply.
The water meter shall be installed within the mobile home. A shutoff shall be installed ahead
of the meter.
Water risers.
Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand
at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position.
Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. The pipe shall be
at least three-fourths (3/4) inch. The water outlet shall be capped when a mobile home does
not occupy the lot.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes
and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of the ground during freezing weather.
Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile
home lot.
Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 116, Water.
§ 179-25. Sewage disposal.
General. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile home parks for
conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local laws.
Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage
from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from the park water supply system at a
distance as specified by generally accepted standards. Sewers shall be at a grade which will
ensure a velocity of two feet per second when flowing full. All sewer lines shall be constructed of
materials approved by the New York State Health Department, Village of Albion Streets
Department and Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention, shall be adequately vented
and shall have watertight joints.
Sewer connections.
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe.
The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the
mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
The sewer connection (see the definition of "sewer connection" in § 179-4B) shall have a
normal inside diameter of at least three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be
at least one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
All materials used for sewer connections shall be rigid, corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and
durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser
pipe shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 201/376
(5)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Sewer lines shall be suspended using perforated metal strap attached to the mobile home.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 112, Sewers.
§ 179-26. Electrical distribution.
General. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures,
equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with codes
and regulations governing such systems.
Power distribution lines. Main power lines shall be located underground. All direct-burial
conductors or cable shall be buried below the ground surface as required by the National
Electrical Code and shall be insulated and specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors
shall be located not less than one foot of radial distance from water-, sewer, gas or communication
lines.
Electrical connections. All electrical connections shall be made and/or installed in accordance with
applicable state and local codes.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 149, Electrical Standards.
§ 179-27. Outdoor cooking, fireplaces and stoves.
Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and wood-burning stoves shall be so located, constructed,
maintained and used as to avoid fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used
and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no
material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. No refuse shall be burned at any
time.
§ 179-28. Insect and rodent control.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall
conform to the requirements of the New York State Department of Health and the Orleans County
Department of Health.
Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or
breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe and other
building materials shall be stored at least one foot above the ground.
Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any
structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers
and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed,
poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health.
Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
§ 179-29. Fuel supply and storage.
Natural gas system.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 202/376
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(1)
E.
Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable
codes and regulations governing such systems.
Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve
installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to
prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall be
arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location. Systems shall be installed
according to applicable state and local codes.
All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile home shall be well supported and
protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not
be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall be securely but not
permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be less
than 12 nor more than 60 United States gallons' gross capacity.
No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage
cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure, unless such installation is approved by
the health authority.
Fuel oil supply systems.
All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable
codes and regulations governing such systems.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place.
All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be
located inside or beneath any mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage.
§ 179-30. Fire prevention; safety inspection.
The mobile home area shall be subject to fire prevention laws which may be adopted by the
village.[1]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 161, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Fire Marshal shall be kept in service
buildings and at all other locations designated by such Fire Marshal and shall be maintained in
good operating conditions.
Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes.
Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements:
The water supply system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two one-and-onehalf-
inch hose streams.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 203/376
(b)
(2)
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver at least 75 gallons of
water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the
highest elevation point of the park.
Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 600 feet, measured along or through roads
or other open public areas of any mobile home, service building or other structure of the park.
The park shall undergo a fire safety inspection at the time the permit to operate is issued. The
inspection shall be carried out by the Fire Marshal.
Article IV. Requirements for Operation
§ 179-31. Responsibilities of park management.
The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in
compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and
inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder.
The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home
stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. Such
register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park.
The park management shall notify the State Health Department immediately of any suspected
communicable or contagious disease within the park.
The park management will maintain written rules and regulations for park occupants and provide a
copy to the Village of Albion Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
The park management and the Bureau of Code Enforcement and Fire Prevention shall cooperate
jointly whenever violations are noted on the park property.
The park management shall provide for each lot to have a sign containing the name of the
occupant and the lot number.
§ 179-32. Responsibilities of park occupants.
The park occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder and shall maintain their mobile home lots, facilities and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile
home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instruction of
the park management.
Article V. Miscellaneous Provisions
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 204/376
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
§ 179-33. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for
each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 179-34. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other laws
or code of the Village of Albion existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
Chapter 184. Recreational Vehicles and Motor Homes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 8-10-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 184-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Recreational Vehicle and Motor Home Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or MOTOR HOME
Any vehicle used, designed for use or capable of being used as sleeping or living quarters,
whether propelled by its own power or by the power of another vehicle to which it may be
attached.
§ 184-3. Prohibited uses; exceptions.
No recreational vehicle or motor home shall be used within or on any property within the Village
limits for use as sleeping or living quarters or for any other purpose in connection with such
sleeping or living quarters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up any recreational vehicle or motor home on any public
way in the Village of Albion.
It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner or occupant of any land or premises within the
Village, to use or permit the use of any mobile home, recreational vehicle or motor home for any of
the prohibited uses thereof as set forth in this chapter.
Exceptions:
Permitted uses in the Village parks associated with a sanctioned event.
No more than two recreational vehicles or motor homes may be used on a developed lot in
the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 205/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 184-4. Penalties for offenses.
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15
days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense.
Civil penalties; construal of penalties.
Obedience to the provisions set forth herein may be enforced by criminal information for the
penalties herein prescribed, as well as by prosecution of the offender as provided in
Subsection A of this section, or by civil action for a penalty or by civil remedy at law or equity
by way of injunction or otherwise to abate or prevent a violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
Neither a judgment in nor the pendency of a criminal prosecution for an alleged violation of
the provisions of this chapter nor a judgment in or the pendency of a civil action of law or in
equity shall be a bar to the other form of proceeding.
The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue, and the remedies herein provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin
or abate a violation shall be cumulative.
Chapter 187. Sand and Salt
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 10-14-1974 as L.L. No. 3-
1974 (Ch. 52 of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Article I. Storage
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as L.L. No. 3-1974 (Ch. 52 of the 1974 Code)]
§ 187-1. Storage in approved facilities.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The storage or stockpiling within the corporate limits of the Village of Albion, Orleans County, New
York, of sand and/or salt intended to be used for road ice control purposes is hereby prohibited after
January 1, 1975, unless such storage or stockpiling is in a facility approved by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and by the Superintendent of Streets of the Village of
Albion; provided, however, that all existing facilities, whether or not so approved, may continue to be
used until December 31, 1975. In no event shall any unapproved storage or stockpiling facility be
allowed subsequent to January 1, 1976.
§ 187-2. Applicability.
This Article shall not be applicable to storage or stockpiling of less than one cubic yard of sand or salt
intended for road ice control.
§ 187-3. Penalties for offenses.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 206/376
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any person, firm, corporation or municipality violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation is found to continue shall constitute a
separate violation to be separately punished.
Chapter 191. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Article I. Maintenance of Premises
§ 191-1. Time limit for leaving refuse outdoors.
No person or persons shall allow to remain longer than 36 hours or overnight, in any alley or on any
sidewalk or premises within 30 feet of any building, empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, wastepaper,
excelsior or other like combustible materials.
§ 191-2. Placement of ashes.
No person or persons shall be allowed to place ashes within any building in any box, barrel or other
wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel or floor.
§ 191-3. Oily wastes and rags.
No person shall keep or permit to be kept on the premises any oily waste or oily rags, unless at all
times when not actually in use such oily waste and oily rags are kept in a metal can with a self-closing
cover and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the container at least five
inches above the floor.
§ 191-4. Inspections.
All owners or occupants of buildings are required to permit the Fire Marshal to inspect their buildings to
see the above is complied with, and it is hereby made the duty of the Fire Marshal to make such
inspection whenever and wherever he or she may suspect a violation of this Article.
§ 191-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this Article shall constitute, for
each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Article II. Disposition and Collection of Garbage
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 207/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 191-6. Littering; garbage grinding machines.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on the surface of any lot, yard, premises, park, alley or
street or in any drain, stream or body of water in the village any garbage, carcass or other putrescible
matter. An exception is hereby granted to persons who dispose of their garbage by means of a
grinding machine, an acceptable household or commercial garbage disposal unit connected with the
village sewer system.
§ 191-7. Nonresident waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the Village of Albion to bring any
garbage, refuse or solid waste of any kind into the Village of Albion for the purpose of disposing of
the same within the village or for the purpose of placing the same at the curbside of any street in
the village or otherwise offering the same for collection by the village solid waste collection
service.
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Village of Albion to permit or allow any nonresident of
the village to place any garbage, refuse or solid waste of any kind at the curbside of such
resident's property or to receive or accept from any nonresident of the Village of Albion any
garbage, refuse or solid waste of any kind for the purpose of disposing of the same within the
Village of Albion or for the purpose of offering the same for collection by the village's solid waste
collection service.
§ 191-8. Hazardous waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place at the curbside of any street in the village or otherwise offer
for collection by the village solid waste collection service any hazardous waste. For purposes of this
Article, "hazardous waste" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
42 U.S.C. § 6903, and the regulations thereunder, and in the New York Environmental Conservation
Law § 27-0901, Subdivision 3, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any succeeding
legislation or regulations or amendments to the foregoing.
§ 191-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this Article shall constitute, for
each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Article III. Recycling
§ 191-10. Findings; purpose.
The village finds that the removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream will decrease
the amount of solid waste disposed of in landfills and aid in the conservation of valuable
resources.
The village finds that the New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988[1] requires all
municipalities to adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, requiring separation of
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 208/376
[1]
C.
D.
A.
recyclable and reusable material from solid waste.
Editor's Note: See § 120-aa of the General Municipal Law.
The village finds that, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the village,
it is necessary for the village to enact this Article in order to encourage and facilitate the maximum
recycling practicable on the part of every household, business and institution within the village.
The village declares that the purpose of this Article is to establish and implement recycling-related
practices and procedures to be applicable to all waste generators within the village.
§ 191-11. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED FACILITY
A public or private facility or facilities where recyclables may be delivered for disposal, including,
but not limited to, dropoff centers, materials recovery facilities or other such public or private
facilities.
RECYCLABLES
Any material designated from time to time by the village, provided that such material is not
hazardous and can be reasonably separated from the solid waste stream and held for material
recycling or reuse value.
SOLID WASTE
All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including, but not limited to, materials or
substances discarded or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at
the time of such discard or rejection or as being accumulated, stored or physically, chemically or
biologically treated prior to being discarded or rejected, having served their intended use, or as
industrial, commercial and agricultural waste, sludges from air- or water-pollution control facilities
or water-supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator
residue, demolition and construction debris and offal, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form, special nuclear or byproduct
material within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or waste
which appears on the list or satisfies the characteristics of hazardous waste promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Conservation.
SOURCE SEPARATION
The segregation of recyclable material from the solid waste stream at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale or other disposition.
VILLAGE
The Village of Albion, New York.
WASTE GENERATOR
Any person, household, business, governmental agency, municipality or other legal entity which
produces solid waste requiring off-site disposal.
WASTE HAULER
All persons engaged in the commercial collection, transportation and/or disposal of solid waste
and/or recyclables generated, originated or brought within the village.
§ 191-12. Separation of recyclable materials.
Each waste generator in the village shall source-separate recyclables from solid waste.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 209/376
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Each waste generator in the village shall provide for the removal of recyclables from the property
on which they are generated either through a service provided by the village or the County of
Orleans or a private hauler or by direct haul by the individual waste generator to an authorized
facility.
Nothing in this Article is intended to prevent any waste generator from making arrangements for
the reuse, private collection, sale or donation of recyclables.
It shall be unlawful for any waste generator to place or to permit or allow to remain on his
premises any garbage, refuse or solid waste of any kind, including recyclables, or containers for
such solid waste or recyclables outside at curbside or within 30 feet of any street or alley earlier
than 3:00 p.m. of the day before the scheduled solid waste collection day for such premises as
established by the village or the County of Orleans or later than 8:00 p.m. of the day scheduled for
such solid waste collection for such premises.
§ 191-13. Responsibilities of waste haulers.
All waste haulers in the village shall offer or cause to be offered to their customers collection,
transportation and disposal services for recyclables to the same extent that any such waste hauler
offers collection, transportation and disposal services for solid waste. Such services shall be
provided on the same day(s) as solid waste pickup, transportation or disposal services are
provided.
No waste hauler shall be required to accept for collection solid waste which has not been sourceseparated
or hazardous waste.
All waste haulers must maintain records of recyclables collected and supply such reports to the
village, as often as reasonably requested by the village, but at least once per year.
§ 191-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The village may inspect all portions of vehicles and/or containers used in the collection,
transportation and/or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclables, including, but not limited to,
containers placed at the curbside of residences, to ascertain compliance with the terms and
conditions specified in this Article.
Failure of a waste generator to comply with the provisions of this Article shall result, upon
conviction, and be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Failure of a waste hauler to comply with the provisions of this Article shall result in a fine for each
violation as follows: $250 for the first violation, $500 for the second and $1,000 for each
subsequent violation.
The village shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this Article and collection of all
fines and penalties provided herein.
The Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal of the village and any police officer or peace officer
may, and is hereby authorized to, issue appearance tickets pursuant to the Criminal Procedure
Law for any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 196. Streets and Sidewalks
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 210/376
A.
B.
[1]
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 128.
Skates and skateboards — See Ch. 247.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Article I. Street Openings
§ 196-1. Written request required; fee.
Application. No person shall open or cause to be opened by cutting or digging the surface,
pavement, sidewalk or curbing or soil in any street, highway or public place under the jurisdiction
of the village without first obtaining the written consent of the Superintendent of Streets and paying
the prescribed fees therefor, or without complying with the provisions and conditions relating
thereto as hereinafter provided.
Fees established by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall by resolution establish a
uniform set of fees, for the written consent, which shall be based upon the estimated actual costs
and expenses to be borne by the village in restoring the street, highway or other public property to
its former usefulness. The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, change said fees to reflect
changes in costs and expenses.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 196-2. Barricading of excavations; restoration of streets.
Any person making or causing to be made any such excavation in the streets, highways or public
places of the village shall properly guard or barricade such excavation at all times and shall install and
maintain adequate and sufficient warning devices to warn the public and shall restore the street,
highway or public property to its former usefulness according to § 196-3.
§ 196-3. Filling of excavations; restoration of improvements.
All excavated materials shall be removed, following which all openings shall be carefully backfilled for
their entire length, width and depth in the street or highway area, including the area between the curb
and the property line, with bank-run gravel or crushed stone, well-tamped. Additional bank-run gravel
or crushed stone shall be added by the permittee as long as any settlement occurs, following which the
pavement, curbing or other improvements shall be restored either by the permittee or the village as
determined in the permit.
§ 196-4. Special provisions for public service corporations.
Bond in lieu of paying fees. Public service corporations may, in lieu of paying the fees established
pursuant to § 196-1 of this Article, file with the Village Clerk a bond to be approved as to form,
amount and sufficiency of sureties by the the Superintendent of Streets, conditioned upon the
proper restoration of streets, highways and public places, in accordance with the direction of the
Superintendent of Streets, and his or her satisfaction; the payment to the village, upon demand, of
any costs and expenses incurred by said village; and the saving of the Village of Albion, its officers
and employees, harmless from any loss, injury or damage due to opening streets, highways or
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 211/376
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
public places, or to any negligence or fault of such corporations, their employees or agents, in
connection therewith.
Separate permits not required; amount of bond. All persons engaged within the Village of Albion in
the telephone, gas or electric business or any other business, the nature of which would require or
result in frequent applications for permits to make obstructions or excavations in the streets,
highways or public places of the village, shall not however, be required to obtain separate permits,
but in such cases a general bond shall be given in lieu of any permit indemnifying the Village of
Albion from any and all loss, cost or damage as aforesaid resulting or arising directly or indirectly
at any time from any act done by said public service corporation. Said bond shall be in the amount
as determined by the of Trustees and shall be renewed annually, or as long as such person
continues to do business within the Village of Albion.
Notification required.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, public service corporations shall advise the Superintendent of
Streets, in writing, as soon as feasible but no later than 30 days prior to making any
obstructions or excavations of its intention to do so, except in case of emergency, in which
event notification shall be made as soon as possible prior to or after the emergency and need
not be in writing.
The Superintendent of Streets shall have the power and authority to direct any public service
corporation to coordinate its work with the village, its independent contractors or other
persons authorized to make excavations or work in streets, highways or public places.
Backfilling requirements. Excavations made by a public service corporation must be backfilled by it
with bank-run gravel or crushed stone, in accordance with the provisions of § 196-3 of this Article,
except that the pavement, curbing and other improvements must be restored by and at the
expense of said corporation.
§ 196-5. Application; certificate of insurance in lieu of bond.
Applications. Applications for making an excavation in or upon any public street, highway or other
public place within the Village of Albion will be accepted only if they are made by:
A public service corporation having on file with the Village Clerk a bond as required in § 196-4
of this Article.
Any other person whose application shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount as
determined by the Board of Trustees, approved as to form and sufficiency of sureties by the
Superintendent of Streets to be given by the person by or in whose behalf such consent or
permission is requested, indemnifying the Village of Albion against all loss, cost, damage or
expense sustained or recovered on account of any negligence, omission or act of the
applicant.
The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, accept a certificate of insurance in an amount
determined by it revocable only on 30 days' notice in lieu of the aforesaid bonds.
§ 196-6. Barriers and warning devices; unauthorized interference
prohibited.
Barriers and warning devices. Any person making or causing to be made an excavation or
opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall keep such excavation or opening
fenced and barricaded with substantial barriers to secure public safety and shall place and keep in
operation suitable warning devices to warn all persons of such excavation, opening or obstruction.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 212/376
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
B.
Interference prohibited. No unauthorized person shall remove or in any way interfere with any
such warning devices or barriers.
§ 196-7. Authority of village.
All work done pursuant to this chapter shall be done and performed subject to the supervision and
approval of the Superintendent of Streets.
Article II. Sidewalks
§ 196-8. Maintenance of sidewalks; construction requirements.
Maintenance; notice to perform work. The owner or occupant of every building or lot and the
owner or occupant of every vacant lot within the limits of the Village of Albion shall keep the
sidewalk in front of such premises in good and sufficient repair for the general use of the public.
The Superintendent of Streets, by a written or printed notice, may require the owner, occupant or
agent of any premises to construct or repair any sidewalk adjacent to said premises. Construction
of sidewalks shall be in accordance with the terms and specifications established by this Article.
Performance of work by village, assessment of costs. If the owner, occupant or agent shall fail to
construct or repair the sidewalk within the time provided in said notice, the Superintendent of
Streets shall cause the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired, and such costs may be imposed
and collected against the property affected in the same manner as provided by the law for the
collection of delinquent village taxes.
Construction requirements for new or replacement sidewalks.
All replacement sidewalks shall be of concrete having a minimum thickness of four inches of
concrete and a minimum width equal to the width of the sidewalk adjacent to the repaired
section or sections.
All new sidewalks shall be of concrete having a minimum thickness of four inches of concrete
and a minimum width of 42 inches. There is a four-foot-block length maximum, and an
expansion joint must be in place a minimum of every 20 feet. The concrete mixture must be a
minimum three-thousand-five-hundred-pound-per-square-inch (equal to a six-bag mix)
strength with No. 1 stone. Four-thousand-pound-per-square-inch (equal to a six-and-one-halfbag
mix) strength with No. 2 stone is recommended.
Sidewalks across driveways shall be a minimum of six inches in depth.
Wire mesh shall be used according to good, standard sidewalk construction practices.
A subbase of four inches of gravel is recommended.
§ 196-9. Responsibilities of owners; lien.
Sidewalks so installed shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Village of Albion, New
York, by its Superintendent of Streets, and, until so approved, the owner shall not have fulfilled his
duties under the terms of this chapter.
Within five days of the installation of said sidewalk, the owner shall notify the Village of Albion
Superintendent of Streets of the same and request at said time the inspection and approval of said
sidewalk.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 213/376
C.
D.
A.
B.
The owner of any public sidewalk within the Village of Albion shall keep the same in good repair,
and, if he or she fails to do so, the Superintendent of Streets shall notify said owner, in writing, by
mail, addressed to his address as shown by the village assessment rolls, demanding that said
owner shall cause the sidewalk to be repaired to conform to the requirements of this chapter within
30 days of the receipt of the notice. Upon the failure of said owner to repair such sidewalk within
said period of time, the Village of Albion, New York, may then repair said sidewalk at the owner's
expense, and the Village Clerk shall bill said owner by mail for the reasonable expenditures
incurred by said village in making said installation.
Not later than the 14th day of January of each year, the Village Clerk shall submit to the Board of
Trustees of said village a report showing the names of any owners who have failed to pay any bill
rendered to said owners pursuant to Subsection C hereinbefore during the last 12 months,
together with the amount of said unpaid bills, and the Board of Trustees, upon receiving said
report, shall direct that said unpaid amounts be assessed against the real property of said owner
which abuts the public streets, as of the following June 1, and shall become a lien against said
real property at said time and shall be collected along with the current village taxes.
§ 196-10. Obstructions.
No person shall obstruct, or cause or permit to be obstructed, any sidewalk or crosswalk in the village,
by placing thereon any boxes, barrels, goods, wares, merchandise or other obstruction of any kind or
nature or suspending any sign, goods, wares or merchandise across or over any walk within eight feet
of the same except temporarily when loading or unloading a vehicle.
§ 196-11. Building materials on sidewalks; enclosed
passageways.
No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any public street, lane, alley or sidewalk any
stone, brick, plank, timber, lumber or other building material, without the written permission of the
Board of Trustees; provided, however, that such permission shall not be for a period longer than three
months, nor shall such permission authorize the obstruction of any sidewalk or crosswalk unless an
enclosed passageway is constructed and subject to such other terms and conditions as the Board of
Trustees may establish to safeguard the public and to minimize the interference of the public in the use
of such street or other passageway.
Article III. Bicycles
§ 196-12. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 196-13. Riding on sidewalks.
No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within the business districts on Main Street and on
Bank Street between Liberty Street and Ingersoll Street.
No person 15 or more years of age, other than newsboys on delivery routes, shall ride a bicycle
upon any other sidewalk in the village.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 214/376
A.
(1)
B.
§ 196-14. Yielding to and passing pedestrians.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon any sidewalk or roadway, such person shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
Article IV. Notification of Defects
§ 196-15. Prior notice required.
Pursuant to Article 6, § 6-628 of the New York State Village Law, no civil action shall be maintained
against the village for damages or injuries to persons or property sustained in consequence of any
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous
or obstructed or for damages or injuries to persons or property solely in consequence of the existence
of snow or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert unless written notice of
the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition or of the existence of snow or ice, relating to
the particular place, was actually given to the Village Clerk and there was a failure or neglect within a
reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of, or to cause the snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise safe.
Article V. Stone Curbing
[Added 6-10-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 196-16. Requirements for state routes.
The Village of Albion shall require that any curbing being replaced or installed new, along the lengths
of State Route 98 and State Route 31 from village line to village line, must be of a stone material.
Chapter 200. Trees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-11-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 200-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of both the public citizenry
and the trees in the Village of Albion by establishing standards and regulations to control planting,
planning, removal, maintenance, protection of the trees and shrubs within the public rights-of-way
and public land areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, maintenance and protection
practices and by eliminating and guarding against dangerous conditions which may result in injury
to persons using the public areas of the Village, and by promoting the enhancement and natural
beauty of the Village, as well as to prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, street,
sidewalk or other public property, and to guard all trees and shrubs within the Village against the
spread of disease or pests.
The Village Board of Trustees determines these tree standards and regulations are reasonably
necessary and desirable for the following reasons:
Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for the survival of mankind;
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 215/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
A.
B.
Trees appreciably reduce the ever-increasing and environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide
content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air;
Trees play an integral role in neutralizing wastewater which passes from the surface to lower
groundwater aquifers;
Trees through their root systems stabilize the soil and play an important and effective part in
Village-wide soil conservation, erosion control and flood control;
Trees are essential and an invaluable physical and psychological addition to the Village,
making life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling both air and land, reducing
noise levels and glare, and breaking the visual monotony of development of land;
Trees provide wildlife habitat and play other important ecological roles;
The protection of trees within the Village of Albion is not only desirable, but essential to the
present and future health, safety, and general welfare of all the citizens of Village of Albion;
Some tree species are more beneficial than others as necessary contributors to the Village's
environment and it is not necessary to protect each and every tree in order to attain the public
benefit of a tree protection and replacement ordinance.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all trees and shrubs presently or hereafter planted in
or upon any public area which shall endanger the life, health or safety of persons or property.
§ 200-2. Applicability; enforcement.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to all trees, plants, and shrubs located on
public property, including Village-owned rights-of-way, parks, or other public lands within the
Village, and also to any development or circumstance which has the potential to adversely impact
public trees.
It shall be the duty of the Village Code Enforcement Officer, in consultation with the
Superintendent of Public Works, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 200-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABUTTER
One whose property touches or adjoins along a border, or with a projecting part, the property of
another.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE
The designated agency of the Village of Albion under whose jurisdiction the trees, shrubs, bushes
and all other woody plants fall.
DRIPLINE
The area directly below the canopy of the tree out from the trunk to the greatest extent of the
branches.
LARGE TREES
Those species which habitually or at maturity attain a height of 45 feet or more.
MEDIUM TREES
Those species which habitually or at maturity attain a height of 30 to 45 feet.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 216/376
NOTICE
A written or verbal announcement as given by authority of the Village.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any
kind.
PROPERTY OWNER
The person owning such property as shown by the Tax Assessor's records, Village of Albion,
unless proof to the contrary is available.
PUBLIC HAZARD
A condition of any tree, shrub, bush or other woody plant, or any substantial portion of a tree,
shrub, bush or woody plant, which constitutes a hazard to life and property or harbors insects or
disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees, shrubs, bushes or woody plants within
the Village.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
All property owned, leased, or occupied by the Village of Albion or any of its administrative
agencies or departments.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The entire width between the dedicated boundaries of all public streets, roads, boulevards, alleys,
and includes all sidewalks and public parking strips located within any such boundaries.
PUBLIC TREES
All trees, shrubs, bushes, and woody vegetation on public property, including Village parks and
rights-of-way.
SMALL TREES
Those species which habitually or at maturity attain a height of 30 feet or less. Such trees shall be
planted where three-phase and single-phase electrical wires exist.
STREET or HIGHWAY
The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
STREET TREES
Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying within public right-of-way of all
streets, avenues, or ways or public property within the Village.
TOPPING
The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within a tree's crown
to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
WOODY VEGETATION
Trees, shrubs, plants and any other vegetation with a woody stem.
§ 200-4. Creation and establishment of Village Community Forest
Advisory Board.
There is hereby created and established a Village Community Forest Advisory Board for the Village of
Albion, which shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of Orleans County and the greater
Albion area, with the Code Enforcement Officer and the Superintendent of Public Works serving as ex
officio members.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 217/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 200-5. Term of office.
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be five years, except that the term of
the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only one through five years for each member. In
the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be
appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 200-6. Compensation.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 200-7. Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually
to the Village Planning Board and Village Board of Trustees and, upon their acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive Village tree plan.
The Board shall provide advice and counsel the Albion Village Planning Board with regard to any
site plan and/or site plan review of which tree plantings are a part, including but not limited to the
review of proposed tree plantings and landscaping, and recommendations for appropriate tree
size, placement, and species in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter.
The Board shall promote and supervise the establishment of a tree inventory for street and park
trees. The inventory shall be updated in conjunction with the Department of Public Works, with the
results of ground inspections every three years.
The Board, when requested by the Board of Trustees, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
§ 200-8. Operation.
The Village Community Forest Advisory Board shall hold regularly scheduled meetings every
other month for the purpose of conducting business as set forth in this section. Should the
business of carrying out the duties and responsibilities of this section require additional meetings,
the Village Community Forest Advisory Board may hold special meetings as needed at the call of
the Chairperson or at the request of three or more members.
The Board shall choose its own officers, i.e., Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary; make
its own rules and regulations annually at a reorganization meeting; and shall keep minutes of its
proceedings. A majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
any business as set forth in this section.
In accordance with § 74.2 of Article 4 of the Public Officers Law, a member of the Village
Community Forest Advisory Board having a conflict of interest shall abstain from any discussion or
voting on that matter.
The Village Community Forest Advisory Board may request and obtain any advice or opinions on
the law relating to any matter before the Board from the Village Attorney, and require the Village
Attorney to attend its meetings.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 218/376
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
The Village Community Forest Advisory Board may require the Village Code Enforcement Officer
and/or the Superintendent of Public Works to attend its meetings and present any facts relating to
any matter before the Board.
All meetings of the Village Community Forest Advisory Board shall be open to the public. The duly
elected Secretary of the Village Community Forest Advisory Board shall keep written minutes of
the proceedings of the Board at all meetings.
§ 200-9. Authority to plant or remove trees on public lands.
Trees planted on public property by adjacent property owners or others shall be selected and
located in accordance with §§ 200-9 through 200-14 of this chapter. Application shall be made to
the Village Community Forest Advisory Board and approval given prior to any planting. No person
shall plant any street tree except according to policies, regulations and criteria established
pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the Department of Public Works and any other applicable
utilities shall be consulted by the property owner before any planting.
All trees planted on public lands as specified by this section shall be located and planted with the
approval of the Village Community Forest Advisory Board, and under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works. In the performance of such work, consideration shall be given to
the following factors. These factors are determined to be of primary importance in maintaining the
Village forest.
Trees that must be removed shall be replaced by new planting, where feasible.
Wherever feasible, trees shall be planted near old and dying ones in anticipation of their
removal.
Unnatural regularity of spacing and arrangement shall be avoided.
Species selected may vary, depending on mitigating factors of the site as provided for in
§ 200-10.
Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be
lawful for the Superintendent of Public works to remove or cause removal of the same. The cost of
removal of said tree shall constitute a lien and charge upon the real property of the owner
responsible for such planting until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be collected
by the Village Treasurer in the manner provided by law for collection of taxes.
Notice of a determination to remove or cause removal of a tree planted or set out in violation of
this section shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer to the responsible property owner by
mail to the last known address as shown on the Village tax rolls. Such notice shall be made 10
days prior to any removal.
Appeal of a decision to remove a tree planted or set out in violation of this section may be made
by a property owner to the Village of Albion Board of Trustees. Appeals shall be made in writing
and submitted to the Village Clerk prior to the scheduled removal date. The Village Board of
Trustees shall use the criteria and regulations contained in §§ 200-10 through 200-14 of this
chapter to reach a decision in any appeal. A decision of any appeal shall be made within 60 days
of receipt by the Village Clerk.
§ 200-10. Tree species to be planted and planting requirements.
Before planting, all street trees must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works, the Village Code Enforcement Officer, and/or their official designee.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 219/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
F.
So the Village Community Forest Advisory Board can determine the tree requirements for the
proposed site, any person wishing to plant a tree under the provisions of this chapter shall submit
to the Village a brief site plan of the proposed planting which shall:
Provide a photograph of the proposed site on which the planting will occur;
Show clearly all existing trees in that immediate vicinity, noting location, species, diameter
and condition;
Note whether existing trees will be retained, removed or relocated;
Show location of utilities, driveways, street tree locations, and the size and species of
proposed street trees (see tree specifications).
The applicant shall further refer to the site assessment criteria and include as much information
based on these criteria as is possible when making an application in order to expedite the site plan
review process.
The Village Community Forest Advisory Board develops and maintains a list of appropriate and
desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on habitual growth and/or
mature height: small (under 30 feet), medium (30 to 45 feet) and large (over 45 feet). Efforts shall
be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree species. Lists of trees not suitable for planting will
also be created by the Village Community Forest Advisory Board. (See designated list
enumerating both appropriate and inappropriate trees, and Recommended Urban Trees: Site
Assessment and Tree Selection for Stress Tolerance, Urban Horticulture Institute Department of
Horticulture, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 2003.)
The selection of tree species shall be based on a site assessment. Overplanting of one tree
species can result in insect infestations and diseases, leading to the destruction of a large number
of trees in one area or even through the entire Village. The Village Community Forest Advisory
Board shall endeavor to limit any one species of tree to between 5% and 10% of a total number of
trees planted within the Village when reviewing a site plan. As a result, the Village's tree
population will be protected from widespread destruction due to insects and disease, ensuring a
long-lived and healthy urban forest.
A site assessment shall also consider tree requirements such as:
Hardiness zone.
Light conditions.
Heat.
Wind.
Soil pH.
Soil texture/type.
Soil compaction levels.
Soil drainage characteristics.
Salt levels from winter road spray.
Utility wires/poles.
Proximity to buildings, structures.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 220/376
(12)
(13)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Rooting space.
Underground utilities.
§ 200-11. Spacing.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 200-10
of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 15 feet;
medium trees, 25 feet; and large trees, 35 feet; except in special plantings approved by the Community
Forest Advisory Board and/or designed or approved by a landscape architect or arborist.
§ 200-12. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with
the three species size classes listed in § 200-10 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to
any curb or sidewalk than two feet for small trees, three feet for medium or large trees.
§ 200-13. Distance from street corners and fire hydrants.
No street tree shall be planted so as to obstruct the sight lines of vehicular traffic at any intersection or
corner. No street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fireplug.
§ 200-14. Utilities.
No street trees other than those species accepted as small trees by the Village Community Forest
Advisory Board may be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead three-phase or single-phase
electric utility wire.
§ 200-15. Public tree care.
The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs
within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
The Village Community Forest Advisory Board may remove or cause or order to be removed any
tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to
sewers, electric power lines, gaslines, waterlines, or other public improvement, or is affected with
an injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees
by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of said trees is in
accordance with §§ 200-9 through 200-14 of this chapter.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all property owners to maintain the grounds of public
rights-of-way abutting the owner's property, regardless of whether such property is developed.
This maintenance shall include watering as needed and keeping such areas free from weeds or
any obstructions contrary to public safety.
Property owners are encouraged to water Village street trees, whether newly planted or mature,
whenever said trees are deprived of their normal source of moisture. Such watering should be
continued during dry weather until the street tree becomes acclimated to the new environment.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 221/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 200-16. Pruning standards.
All tree pruning on public property shall confirm to the ANSI A300 standards for tree care operations
and be done by Village Department of Public Works or contractors authorized by the Village
Department of Public Works and approved by the Village Board.
§ 200-17. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or Village department to top any street
tree, park tree or other tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs
to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted,
where appropriate. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this
chapter at the determination of the Village Community Forest Advisory Board and/or Superintendent of
Public Works.
§ 200-18. Pruning and corner clearance.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the Village shall prune the
branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or
obstruct the view/sight lines of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of
13 feet above the street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Such owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The Village shall have the right to prune or remove any tree or
shrub on private property or when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from
a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at
intersections.
Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such
conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements.
A utility tree-trimming policy shall be reviewed by the utility company and the Village Community
Forest Advisory Board prior to any trimming by the utility company, to ensure proper trimming and
pruning will be done without excessive and undue loss to the crown of the tree.
§ 200-19. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the Village of Albion when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees
within the Village. The Code Enforcement Officer will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees by
mail to the last known address as shown on the Village tax rolls. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within 60 days of such notice.
In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the Village shall have the authority
to remove such trees. The Code Enforcement Officer will notify, in writing, the owner of such trees
by mail to the last known address as shown on the Village tax rolls. Such notification shall be
made 10 days prior to any removal. The cost of removing such trees shall constitute a lien and
charge upon the real property involved until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be
collected by the Village Treasurer in the manner provided by law for the collection of taxes.
Appeals of an order or decision to remove a tree under the provisions of this section may be made
by a property owner to the Village of Albion Board of Trustees. Appeals shall be made in writing
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 222/376
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
and submitted to the Village Clerk prior to the scheduled removal date. The Village Board of
Trustees shall use the definitions, regulations and requirements contained in this chapter to reach
a decision. A decision of any appeal shall be made within 60 days of receipt by the Village Clerk.
§ 200-20. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed a minimum of four inches below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
§ 200-21. Protection of trees.
In order to maintain the overall forest, reasonable efforts shall be made to replace trees that are
removed and to protect quality trees that are endangered. Trees removed by decision of the
Village Community Forest Advisory Board or by natural causes shall be replaced somewhere in
the forest on a one-for-one basis within one year, depending on the availability of sufficient funds.
The location and species of any replacement tree shall be determined by the Village Community
Forest Advisory Board.
Trees of desirable species and good health shall be protected from damage during construction,
sidewalk repair, utilities work above and below ground, and other similar activities. No person shall
without first obtaining a written permit from the Village Code Enforcement Officer:
Undertake any construction or development activity (including but not limited to the
excavation of any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, or the laying of pavement) within the dripline
or radius of 10 feet, whichever is greater, of any Village tree or shrub.
Move or park vehicles associated with any construction or development activity which may
damage or affect any tree or shrub on Village property.
The zone of protection shall include the ground beneath the canopy of the tree and shall be
enclosed with a substantial fence, frame, or box centered around the tree, not less than four feet
high. Unless the Superintendent of Public Works and the Village Community Forest Advisory
Board, for good cause, determine otherwise, all trees or shrubs on any public street or any other
Village-owned property directly impinging on any excavation or construction of any building,
structure or street work shall be guarded as follows:
For trees or shrubs with a crown spread of eight feet or less, a substantial fence, frame, or
box not less than four feet high and eight feet square shall surround the tree or shrub;
For trees or shrubs with a crown spread of over eight feet, a fence not less than four feet high
shall be placed at least at the tree or shrub's dripline or at a radius of a distance in feet from
the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches DBH (diameter breast height: four feet),
whichever is greater. All building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside this
barrier.
§ 200-22. Placing materials on public property.
No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the municipality any stone,
brick, sand, wood, steel, concrete, asphalt products or other materials which may impede the free
passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 200-23. Abuse or mutilation of trees on public lands.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 223/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
Under no circumstance shall any person cut, carve, transplant, top, or remove any public tree; attach
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any such tree; allow any gaseous,
liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come in contact with them; or to set fire or permit
any fire to bum when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
§ 200-24. Interference with Village Community Forest Advisory
Board.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Village Community Forest
Advisory Board or any of its agents while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds as
authorized in this chapter.
§ 200-25. Arborist's license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in planting or transplanting of a tree or trees
on public lands as defined in this section without first obtaining a written permit as a result of an
approval of a tree site plan review by the Village Community Forest Advisory Board.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning,
treating, or removing street, park, or public trees, bushes, shrubs, or woody vegetation on public
property without obtaining a written permit from the Village, the application of which being subject
to review by the Village Community Forest Advisory Board. Each applicant shall possess and
show proof of a current New York State Arborist License, be a certified nurseryman, or submit
written evidence of proficiency in the care of trees.
The permit fee shall be established from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
NOTE: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk. Said fees will be
placed in a dedicated fund for the purpose of reforestation efforts within the Village. No written
permit shall be required of any public service company, including electric utilities and their agents
and contractors, or Village employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors. Further, pruning, planting, removing or any other tree work done on public trees by
volunteers or Village employees under the supervision and operation of the Superintendent of
Public Works or Village Code Officer shall not require a permit under this section. Each permit
shall run for a period of no longer than one year from the date of issue.
Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death, and $100,000 property
damage, indemnifying the Village or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of
such endeavors as herein described.
§ 200-26. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Village Community Forest Advisory Board, Code
Enforcement Officer, or Superintendent of Public Works may, within 15 days of filing of the decision in
the Village Clerk's office, file a written appeal with the Village Board of Trustees for review of the
decision. Reviews shall be conducted based on the same record that was before the Village
Community Forest Advisory Board and use the same criteria. After review, the Village Board of
Trustees may reverse or affirm, or modify, or modify and affirm the action of the Village Community
Forest Advisory Board.
§ 200-27. Penalties for offenses.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 224/376
A.
B.
[1]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine payable to the
Village of Albion of not less than $125 and not more than $250 each day of the violation. No
penalty shall be assessed for failure to act during any notice period.
In addition, if, as a result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation, or
death of a tree, shrub, or other plant is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree,
shrub, or other plant shall be borne by the person in violation. The replacement value of trees and
shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the current edition of Valuation of Landscape
Trees, Shrubs, and Other Plants, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture, and/or
current market value.
Part IV: Law Enforcement Legislation
Chapter 206. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 6-13-1977 as L.L. No. 4-1977
(Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 59.
Bingo — See Ch. 210.
Games of chance — See Ch. 227.
§ 206-1. Open containers in public areas prohibited.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink from any container containing liquor, beer, wine
or other alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot,
park or other public area within the Village of Albion, New York.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 206-2, Presumptive evidence, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 206-2. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply in the event of a fair, picnic or other community gathering for
which special permission has been granted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion
specifically granting an exemption from the provisions of this Article.
§ 206-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 208. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 236.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 225/376
Article I. Dog Control
[Adopted 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977 (Ch. 18 of the 1974 Code); amended in its entirety 1-8-2003 by
L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 208-1. Title.
The title of this article shall be the "Dog Control Law of the Incorporated Village of Albion."
§ 208-2. Purpose.
The dogs in the Village of Albion have in some instances come or been allowed to cause annoyances,
damage to persons and property of others, and it appears further that dogs properly cared for serve a
useful purpose, the Village Board of the Incorporated Village of Albion enacts the following article to
preserve the relationship between a dog and its master and at the same time to protect the health,
safety and property of others from annoyance and damage caused by dogs.
§ 208-3. Authority; enforcement.
This article is enacted pursuant to Article 7 of the Agricultural and Markets Law of the State of New
York, together with any future modifications thereof. All provisions of said Article 7 are applicable and
incorporated herein except where modified hereby. The relevant portions of the Conservation and
Public Health Laws also apply, and enforcement of this article is intended by application of the Penal
Law.
§ 208-4. Definitions.
All of the terms defined in § 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall have the same meaning as
used herein unless specifically modified. For the purpose of this article, the terms as hereinafter used
are defined as follows:
AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS LAW
The Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York in effect during the life of this article.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
The person authorized by the Village Board from time to time, by resolution, to enforce the
provisions of this article. The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to draw on information and
obtain supporting affidavits for submission to the Village Justice Court.
CONFINED
A dog is securely confined or restrained when it is kept on the owner's premises either within its
building, kennel or other suitable enclosure or securely fastened on a chain, wire, or other
effective tether for such length or so arranged that the animal cannot reach or injure any person
on any adjacent premises or on any public street, way or place, or, if the animal is being
transferred by the owner, it is securely confined in a crate, or on a tether or in another container or
so restrained within an enclosed vehicle in a safe manner consistent with the dog's good health so
that it cannot be expected to escape therefrom (see Agriculture and Markets Law §§ 353 and 356,
Cruelty to animals).
DANGEROUS DOGS
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 226/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
In addition to dogs which attack a person, or attack, chase or worry a domestic animal as
provided for in § 121 of the Agriculture and Markets law, dangerous dogs shall include:
Any dog which chases, or worries any person so as to put the person in reasonable fear
of immediate bodily harm, provided that such person is peaceably conducting himself in a
place where he or she may lawfully be;
Any dog that presents a risk of physical injury or death to a human being or would
constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being or property if not kept under the
direct control of the owner.
Any dog providing protection or security to the premises upon which illegal activities are
occurring.
This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance
of their duties.
The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that, according to the records of either the Village
Animal Control or the Humane Society or of any law enforcement agency:
Has, without justification, bitten, attacked, endangered or inflicted physical injury on a
human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked has chased or menaced
a person upon the street, sidewalk or any public ground, provided that such actions are
attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by any
of the above-referenced authorities; or
Has more than once, and without justification, severely injured or killed a domestic animal
while off the owner's property; or
Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for
dog fighting.
A dog's actions shall be considered justified if such actions are inflicted upon a person who is
committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the dog's owner or custodian;
or committing, at a time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
dog's owner or custodian, or provoking, tormenting or physically abusing the dog. A dog's
actions shall be considered justified if such actions were inflicted upon an animal that initiated
an attack on it.
DOG
Any member of the species Canis familiaris, both male and female dogs.
DOG AT LARGE
Designates and describes each animal at all times when it is off the premises of the owner or is on
the premises of another without his consent unless effectively restrained in a manner where said
animal is in the immediate custody and control of the dog by an owner by a chain or leash not
exceeding six feet in length affixed to the collar or harness of the dog.
OWNER
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning or keeping a dog. In the event the
owner of any dog committing an infraction of this chapter shall be under the age of 18 years, the
head of the household in which said owner resides shall be deemed to have custody and control
of said dog and shall be responsible for any acts of said dog.
VILLAGE
The area within the appropriated limits of the Village of Albion.
§ 208-5. License and vaccination.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 227/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
All dogs within the Town and Village shall be identified, licensed and vaccinated in accordance
with Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, particularly § 109 thereof.
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained in the incorporated Village of Albion shall be kept licensed if
running at large and/or less than six months of age, and all owners must provide with all pertinent
alarm provisions incident to obtaining such licenses and the wearing of the license tags by a dog.
A license fee for each spayed or neutered dog shall be $6; the license fee for each unspayed or
unneutered dog shall be $15.
§ 208-6. Restrictions on dangerous dogs.
No person shall own or harbor a dangerous dog, unless such dog is at all times restrained and
controlled so as to prevent the attack of or injury of any person and so as to prevent such dog from
putting any person in reasonable fear of immediate bodily harm, provided that such person is feasibly
conducting himself in a place where he may lawfully be.
§ 208-7. Dangerous dog remedies.
Upon finding a dog to be a dangerous dog, the court may order the immediate destruction of the dog,
or, in the alternative, may order any or all of the following, for which failure to comply shall result in the
destruction of the dog and shall constitute a violation of this section by the owner.
Monetary penalty. The court may impose a penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 upon any
person found culpably negligent in failing to control or restrain a dangerous dog.
Leash. No person having charge, custody, control, or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow a
dog to exit its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a
leash not more than six feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on
a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of
controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash.
Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow a dog outside of
its enclosure unless it is necessary for a dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases,
the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such
muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision.
Confinement. Except when leashed or muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall
be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secured enclosure that is
suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent a dog from escaping. The
enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate
exercise room, light and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall meet the following requirements:
The structure must have secure sides and a secure top or all sides must be at least eight feet
high.
The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be
embedded not less than one foot into the ground.
The structure must be of such material and enclosed in such a manner that the dog cannot
exit the enclosure on its own.
Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio or in a part of a house or
structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog
shall be kept in a house or structure when screened windows or screened doors are the only
obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 228/376
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
Signs. The owner of a dangerous dog shall post in a prominent place on the premises a sign with
lettering at least two inches high and in a color contrasting the background stating "DANGEROUS
DOG ON PREMISES."
Liability insurance: surety bond. The owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the Dog Control
Officer proof that he or she has procured liability insurance or a surety bond of not less than
$100,000 covering any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog. The policy
shall contain a provision requiring that the Village be notified immediately by the agent issuing the
policy in the event that the insurance policy is cancelled, terminates or expires. The liability
insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the redemption of a dangerous dog. The dog
owner shall sign a statement attesting that he or she shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the
liability policy unless he or she ceases to own or keep the dog.
Notification of escape. The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the Dog Control Officer
immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at large. Such notification
shall also be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or a domestic animal.
Obedience training. The owner of a dangerous dog shall, at the owner's expense, contact an
obedience trainer for instruction and shall follow the trainer' s recommendation.
Neutering. The owner of a dangerous dog shall, at the owner's expense, have the dog spayed or
neutered to prevent the potential reproduction of similarly dangerous dogs.
Marking or implanting identification. The court shall require that all dangerous dogs shall be
marked or implanted with an individual means of identification, in a form deemed most appropriate
by the Dog Control Officer, if the immediate destruction of the dog is not ordered. This shall occur
prior to the release of the dog from animal control and shall be at the expense of the owner.
§ 208-7.1. Injuries caused by dangerous dogs; guard dogs.
Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSONAL OR PHYSICAL INJURY
Impairment of physical condition; or substantial pain.
Prohibitions.
No person who own or harbors a dog shall permit the dog to cause serious physical injury to
another person.
No person who has been found guilty previously of a violation under § 208-7 and who owns or
harbors a dog shall suffer or permit a dog to cause physical injury to another person.
No person who owns or harbors a dog who has been previously found to be a dangerous dog
shall suffer or permit the dog to cause physical injury to another person.
For purposes of Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) above, the owner or harborer of a dog who
causes serious physical injury or physical injury to another person shall be deemed to have
suffered or permitted such dog to cause injury by failure to leash, secure or control said dog.
Notwithstanding the penalties established elsewhere in this code, a person who violates this
§ 208-7.1 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for which the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed
$1,000 and/or imprisonment for a time period not to exceed one year.
The owner of any premises patrolled by any guard dog shall post a sign at each point of public
access with lettering in clear and concise English at least 2 1/2 inches high and in color
contrasting to that of the background stating that the premises are patrolled by a guard dog.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 229/376
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
C.
§ 208-7.2. Prohibited acts.
Running dog at large prohibited. No dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, muzzled or not muzzled,
shall be allowed to run at large on any street, sidewalk, lane or public avenue. It shall be unlawful
and an infraction hereunder for any owner of a dog hereinabove defined to permit a dog, whether
licensed or unlicensed, to be at large within the Village, including Mt. Albion Cemetery, unless
effectively restrained in the immediate custody and control of the owner or custodian of the dog by
a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length affixed to the harness or collar of the dog.
Nuisance prohibited. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk, or on any public property whatsoever, or on any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property.
Violations.
Any owner of a dog or any person who harbors a dog in the Village of Albion shall be in
violation of this article if such dog:
Engages in habitual loud howling or barking in such a manner to annoy any person other
than the person owning or harboring such dog.
Is a female in heat, not securely confined (enclosed) by the owner or person harboring
the dog.
Causes damage or destruction to property or otherwise commits a nuisance other than
on the premises of the owner of the person harboring the dog.
Is not in full compliance with Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, which includes
the wearing of a New York State identification tag any time the dog is off the owner's or
harborer's premises.
Any person who observes an animal committing a violation of any of the provisions of this
article may file in the Village of Albion Court a signed and sworn complaint, sworn to before
the Village Justice of the Village of Albion or the Village Police of the Village of Albion,
specifying in detail the fact of the alleged violation, and including the name and address of the
owner and other persons harboring said animal. Upon receipt by the Court of any complaint
against any conduct of any animal, the Justice of said Court must summon the alleged owner
or said person harboring said animal to appear in person before him or her at the designated
time at least three days subsequent to the service upon him or her of said summons, at which
time and place the person who is summoned shall admit or deny the information contained in
the complaint and, if he denies such information, a hearing shall be had at that time or an
adjourned time before the Justice of said Court. Service upon said owner or other person
harboring said animal of a summons shall be made in the same manner as service of a
summons in a civil action in civil court as prescribed by the laws of the State of New York. If,
after such hearing, the Justice hearing the same shall find that the animal complained of had
committed a violation of any one of the provisions set forth in this article hereinabove or if said
person summoned admits the allegations of the complaint, the Justice may fix a civil penalty
not to exceed $1,000.
§ 208-7.3. Animals in heat.
Every owner of or person harboring a female dog in heat shall confine the animal during such period in
or on the premises of the owner or other person harboring such animal.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 230/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 208-7.4. Seizure of dog at large.
Any dog found at large and not under effective restraint as required hereunder may be seized by
any duly appointed Animal Control Officer, Assistant Animal Control Officer, peace officer or duly
authorized officer or representative of the Incorporated Village of Albion, or the American Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and confined and impounded in a pound designated by
the Village. Any dog so found at large not under effective restraint that cannot be safely seized
may be destroyed by such Animal Control Officer, Assistant Animal Control Officer, peace officer
or any other duly authorized officer. The person seizing the animal shall take any dog so found at
large which is wounded and in need of emergency veterinary care for such care as soon as
possible.
The officer seizing any dog pursuant to this article shall forthwith report such seizure to the Police
Department, which shall keep a record of the name of the officer, the time and the date of such
seizure, a description of the dog and license tag number, if any, and of the structure and
disposition of the dog thereafter.
If the dog seized bears a license tag, the officer seizing such dog shall ascertain the name of the
owner and give immediate notice to such owner by personally serving upon him or her or upon an
adult member of the family notice, in writing, stating the dog has been seized and will be
destroyed unless redeemed within the period herein provided.
The owner of a dog at large so seized may redeem the dog within five days by paying to the
Village Clerk the sum of $25 as a cost of seizure and in addition thereto the cost of feeding and
caring for such dog for the first violation; or by paying the sum of $50 as a cost of seizure and in
addition thereto the cost of feeding and caring for such dog as a second violation hereof by such
owner within a period of six months; or by paying the sum of $100 as a cost of seizure and in
addition thereto the cost of feeding and caring for such dog for a third subsequent violation thereof
by such owner within a period of six months.
If any dog seized is not redeemed within the time as herebefore set forth, the owner shall forfeit all
title to the dog and the dog shall be sold or destroyed.
In case of an emergency or veterinary care was necessary at the time of seizure and said care
was provided pursuant to § 208-7.4A, the owner of his agent must pay the cost incurred there
before said dog may be redeemed.
§ 208-7.5. Village liability.
No liability shall be imposed upon the employees of the Incorporated Village of Albion for the
destruction or sale of any dog pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 208-7.6. Restriction on number of dogs.
It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than three dogs, six months or older, on any premises,
regardless of the number of the owners, except by a special permit issued by the Village Board of
Trustees with the favorable recommendation of the Planning Board. No such permit shall be issued if
the issuance thereof shall be inconsistent with the applicable provisions of the Code of the Village of
Albion.
§ 208-7.7. Euthanized dogs.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 231/376
In the event that it becomes necessary to euthanize a dog, the dog control officer or other law
enforcement officer shall arrange, through a veterinary or dog control officer, in their facilities, to
humanely euthanize and dispose of the carcass in accordance with § 370 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
§ 208-7.8. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of § 280-5 shall be deemed an offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. An appearance
ticket, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law, may be issued for any violation of this article and an
answer to such appearance ticket may be made by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, within five days of the violation as provided in the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State
of New York in lieu of personal appearance on the return date at the time and place specified in such
appearance ticket.
Article II. Livestock
[Adopted 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
§ 208-8. Certain animals prohibited.
No person shall keep, house or maintain any sheep, goat, cow, calf, horse, donkey, pony, steer or
swine on premises in the Village of Albion.
§ 208-9. Poultry and fowl.
No person shall keep, house or maintain any poultry or fowl in the Village of Albion.
§ 208-10. Seizure and redemption.
In addition to any other penalty for a violation of this Article, the Police Department of the Village is
hereby empowered to seize, pick up and confine in any proper place any cattle, horses, goats and
swine that shall be found at large in any street, park or public place. Any animal so seized and
confined may be redeemed by the owner upon his or her payment of all necessary expenses of
seizure, removal and confinement.
§ 208-11. Disposition of unclaimed animals.
Any animal so seized and confined which is not claimed and redeemed within five days from the date
of seizure shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
law provided therefor.
§ 208-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Chapter 210. Bingo
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 232/376
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as §§ 7-1, 7-2 and 7-9
of Ch. 7 of the 1974 Code, approved at referendum 3-18-1958. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 227.
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATIONS
Includes any bona fide religious or charitable organization or bona fide educational, fraternal, civic
or service organization or bona fide organization of veterans, volunteer firefighters or volunteer
ambulance workers which, by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution or act of the
legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more of the lawful purposes as
defined in § 476 of the General Municipal Law, provided that each shall operate without profit to its
members, and provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one or more of the
lawful purposes as defined in § 476 of the General Municipal Law for a period of one year
immediately prior to applying for a license under this chapter.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
BINGO OR GAME
Includes a specific game of chance, commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto," in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION
The State Racing and Wagering Board.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
LICENSE
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 210-2. Authorization.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
It shall be lawful for any organization, upon obtaining a license therefor as hereinbefore and hereinafter
provided, to conduct the game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Village of Albion, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and any
amendments thereto and the provisions of the Bingo Control Law.
§ 210-3. Sunday games.
Games of chance may be conducted under any license issued under this chapter on the first day of the
week commonly known as Sunday.
Editor's Note: This section was amended prior to its inclusion in this codification, and said amendment
was approved by referendum 6-30-1959.
Chapter 214. Checks, Fraudulent
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 2-13-1991. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 233/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
§ 214-1. Payment; penalties for offenses.
The Village of Albion will, effective immediately, begin charging anyone who issues a bad check to
the Village of Albion in payment of any taxes, water, sewer or any other goods or services a
penalty in the amount of $25.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The issuer of such a bad check shall pay, in cash, the original amount of the moneys due, plus the
penalty amount, within five business days of notification, or legal action will occur.
The village will refuse to accept checks from such person in the future for any obligations which
that individual may be indebted to the village.
Chapter 217. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 7-10-1996 as L.L. No. 4-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 217-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Curfew Law of the Village of Albion."
§ 217-2. Policy; purpose and findings.
Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Albion to minimize nocturnal crime,
juvenile delinquency and vandalism and to prevent the damage and destruction of both public and
private property.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the village and to maintain rule and order by prescribing, in accordance with prevailing
community standards, regulations concerning the presence of minors on streets, roads, highways,
public parks or other public areas of the village at night to reduce juvenile crime and vandalism, to
protect the children and minors of the village and to further family responsibility.
Findings. The Board of Trustees of the village hereby finds that:
There has been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally provided by certain
parents and guidance for minors, resulting in minors being involved in a wide range of
unacceptable conduct, including vandalism; noisy, rowdy and disturbing behavior; breaking
and entering; public drinking; littering; and harassment of village residents.
Significant numbers of minors have been congregating in the village after dark, causing
disturbances to residents.
Offensive activities of minors are not easily controlled by existing laws.
The sense of the community is that there is a proper time for the cessation of outdoor
activities of minors.
There is a need for a curfew for minors to achieve, under local conditions, the policy and
purpose herein stated.
Curfew regulations will meet special needs, will enable the community to better control streets
and public places, will be a significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency and will
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 234/376
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
enable the police to act reasonably and fairly to prevent the violations of laws by minors.
The curfew hours declared by this chapter take into consideration the danger hours for
nocturnal crime and for accumulations of minors with the potential risks incident to immaturity.
Curfew regulations in other communities have been a significant factor in reducing juvenile
delinquency.
Parental responsibility for the whereabouts and conduct of minors should be the norm; as
parental control increases, the likelihood of juvenile delinquency decreases.
§ 217-3. Definitions; word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings indicated:
KNOWINGLY
Includes knowledge of information which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to include
and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain a reasonable community standard of
parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was
indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
MINOR
Any person under the age of 18 years of age or, in equivalent phrasing sometimes employed
herein, any person 17 or less years of age.
PARENT
Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal
guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis or as a person to whom legal custody has
been given by court order.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any place to which the public has access, whether privately or publicly owned, including, but
not limited to, public streets, roads, thoroughfares, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks,
recreation or shopping areas, stores, cafes, restaurants, eating establishments, public
transportation facilities, vehicles used for public transportation, parking lots or any other public
building, structure or area.
REMAIN OR LOITER
To stay behind, to tarry or to stay on or upon a public place.
TIME OF NIGHT
Based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the village.
YEARS OF AGE
Continues from one birthday to, but not including, the day of the next so that 17 or less years
of age is equivalent to under 18 years of age.
The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the
singular; and words in the singular number include the plural.
§ 217-4. Establishment for minors.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 235/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a minor to be or loiter or remain in, on or upon a
public place within the village between the following hours (also known as the "curfew hours"):
Beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights and extending until 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.
Beginning at 10:00 p.m. on all other nights and extending until 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
§ 217-5. Exceptions and exemptions.
A minor in a public place during the curfew hours shall not be considered in violation of this chapter
when the minor is:
Accompanied by a parent of such minor.
Accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in
accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right to such exercise, provided that the minor has
in his possession a writing, signed by the minor and by a parent of the minor, with their home
address and telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be in a
public place during the curfew hours in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
writing.
With parental consent, in or on a public place in a case of reasonable necessity.
On the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from
the place where the minor resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given
permission for the minor to be there.
With parental consent, returning home from and within one hour after the termination of a schoolor
village-sponsored activity or an activity of a religious, voluntary, cultural or community
organization.
With parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged in normal travel or when the minor is engaged
in bona fide interstate travel beginning or ending in the village.
Engaged in or traveling to or from a place of employment.
Engaged on an errand involving a medical emergency or other emergency involving an immediate
and significant threat to life or property.
Seventeen years of age and has parental consent for the use by such minor of generally
designated public places for generally designated periods of time.
Authorized by a special permit from the Village Board carried on the person of the minor thus
authorized, as follows:
When necessary night time activities of a minor are inadequately provided for by the
provisions of this chapter, recourse may be had to the Village Board for a special permit as
circumstances warrant.
Upon the Village Board's finding of necessity for the use of a public place or places and with
written parental consent, the Village Board may grant a special permit, in writing, for use by
such minor of a specified public place or places and for specified periods of time as, in the
Village Board's judgment, may be necessary.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 236/376
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Such special permit may be revoked by the Village Board for good cause shown following a
hearing.
§ 217-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a parent knowingly to permit or by inefficient
control to allow a minor to be or loiter or remain in, on or upon a public place in the village during
curfew hours under circumstances not constituting an exception to or an exemption from or otherwise
beyond the scope of this chapter.
§ 217-7. Enforcement.
If a police officer reasonably believes that a person is in a public place in violation of this chapter,
the officer shall notify the person of such violation and shall require the person to provide his or
her name, address, telephone number and how to contact his or her parents. In determining the
age of the person and in the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate or drivers
license, the officer shall use his or her best judgment in determining age.
If the officer determines or has reason to believe that a person is in violation of this chapter, he or
she shall, if practicable, take the person to police headquarters, where a parent shall be
immediately notified and required to report to police headquarters and procure the person,
whereupon the parent shall be questioned to ascertain, within constitutional limits, the relevant
facts.
The officer shall file a written report.
The officer shall issue an appearance ticket or tickets as the circumstances require.
The minor shall be released to the custody of a parent.
If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the minor may be temporarily
entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will assume responsibility of caring for the
minor pending availability of a parent.
In circumstances where the procedures in Subsections B, E and F of this section are
impracticable, the officer shall comply with or cause compliance with the procedures in
Subsections A, C, D and H of this section.
In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, send to a parent written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent
violation will result in full enforcement of this chapter, including enforcement of parental
responsibility and of applicable penalties.
§ 217-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the provisions of this chapter shall be dealt
with in accordance with the procedures contained in § 217-7 herein and on each violation shall be
treated as a first violator.
Any minor between the ages of 16 and 18 years of age convicted for violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for the first
conviction, $100 for the second conviction and $250 thereafter or by a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days, or be required to perform community service, or any combination thereof.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 237/376
C. Any parent convicted for violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine or not more that $50 for the first conviction, $100 for the second conviction
and $250 thereafter or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or be required to perform
community service, or any combination thereof.
§ 217-9. Notice.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and of the curfew regulations established by it shall be posted,
from time to time, in, on or at such public or quasi-public places, as may be determined by the Chief of
Police, in order that the public may be informed of the existence of this chapter and its regulations.
Chapter 227. Games of Chance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 11-14-1977 as L.L. No. 1-1978
(Ch. 26A of the 1974 Code); approved at referendum 3-21-1978. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses, carnivals and parades — See Ch. 143.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 206.
Bingo — See Ch. 210.
§ 227-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Village of Albion."
§ 227-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION
An authorized organization as defined in Subdivision 4 of § 186 of the General Municipal Law.
GAMES OF CHANCE
A game of chance as defined in Subdivision 3 of § 186 of the General Municipal Law.
VILLAGE
The Village of Albion.
§ 227-3. Authorizations.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the Clerk of the Village of Albion,
conduct games of chance within the Village of Albion as provided in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law and as provided further in this chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted in
accordance with the general state law and with the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 227-4. Sunday games.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as Sunday, may be conducted
pursuant to this chapter and appropriate statute and regulation.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 238/376
§ 227-5. Enforcement.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
The Police Chief shall exercise control over and supervision of all games of chance conducted under
an appropriately issued license. Such officer shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 227-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State's office, following its
approval at referendum by a majority of qualified voters voting thereon at a general election held
pursuant to the provisions of § 24 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 231. Loitering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 1-10-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001.
This local law was adopted as Chapter 218 and has been renumbered for organizational purposes.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 217.
Noise — See Ch. 236.
Trespassing — See Ch. 259.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LOITER
To stand, lounge, congregate or remain, or to park or remain parked in a motor vehicle, at a public
place or place open to the public and to and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this
chapter. "Loiter" also means to collect, gather, congregate or be a member of a group or a crowd
of people who are gathered together in any public place or place open to the public and engage in
any conduct prohibited under this chapter.
PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
Any place open to the public or any place to which the public is invited, and in, on or around any
privately owned place of business, private parking lot or private institution, including places of
worship or any place of amusement and entertainment whether or not a charge of admission or
entry thereto is made. It includes the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas open to the public
of any store, office or apartment building, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property
not owned by or under the control of the person charged with violating this chapter, or, in the case
of a minor, not owned by or under the control of his parent or guardian.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any public street, road or highway, alley, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, or any
public resort, place of amusement, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant
thereto, school building or school grounds, public parking lot or any vacant lot.
§ 231-2. Prohibited conduct.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 239/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to loiter at, on or in a public place or a place
open to the public in such manner:
As to interfere with, impede or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
As to interfere with, obstruct, harass, curse or threaten or do physical harm to another
member or members of the public; or
That by words, acts or other conduct it is clear that there is a reasonable likelihood to result in
a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct or to cause annoyance, inconvenience or alarm
or to create a risk thereof.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined herein, at a public place or place open to the
public and to fail to obey the direction of a uniformed police officer or the direction of a properly
identified police officer not in uniform to move on, when not to obey such direction shall endanger
the public peace and safety.
§ 231-3. Lawful assembly not affected.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing or other lawful assembly.
Chapter 236. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 124.
Animals — See Ch. 208.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 241.
§ 236-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Noise Control Law of the Village of Albion."
§ 236-2. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village Board to prevent unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise and to reduce noise levels within the Village so as to preserve, protect and promote
the public health, safety and welfare and to foster convenience, peace and quiet within the Village by
the inhabitants and transients thereof. The Village Board finds that every person is entitled to have
maintained noise levels which are not detrimental to life, health and the enjoyment of property and that
excessive and unnecessary noise within the Village of Albion affects and is a menace to public health,
safety, welfare and the comfort of the people of the Village.
§ 236-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
DECIBEL (DB)
The practical unit of measurement of sound pressure level; the number of "decibels" of a
measured sound is equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the sound pressure of the
measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals); abbreviated "dB."
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 240/376
A.
B.
A.
NOISE
Any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare or
that would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, exceeding the limits as set
forth in this chapter.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER
Any member of the Police Department empowered to issue a summons for violation of this
chapter.
REAL PROPERTY LINE
Either the imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property
from another, or the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a
multidwelling-unit building.
SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS
Any apparatus or device for the making, reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other
sounds.
SOUND LEVEL
The sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound-level meter set for A-weighting;
"sound level" is expressed in dBA.
SOUND-LEVEL MEASURE
An instrument for the measurement of noise and sound.
UNNECESSARY
That which is not required by the usual circumstances.
WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL
The sound level, in decibels, reported as measured by a sound-level-measuring instrument having
an A-weighted network which discriminates against the lower frequencies according to a
relationship approximating the auditory sensitivity of the human ear. The level so read is
designated in dBA.
§ 236-4. Maximum sound levels.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source of sound on a particular
category of property or any public space or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound
level that exceeds the particular sound level limits set forth as follows: between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., 55 dBAs and between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., 45 dBAs; Holidays between June 1
and September 30, 45 dBAs, when measured anywhere outside the property line of the soundproducing
device.
[Amended 10-13-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004; 5-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the existence of unnecessary sound which tends to
injure, alarm, annoy, harass or disturb the peace or enjoyment of property of another.
§ 236-5. Prohibited acts.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in
violation of this chapter, but the enumeration herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
The use or operation of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or other machine or
device for the producing, reproducing or amplification of sound with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are voluntary listeners thereto. It
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 241/376
(1)
(2)
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[2]
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection if sound emanating from such
machine or device is:
Audible beyond the property line of the premises upon which it is being used, between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Audible at a distance of 50 feet beyond the property line of the premises upon which it is
being used, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb
the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. (For the purpose of this section, a "noise
disturbance from a barking dog" shall be defined as that created by a dog barking continually for
five minutes or intermittently for 10 minutes, unless provoked.[1])
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 208, Animals.
The use of any automobile, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, bus or vehicle in any manner as to
create loud and unnecessary noise.
The discharge into the air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion
engine or motor-vehicle engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety as determined by the noise control officer.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street or property adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, court or church while the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital or nursing home
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution.
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers in such a manner
as to create an unreasonable or unnecessary noise of unreasonable extent and duration.
The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention to any sale or display of merchandise by the creation of noise.[2]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 241, Peddling and Soliciting.
The sounding of any horn or signal device on any vehicle, motorcycle, bus or other device, except
as a warning signal pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 1 of § 375 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
The use of any radio apparatus, talking machine, loudspeaker, public address system or amplifier
attached thereto in such a manner that the loudspeaker shall cause the sound from such device to
exceed the level set forth in § 236-4 at the property line nearest the sound source.
The creation of any noise causes public inconvenience or alarm or disturbs the public's peace,
comfort and tranquillity.
§ 236-6. Sound devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any sound
device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place for commercial or
business advertising purposes or for any person to operate or drive any automobile, truck or other
vehicle for commercial or business advertising by means of any sound device or apparatus. The
use of any trade, business or corporate name or the name of any person, proprietor or vendor in
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 242/376
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
such commercial or business advertising shall be presumptive evidence that such advertising was
conducted by that person, business or corporation.
It shall be unlawful to operate any radio, apparatus, talking machine, loud-speaker, amplifier or
other sound-making device in any street, park or public gathering place in such a fashion as to
exceed a noise level set forth in § 236-4A. However, these levels will be measured 20 feet from
the sound-producing device.
[Amended 10-13-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004; 5-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
§ 236-7. Exceptions.
The following sounds shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter:
Sounds created by church bells or chimes.
Sounds created by any government agency by the use of public warning devices.
Sounds created by lawn mowers, snowblowers or other real property maintenance equipment.
Sounds created by public utilities in carrying out the operation of their franchises.
Sounds connected with sporting events of any public or private school, authorized carnival, fair,
exhibition or parade.
Sounds on private property which do not carry beyond the boundary lines of the property on which
they are created.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding sounds created in the exercise of trade, industry,
business or employment, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-13-2004 by
L.L. No. 5-2004.
§ 236-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 236-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the noise control officers.
Chapter 241. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 59.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
§ 241-1. License required; when allowed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business, occupation or activity (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "vending" or "to vend") of a hawk vendor, hawker, peddler, salesman,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 243/376
A.
B.
C.
canvasser or solicitor of goods, wares and merchandise as buyer or seller (hereinafter called "vendor"
or "vendors") in the public streets and places and from door to door within the corporate limits of the
Village of Albion, New York, on Sundays, holidays (as hereinafter defined) and prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. on any other day. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business,
occupation or activity of a vendor, hawker, peddler, salesman, canvasser or solicitor of goods, wares
and merchandise as buyer or seller in the public streets, places and from door to door within the
corporate limits of the Village of Albion, New York, on the days and during the times when such
vending is permitted as hereinabove mentioned without first applying for and securing a license
(hereinafter called a "vendors license") as hereinafter provided.
§ 241-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HOLIDAYS
Include New Year's Day, Good Friday, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
LICENSING OFFICER
The Village Clerk of the Village of Albion.
PERSON
Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, general-stock companies, societies and all other entities of any kind capable of
being sued. Each natural person employed as a vendor or solicitor is required to apply for and
obtain a license.
PUBLIC PLACE
A place other than private property.
SOLICITOR
Includes any person who goes from place to place or house to house or who stands in any street
or public place taking or offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise or for service to
be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing
whatsoever for future delivery.
VENDOR, HAWKER AND PEDDLER
Includes, except as hereinafter expressly provided, any person, either principal or agent, who,
from any vehicle or on any public street or public place or by going from house to house on foot or
from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or exposes for sale or barter
any goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 241-3. Application requirements.
An applicant for a license shall execute an application form at the office of the Village Clerk which
application form shall require the following:
The applicant's name, home, business and local address, if any.
A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's age, sex, height, weight,
complexion, color of hair and eyes and any other distinguishing physical characteristics.
The name and address or local principal office of the person, firm, organization or corporation, if
any, for or through whom or under whose auspices the applicant is authorized to conduct such
activity; if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and
addresses of the president, vice president, secretary and treasurer; or a statement that the
applicant is engaged in such activity solely on his own behalf.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 244/376
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
[1]
A brief description of the type or types of articles or services for which sales, purchases or orders
are to be solicited.
A statement as to the approximate amount to be collected by the applicant and whether in full or
partial payment.
The length of time during which the applicant intends to remain in the Village of Albion for the
purpose of engaging in such activity.
A statement whether any license similar to or like that provided for in this chapter was issued or
denied to the applicant within the current or prior calendar year, whether in the Village of Albion or
elsewhere, and, if issued, whether such license had been revoked, setting forth the reasons for
such revocation.
A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if
so, the place where, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor or
if the matter is pending.
Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business
authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
§ 241-4. Applicant to submit identification.
The applicant, at the time of executing such application, shall also submit identification satisfactory to
the Police Department, which shall contain a specimen of the applicant's signature. All applicants will
be fingerprinted and photographed by the Police Department.
§ 241-5. Investigation of applicant.
The Police Department of the Village of Albion shall make such investigation as it shall deem
necessary in connection with the issuance of such license.
§ 241-6. Issuance of license; fee.
The license fees payable upon the issuance of a vendor's license shall be for residents and
nonresidents of the village as set forth from to time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
The license hereunder shall be issued by the licensing officer for a term expiring December 31 of
the year in which it is issued to such persons as the licensing officer shall deem fit and proper for
such trade or occupation, after such investigation as the licensing officer deems necessary for the
public good. Any applicant who shall have been refused a license by the licensing officer may
apply to the Village Board of Trustees therefor at a meeting hereof, and the same may be granted
or refused by the Board.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village clerk.
§ 241-7. Suspension of license.
The licensing officer may suspend any such license for any reported violation of this chapter or other
sufficient cause shown until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees, and thereupon said license may
be revoked or continued by the Board. Written notice of such suspension, together with the grounds
thereof, and of the Board meeting shall be given to the licensed person by delivery to him or her in
person or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to his or her local address, if any, and if
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 245/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
none is given in his or her application, then to his or her home or business address. At such Board
meeting, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard. In the event that the license is revoked,
there shall be no return of the license fee.
§ 241-8. License nonassignable, renewal.
The license herein provided for is not assignable. It may be renewed at its expiration only upon the
execution and approval of a new application.
§ 241-9. Regulations.
The vendor shall have such license in his or her possession at all times and shall exhibit the same
at any time upon demand by any police officer, village official or the person approached by any
vendor.
A vendor shall not conduct activities in such manner as will interfere with the pedestrian or
vehicular use of the public streets and places.
He or she shall not directly or indirectly cause or permit the public streets and places to be littered
with papers, wrappings or other debris or refuse.
He or she shall not enter any house or building where there is posted on the front of the building or
premises a written notice stating that vendors are not desired, unless the vendor has received the
prior consent of the occupant thereof.
He or she shall make no false statements or misrepresentations in the course of his or her
activities and shall conduct himself or herself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner.
He or she shall not use any sound device, other than a bell or horn, the sound of which shall not
be of such volume as to be disturbing or offensive to the public, or shout or cry out for the purpose
of attracting attention to his or her wares or giving notice of his or her approach.
He or she shall not sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school property line
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days, except as permitted by the school
authorities as to time and place.
A vendor shall have in his or her possession at all times and shall exhibit upon demand of any
police officer, village official or any person approached by such vendor proper identification of
himself or herself, giving his or her name and address.
§ 241-10. Weighing and measuring appliances.
Any vendor carrying, keeping or using scales, measures or other appliances for weighing or measuring
shall first have the same inspected by the Sealer of Weights and Measures, and, if the latter shall find
such appliances correct and true, he or she shall issue his or her certificate to that effect, and such
certificate shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place. A vendor shall not carry, keep for use or use
any such appliances which shall not be correct and true and do not record and give the weight and
quantity claimed by said vendor.
§ 241-11. Exemptions.
The following transactions shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter, and no license or
license fee shall be required in the following cases, except that registration by completion of the license
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 246/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
application shall be required:
An honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces of the United States who is a cripple as a
result of injuries received while in the service of said Armed Forces.
A veteran of the Armed Forces of the United States and a surviving spouse of any such veteran
who shall have obtained a license from the Orleans County Clerk pursuant to the provisions of
§ 32 of the General Business Law of the State of New York. However, such person must present
the license issued by the County Clerk to the village licensing officer, who will issue a village
license without payment of any fee. Such person shall otherwise be subject to the requirements of
this chapter.
Vendors of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and persons who produce such
commodities.
Salesmen calling on and selling directly to governmental, business and commercial
establishments.
Salesmen duly licensed by the State of New York while engaged in the activity for which they are
licensed.
Minors 18 years of age or under engaged in providing such services as snow shoveling, grass
cutting, leaf raking, lawn clearing and other similar home services as an independent contractor.
Solicitations, sales or offers on behalf of a society, association or corporation organized and
operated exclusively for charitable, educational, civic, patriotic, benevolent, religious or
philanthropic purposes and not for pecuniary benefit, no part of the net earnings of which inure to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual which has a permanent office or place for the
conduct of its business within the Village of Albion, New York, when such solicitation, sale of offer
is carried out on behalf of such society, association or corporation by volunteers or persons
employed on an annual basis for fixed wage or salary.
Solicitations at the regularly appointed meetings or services in the regular place of worship or
exercises of any church, religious society, lodge, benevolent order or fraternity, labor union,
veterans' organization or political party, fire company or any branch thereof.
Sales conducted pursuant to statute or order of any court.
Persons having an established place of business within the village or their employees soliciting
orders from customers and delivering the same.
§ 241-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 242. Mobile Food Vendors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 3-11-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 242-1. Definitions.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 247/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MOBILE FOOD TRAILER ("MFT")
A commercially manufactured and/or fabricated trailer for the purpose of commercial food
preparation and sales and which is self-contained and is towed/transported from site to site via a
motorized vehicle, in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale or distribution.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE ("MFV")
A commercially manufactured, self-contained, motorized mobile food unit in which ready-to-eat
food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for service, sale or distribution.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDOR ("MV")
The owner of a mobile food trailer/mobile food vehicle or the owner's agent; hereinafter referred to
as "vendor."
§ 242-2. License required; when allowed.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or operate or permit to be
conducted or operated a mobile food trailer or mobile food vehicle within the Village of Albion
without first obtaining a license from the Village of Albion Clerk's office. All licenses shall be
nontransferable. The mobile food vendor shall exhibit the same at any time upon demand by the
Village of Albion Police Department or any other officer of the Village. Said license shall be
obtained in full at least two days before the first operation of the mobile food vending business.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food vehicle on private property without first
having obtained a valid license as prescribed in this section. Operation of a mobile food vehicle on
private property shall be regulated in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Village Code.
*All MFTs/MFVs/MVs involved with a special event approved by the Village of Albion Board of
Trustees are exempt from obtaining a license.
§ 242-3. Application requirements.
The application for the license shall include a statement verified by the person or persons who are to
conduct such mobile food vending business, and, if a corporation, by the president and treasurer
thereof, containing the following information:
The full name and address of each of such persons and, if a corporation, the state under the laws
of which it is organized, the exact location of its principal office and place of business and the
names and addresses of its officers.
The location(s) within the Village of Albion where such mobile food vending business is to be
conducted.
The date on which such person intends to begin doing business within the Village of Albion.
Proof of all applicable licenses, i.e., New York State Health Department, inspections and
insurance, including liability insurance for the MFT or MFV.
A brief description of the firm and the kinds of food the applicant desires to sell.
Proof demonstrating acknowledgement and consent of the property owner to permit the vendor to
operate on the site, signed by the property owner to include the following:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 248/376
(1)
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A site plan, drawn to scale and with dimensions, indicating the location of all existing
buildings, structures, driveways, parking spaces, and improvements, and the location or areas
where the proposed vending activity, structures and improvements related to the vending
activity will be located upon the site.
§ 242-4. Issuance of license; fee.
The fee for the solicitor's permit required by this chapter shall be as determined by the Village of
Albion Board of Trustees. The amount of the fee may be amended from time to time by resolution.
[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is located in the office of the Village Clerk.
Any applicant who shall have been refused a license by the licensing officer may apply to the
Village Board of Trustees therefor at a meeting hereof, and the same may be granted or refused
by the Board.
§ 242-5. Suspension of license.
Any license may be revoked by the Village of Albion Police Department or any other officer,
investigator, or other person designated by the Village, if the holder fails to comply with any of the
sections contained in this chapter, or if it is found that the holder has made a false statement in their
application.
§ 242-6. License nonassignable; renewal.
The license herein provided for is not assignable. It may be renewed at its expiration only upon the
execution and approval of a new application.
§ 242-7. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful for a mobile food trailer or a mobile food vehicle to park, stand or operate on a
public street or place which is adjacent to or within a fifty-foot radius, or a thirty-foot radius if on
private land, of the nearest edge of any building or section of a building comprising a licensed food
establishment, excluding any patio, awning or temporary enclosure attached thereto, the kitchen
of which is open for serving food to patrons. This requirement may be waived if the application is
submitted together with the written consent of the proprietor of the adjacent licensed food
establishment.
Every MFT/MFV/MV must at all times carry on the vehicle a measuring device with a capacity of
not less than 50 feet as a condition of its permit.
All mobile food trailer and vehicle vendors must abide by all parking and vehicle and traffic laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations at all times, including any hour maximum duration requirements
in force and effect at that time and location.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile food trailer or mobile food vehicle to operate within 50 feet of the
boundary line of any fair, carnival, circus, festival, special event or civic event that is sanctioned or
licensed by the Village of Albion.
All signage associated with a mobile food vendor must be permanently affixed to the mobile food
vehicle. One additional sandwich sign is licensed as long as the additional sign in no way
obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 249/376
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
All mobile food trailers and mobile food vehicles shall be equipped with trash receptacles of a
sufficient capacity that shall be changed as necessary to prevent overflow or the creation of litter
or debris.
A mobile food vendor shall not conduct activities in such a manner as will interfere with a
pedestrian or vehicular use of the public streets and places.
A mobile food vendor shall not directly or indirectly cause or permit the public streets and places to
be littered with papers, wrappings or any other debris or refuse.
A mobile food vendor shall make no false statements or representations in the course of his
activities and shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner.
All MFTs/MFVs/MVs shall not use or blow upon or ring any sound instrument or thing or shout or
cry out for the purpose of attracting attention to his wares or giving notice of his approach.
A mobile food vendor shall not sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any school days.
No person shall conduct MFT/MFV/MV business within the Village of Albion at any place or places
other than that named in the statement filed with the Village of Albion Clerk's office pursuant to
§ 246-3 herein.
It shall be unlawful for any MFT/MFV/MV to conduct or operate a mobile food trailer or mobile food
vehicle on holidays, and prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any other days. Holidays include
New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
All mobile food vendor licenses are null and void during the Albion Strawberry Festival.
§ 242-8. Weighing and measuring devices.
Any vendor carrying, keeping or using scales, measures or other appliances for weighing or measuring
shall first have the same inspected by the County of Orleans, Weights and Measures; and if the latter
shall find such appliances correct and true, he shall issue his certificate to that effect, and such
certificate shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place. A vendor shall not carry, keep for use or use
any such appliances which shall not be correct and true and do not give a record and give the weight
and quality claimed by said vendor.
§ 242-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine not less than $250 or to exceed $500, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or
both.
Chapter 247. Skates and Skateboards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 59.
Noise — See Ch. 236.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 250/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
§ 247-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INLINE SKATES
Shoes, skates or footwear with one or more rows of roller wheels.
REFLECTIVE CLOTHING
Any shirt, vest or jacket or any other readily visible piece of apparel equipped with a reflective
surface.
ROLLER SKATES
Shoes, skates or footwear with two or more rows of roller wheels.
SKATEBOARD
A narrow board of wood, plastic, fiberglass or similar material with roller skates or other types of
wheels attached to each end and used for gliding or moving on any hard surfaces, without a
mechanism or other devise for steering while being used, operated or ridden.
§ 247-2. Restricted locations.
No person shall operate a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates upon the public streets (including
the entire paved and improved surfaces thereof, including gutter areas, from curb to curb, where curbs
exist) or sidewalks within the business districts on Main Street between East Avenue and the
Erie/Barge Canal, and on East Bank Street and West Bank Street between Liberty Street and Ingersol
Street.
§ 247-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall use or operate a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates upon any public streets
(including the entire paved and improved surfaces thereof, including gutter areas, from curb to curb,
where curbs exist) sidewalks or any public lands within the Village of Albion:
In a careless manner without due caution and circumspection;
In a manner which endangers or in any manner which creates a risk or danger to any person or
property; or
In any manner which impedes or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 247-4. Precautions.
Every person operating a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates shall operate the same in strict
observance of Article 34 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law relating to the operation of
bicycles and play vehicles, except as to those provisions which by nature can have no application.
The operator of a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates emerging from an alley, driveway or
building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the right of way to all pedestrians on said
sidewalk.
Whenever any person shall operate a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates upon a sidewalk,
such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 251/376
D. No person shall operate a skateboard, inline skates or roller skates at nighttime unless he or she
is wearing reflective clothing which shall be visible from a distance of not less than 300 feet from
the front, side and rear when directly in front of the lawful beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
§ 247-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 254. Taxicabs
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 60 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
§ 254-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings given to them by this section.
DRIVER'S LICENSE
Permission granted by the Board of Trustees to any person to drive upon the streets of said village
any licensed taxicab.
OPERATOR
Any person owning or having control of the use of one or more taxicabs used for hire upon the
streets of the said Village of Albion, or engaged in the business of operating a taxicab.
STREET
Any street, alley, avenue, land or public place in the Village of Albion.
TAXICAB
Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for hire, whether the same be
operated from a taxi stand or subject to call from a garage, residence or otherwise operated for
hire, except vehicles subject to the provisions of the Transportation Law or used by undertakers in
the conduct of their business.
TAXICAB DRIVER
Any person who drives a taxicab whether such person be the owner of such taxicab or employed
by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB LICENSE
Permission granted by the Board of Trustees to any person to operate or keep for hire any taxicab
in said village.
§ 254-2. General requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay within the limits of the
Village of Albion any taxicab without first having obtained and paid for a license to operate or keep
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 252/376
[1]
[1]
such taxicab for pay or hire, and having the same in force and effect, under the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 254-3. Driver's license required.
No person shall drive a taxicab and no person shall permit anyone to drive a taxicab within the limits of
the Village of Albion without such driver having first obtained and paid for and having in force and
effect a driver's license under the provisions of this chapter. Applications for taxicab driver's licenses
shall be made on forms supplied by the Board of Trustees and shall be approved, in writing, by the
Chief of Police. Such approval or disapproval shall be subject to review and final decision by the Board
of Trustees.
§ 254-4. Terms and fees of drivers' licenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Drivers' licenses shall be issued to expire on April 1 following the date of issue. The fee of such license
shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.[1]
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 254-5. Taxicab licenses required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a taxicab upon the streets of the
Village of Albion without having first obtained, paid for and having in force and effect a taxicab license
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 254-6. Terms and fees of taxicab licenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Taxicab licenses shall be issued to expire on April 1 following the date of issue. The fee for such
license and for each additional taxicab owned or operated by the same applicant shall be as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.[1] No license shall be issued for a taxicab
unless the application is accompanied by a certificate of a duly qualified mechanic that the said taxicab
is equipped according to the laws of the State of New York, is in good mechanical repair and is in safe
operating condition; and a new certificate as above required shall thereafter be furnished as to any
taxicab to which a license has been issued whenever the Chief of Police or the Board of Trustees shall
require it. The Chief of Police shall have the right and at any time when in his or her judgment it is
advisable to make his or her own inspection of any such taxicab or direct such an inspection by his or
her own designee. A license shall be refused to, or, if already issued, shall be revoked or suspended of
any vehicle found to be unfit or unsuited for patronage.
Editor's Note: A fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 254-7. Issuance of licenses.
All licenses under this chapter shall be authorized by resolutions of the Board of Trustees and shall be
issued over the signatures of the President (Mayor) and Clerk of the village and only upon payment of
the fees therefor.
§ 254-8. Payment of fares.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 253/376
[1]
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may
refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to
convey any orderly person or persons upon a request anywhere in the village, unless previously
engaged or unable to do so.
§ 254-9. Transfer.
No license obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be transferred but shall be and
remain for the proper use and benefit of the parties obtaining same; provided, however, that a taxicab
license may be transferred from one vehicle to another by the same owner upon proof being submitted
to the Village Clerk and satisfactory to him or her that the vehicle from which said license is transferred
is no longer owned or used as a taxicab in the Village of Albion, but only upon an endorsement of such
transfer upon said taxicab license.
§ 254-10. Employment of taxi by more than one person or party.
No license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall allow or permit any person to ride in a
taxicab with a person or persons who have previously engaged such taxicab without the consent of
such person or persons.
§ 254-11. Change of address.
Any licensee under this chapter shall, within three days after a change in his or her residence address,
notify the Village Clerk of his or her new address.
§ 254-12. Revocation of license.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked for cause at any time, and sufficient cause
shall include any violation of this chapter and a conviction for violation of any other law of the Village of
Albion or law of the State of New York, except the parking-meter laws of said village.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 254-13. Rates.
[Amended 9-8-1975 by L.L. No. 7-1975]
A suitable rate card shall be conspicuously posted in the interior of every taxicab. Every licensed
taxicab shall be provided with a printed receipt pad, and said licensed driver shall, whenever requested
by a passenger, give him or her a receipt for the fare.
§ 254-14. Parking limitations; taxicab stands.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
No taxicab shall stand or park on the streets in the Village of Albion, New York, when not in use,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., except on such streets or portions of streets as shall be
designated as taxicab stands by the Board of Trustees and no taxicab, when in use, shall stand or park
upon the streets in said village in excess of 15 minutes at any time, except on such streets or portions
of streets designated as taxicab stands. Operators who do not wish to use the streets or portions of
streets designated by the Board of Trustees as taxicab stands must provide a private stand approved
by the Board of Trustees, and such taxicabs must be kept on such stands at all times when not in use.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 254/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 254-15. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 259. Trespassing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion: Art. I, 9-11-1991 as L.L. No. 6-
1991 (Ch. 17 of the 1974 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Article I. Village Garage Area
[Adopted 9-11-1991 as L.L. No. 6-1991 (Ch. 17 of the 1974 Code)]
§ 259-1. Access restricted.
Access to the village garage work areas and to the areas between the garage work areas and the
west, north and east boundaries of the land owned by the Village of Albion, except for public
highways therein if any, is limited to village employees and others who are authorized access, in
writing, by the Superintendent of Streets or his or her designee.
Persons entering the premises for the purpose of participating in an organized solid waste
recycling program at such time as the recycling facility is open and manned and signs are in place
indicating the facility is open shall be deemed authorized persons so long as they comply with the
rules and regulations of the recycling facility.
No person who is not an authorized person shall be in such restricted access area at any time.
The Village Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, adopt by resolution such further rules and
regulations to control such restricted area access.
Signs shall be posted and maintained at each entrance to the area around the garage to inform
the public of the restricted access. Such signs shall be of such size and design and placed in such
locations as to provide adequate notice.
§ 259-2. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a village trespass and be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $250 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 263. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion at time of adoption of Code 8-14-
1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 255/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 263-1. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York.
The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for
the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE
The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the absence of a curb, the lateral boundary
line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS
New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD
Whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the
time standard which is in current use in this state.
§ 263-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Streets Department shall install and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under
the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate, warn or
guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of
§ § 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 263-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations adopted under the provisions
of this chapter, there is hereby established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed
a part of the section to which they refer. All regulations shall be adopted with reference to the
appropriate schedule as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance with provisions of the Village
Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by an officer or agency authorized by the Board of
Trustees to adopt regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 263-4. Traffic control signals.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 256/376
A.
B.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of those streets described in
Schedule I (§ 263-37), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-5. Speed limits.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any public highway within the
corporate limits of the Village of Albion at a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour. This
section shall not apply to ambulances, fire vehicles or police vehicles when on emergency trips.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule II (§ 263-38), attached to and made a part of this chapter, is hereby established at the
rate of speed indicated.
§ 263-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in Schedule III (§ 263-39),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the areas described in said schedule, during school
days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 263-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 263-40), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 263-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 263-
41), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the locations described in
Schedule VI (§ 263-42), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the
locations described in Schedule VII (§ 263-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-11. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 263-44), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on
each street intersecting the through street.
§ 263-12. Stop intersections.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 257/376
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 263-45), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 263-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 263-46), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 263-14. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
[Amended 1-9-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of the gross weights indicated, with the
exception of agricultural vehicles used in the furtherance of agricultural activities, are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 263-47), attached to and made part of
this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 263-15. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or other tractor, trailer or tractortrailer
combination, having a gross weight in excess of that herein respectively prescribed, upon any of
the streets or portions thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 263-48), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on that street.
Article III. Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 263-16. Application of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 263-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule XIII (§ 263-49), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-18. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIV
(§ 263-50), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-19. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XV
(§ 263-51), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-20. Parking prohibited certain hours.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 258/376
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVI (§ 263-52) of any day,
unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-21. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII (§ 263-53) of any day,
unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-22. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVIII (§ 263-54) of any day,
unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule XIX (§ 263-55) at any
time between the hours listed in said schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 263-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XX
(§ 263-56), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except at the angle designated and only within
the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall hereafter
be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 263-25. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 263-57), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 263-26. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 263-58), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 263-27. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 263-59), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 263-28. Handicapped Parking.
The locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 263-60), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated for use only by vehicles displaying a valid handicapped parking permit. Additional
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 259/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
B.
spaces in private and municipal parking lots shall be as designated by the Bureau of Code
Enforcement and Fire Prevention.
§ 263-29. Seasonal all-night parking.
No motor vehicle as defined in the vehicle and traffic law of the State of New York nor any recreational
vehicle nor any farm vehicle, nor any construction vehicle shall be parked on any public street, right-ofway
or sidewalk within the corporate limits of the Village of Albion between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. of each day during the period beginning at 2:00 a.m. on November 15 in each year and
ending 6:00 a.m. on April 15 of the following year.
§ 263-30. Parking in unmetered areas restricted.
The parking of vehicles in any portion of the area hereinbefore described shall be limited to such
parking time or parking limitations as have been fixed by other ordinances of the Village of Albion;
provided, however, that in no event shall any vehicle remain parked in the municipal parking lot or on
any other Village-owned property for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours without permission of
the Chief, Village of Albion, Police Department.
Article IV. Municipal Parking Lot
[Amended 10-1-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
§ 263-31. Off-street parking lots established.
The premises acquired by deeds are subject to the further order of this Board, established as a
public parking lot and place for the parking of motor vehicles and other vehicles.
The following shall be designated as municipal parking lots:
The Village-owned parking lot behind the Village Hall known as "Bank Street Municipal
Parking Lot."
The Village-owned parking lot on North Main Street between 19 North Main Street and 31
North Main Street known as "Main Street Municipal Parking Lot."
The Village-owned parking lot on Platt Street adjacent to the railroad tracks known as "Platt
Street Municipal Parking Lot."
The Village-owned parking lot on the southwest corner of East Bank Street and Platt Street
known as the "East Bank Street Municipal Parking Lot."
[Added 6-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 263-31.1. Parking restrictions.
Overnight parking in any designated municipal parking lot of motor vehicles or other vehicles in
excess of 10,000 pounds shall be prohibited (except when permitted during natural disasters when
declared by the Village Board of Trustees).
No motor vehicles or other vehicles shall be left in any municipal parking lot for more than 24
hours except under the direction of the Albion Police Department.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 260/376
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
E.
[2]
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
The repair of motor vehicles or other vehicles in any designated municipal parking lot shall be
prohibited.
The storage of any unregistered motor vehicles or other vehicle in any designated municipal
parking lot shall be prohibited.
Parking on the East Bank Street Municipal Parking Lot shall be restricted as follows:
[Amended 6-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000[1]]
Maximum two-hour parking.
No parking between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
All restrictions listed in § 263-31.1 shall apply.
Editor's Note: This local law also amended and renumbered former Subsection E, regarding
vehicle removal, as Subsection F.
Any vehicle found in violation of § 263-31.1 can be removed pursuant to Article V, §§ 263-33
through 263-35, of this chapter.
[Amended 6-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000[2]; 9-13-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 10-10-2012 by L.L. No.
6-2012]Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 263-31.2, Parking permits, which immediately
followed this section.
Parking allowed in Municipal-owned parking lots from November to April in areas specified by the
Village Street Department.
[Added 1-10-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; amended 9-12-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
No vehicle in excess of 6,000 pounds is permitted to park in the Village of Albion parking lot
located between Platt Street and McKinstry Street other than for loading and unloading of the
vehicle to benefit the owner or tenants of the building adjacent to said parking lot.
[Added 10-10-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
§ 263-32. Exit restricted.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle or other vehicle out of the Bank Street Municipal Parking
Lot westerly over said right-of-way onto Main Street or to use said right-of-way in the operation of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle as an exit from said parking place.
Article V. Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 263-33. Authority to impound vehicles.
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public parking lot within this Village
during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects that portion of the public
highway or parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be
removed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking lot within the Village
where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under
the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
§ 263-34. Storage and charges.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 261/376
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Chief of Police or his or her designee may
store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or
person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored
of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal and storage,
such storage charges not to exceed $10 per day or fraction thereof.
§ 263-35. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his or her designee to ascertain to the extent possible the
owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge and to notify him of the removal and
disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to redeem same. Said Chief of
Police or his or her designee shall also, without delay, report to the Village Clerk the removal and
disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article.
Article VI. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 263-36. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision of this chapter which is not
a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not
more than 45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Article VII. Schedules
§ 263-37. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-4, traffic control signals shall be installed at the following
described intersections:
Intersection
Main Street at State Street
North Main Street at Bank Street
Sough Main Street at East/West Avenue
§ 263-38. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-5B, speed limits are hereby established upon the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 262/376
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Oak Orchard Estates
[Added 3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 2-
2010]
15 Parking areas, private streets, roadways or
driveways located in the mobile home park or
manufactured home park
§ 263-39. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the speeds
indicated below, in the areas designated below, during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Clarendon Road
[Added 11-22-2017 by L.L.
No. 3-2017]
20 From East Avenue southerly to Village line
East Avenue 20 From 238 East Avenue to 349 East Avenue
§ 263-40. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-7, the following described streets or parts thereof are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Beaver Alley West From Liberty Street to Main Street
Erie Street
[Repealed 5-29-2003 by
L.L. No. 3-2003]
North Main Street West Municipal Parking Lot (along canal)
§ 263-41. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-8, no person shall make a U-turn at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street Location
East Bank Street Platt Street
§ 263-42. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-9, no person shall make a turn of the kind designated below
at any of the following intersections:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 263/376
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 263-43. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-10, no person shall make a right turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop indication) at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 263-44. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-11, the following described streets or parts thereof are
hereby designated as through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each street
intersecting the through street:
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic
Control Device
Albion-Eagle Harbor West State Street West Yield Road
Allen Road Clinton Street South Stop sign
Allen Road Hamilton Street South Stop sign
Allen Road West Academy Street South Stop sign
Brown Street Caroline Street East Stop sign
Brown Street Densmore Street West Stop sign
Brown Street Linwood Street East Stop sign
Brown Street Moore Street West Stop sign
Brown Street Wood Street East Stop sign
Chamberlain Street Herrick Street North Stop sign
Chamberlain Street Reynolds Street North Stop sign
Chamberlain Street Temperance Street North Stop sign
Clarendon Street Childs Street East Stop sign
Clarendon Street East Park Street East Stop sign
Clarendon Street Crimson Drive East Stop sign
Clinton Street Beaver Street West Stop sign
Clinton Street Hazard Parkway West Stop sign
Clinton Street Washington Street East Stop sign
Clinton Street West Park Street North and South Stop sign
East Bank Street Platt Street North Stop sign
East Park Street Herrick Street North Stop sign
East Park Street Reynold Street North Stop sign
East Park Street Temperance Street North Stop sign
East State Street Clarendon Street North Stop sign
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 264/376
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic
Control Device
East State Street East Bank Street South Stop sign
East State Street Ingersoll Street South Stop sign
East State Street McKinstry Street North and South Stop sign
East State Street Platt Street North and South Stop sign
Erie Street
[Added 5-29-2003 by L.L.
No. 3-2003]
Ingersoll Street East Stop sign
Erie Street
[Added 5-29-2003 by L.L.
No. 3-2003]
Main Street (Route 98) West Stop sign
Herrick Street East Herrick Street West Stop sign
Ingersoll Street Elmwood Avenue East and West Stop sign
Ingersoll Street Erie Street East Stop sign
Ingersoll Street McClelland Street West Stop sign
King Street Washington Street East and West Stop sign
King Street West Park Street East and West Stop sign
Liberty Street Beaver Alley West Stop sign
Liberty Street Beaver Street East and West Stop sign
Liberty Street
[Added 3-11-1998 by L.L.
No. 1-1998]
West State Street Both Stop sign
Linwood Avenue Ingersoll Street North and South Stop sign
Lydun Drive Lydun Drive Extension West Stop sign
McKinstry Street Chamberlain Street East Stop sign
McKinstry Street Crimson Drive West Stop sign
Meadowbrook Drive Clover Lane East Stop sign
Meadowbrook Drive
(where it maintains a
continuous east-west
course from and to South
Main Street)
Meadowbrook Drive
(circular portion)
West Stop sign
Moore Street Braley Street North Stop sign
Moore Street Joseph Street North and South Stop sign
Moore Street Knapp Street South Stop sign
Moore Street Sanford Street North Stop sign
Platt Street Chamberlain Street East and West Stop sign
Reynold Street East Herrick Street Both Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
Clarendon Street South Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
Clinton Street Both Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
Hamilton Street Both Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
King Street North Stop sign
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 265/376
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic
Control Device
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
McKinstry Street North Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
Platt Street North Stop sign
Route 31 (East Avenue
and West Avenue)
West Academy Street Both Stop sign
Washington Street Day Street North Stop sign
Washington Street Hamilton Street South Stop sign
West Academy Street Washington Street Both Stop sign
West Academy Street West Park Street Both Stop sign
West Bank Street Clinton Street North Stop sign
West Bank Street East Academy Street North Stop sign
West Bank Street Liberty Street North Stop sign
West Bank Street West Academy Street North Stop sign
West Park Street Day Street North Stop sign
West State Street Clinton Street North and South Stop sign
West State Street East Academy Street South Stop sign
West State Street King Street North Stop sign
West State Street Liberty Street North and South Stop sign
West State Street West Street South Stop sign
§ 263-45. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-12, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Beaver Street Both Liberty Street
Beaver Street East South Main Street
Beaver Street West Clinton Street
Brown Street Both East State Street
Brown Street
[Added 2-9-2005 by L.L. No.
3-2005]
Both Linwood Avenue
Caroline Street Both Ingersoll Street
Caroline Street East Brown Street
Caroline Street West North Main Street
Chamberlain Street Both Platt Street
Chamberlain Street East McKinstry Street
Chamberlain Street West South Main Street
Child Street East Clarendon Street
Clarendon Road Both Route 31
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 266/376
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Clarendon Street North East State Street
Clinton Street Both Route 31
Clinton Street Both West Bank Street
Clinton Street Both West State Street
Clinton Street South Allen Street
Clover Lane East Meadowbrook Drive
Crimson Drive East Clarendon Street
Crimson Drive West McKinstry Street
Day Street North West Park Street
Day Street South Washington Street
Densmore Street West Brown Street
East Academy Street North West Bank Street
East Academy Street South West State Street
East Bank Street Both Ingersoll Street
East Bank Street South East State Street
East Herrick Street East Reynolds Street
East Herrick Street West Herrick Street
East Park Street Both McKinstry Street
East Park Street Both Platt Street
East Park Street East Clarendon Street
East State Street Both Brown Street
East State Street Both Goodrich Street
East State Street Both Platt Street
Elmwood Avenue Both Ingersoll Street
Erie Street East Ingersoll Street
Erie Street West Main Street
Goodrich Street Both East State Street
Hamilton Street Both Route 31
Hamilton Street North Washington Street
Hamilton Street South Allen Street
Hazard Parkway East Main Street
Hazard Parkway West Clinton Street
Herrick Street North East Park Street
Herrick Street South Chamberlain Street
Ingersol Street Both Linwood Avenue
Ingersoll Street Both East Bank Street
Ingersoll Street Both Caroline Street
Ingersoll Street South East State Street
Joseph Street Both Moore Street
King Street South Route 31
King Street North West State Street
Knapp Street South Moore Street
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 267/376
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Liberty Street
[Added 12-11-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-2019]
Both Beaver Street
Liberty Street Both West Park Street
Liberty Street Both West Bank Street
Liberty Street Both West Park Street
Liberty Street Both West State Street
Linwood Avenue East Brown Street
Lydun Drive East Brown Street
Lydun Drive Extension East Lydun Drive
McClelland Street West Ingersoll Street
McKinstry Street Both East Park Street
McKinstry Street North East State Street
McKinstry Street South Route 31
Meadowbrook Drive North Meadowbrook Drive
Moore Street West Brown Street
Platt Street Both East Park Street
Platt Street Both East State Street
Platt Street Both East Bank Street
Platt Street South Route 31
Reynolds Street North East Park Street
Reynolds Street South Chamberlain Street
Sanford Street North Moore Street
Smith Street
[Repealed 10-10-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]
South Lydun Drive East Lydun Drive
Temperance Street South Chamberlain Street
Temperance Street North East Park Street
Washington Street
[Amended 3-12-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
Both West Academy Street
Washington Street East Clinton Street
Washington Street Both King Street
West Academy Street Both Route 31
West Academy Street
[Added 3-12-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008]
Both Washington Street
West Academy Street Both West Bank Street
West Academy Street Both West State Street
West Academy Street South Allen Street
West Park Street Both Clinton Street
West Park Street Both Liberty Street
West Park Street Both West Academy Street
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 268/376
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
West Park Street West King Street
West State Street Both West Academy Street
West Street South West State Street
Wood Street East Brown Street
§ 263-46. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-13, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Lydon Drive North West Lydun Drive Extension
State Street West Albion-Eagle Harbor Road
§ 263-47. Schedule XI: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
[Amended 1-9-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-14, all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in
excess of the gross weights indicated below, except for agricultural vehicles used in the furtherance of
agricultural activities, are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts thereof, except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
All Village streets or parts
thereof
6 Entire length
§ 263-48. Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-15, gross weight limits are hereby established as indicated
for commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets or
portions thereof described below, except as provided in said section:
Name of Street or Bridge
Max. Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Allen Road 16,000 From South Main Street westerly to the
west boundary of the Village of Albion
§ 263-49. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-17, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of
the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 269/376
Name of Street Side Location
Beaver Street North From Main Street to a point 39 feet west of the center
line of Main Street
Beaver Street North From a point 149 feet west of the center line of Main
Street west to the east bounds of South Clinton Street
Brown Street East From the north edge of the east abutment of a certain
bridge or culvert crossing the west branch of Sandy
Creek to a point which is 277 feet north thereof
Brown Street West From the intersection of Brown Street and Caroline
Street south to the north edge of the westerly abutment
of the bridge or culvert crossing over the west branch
of Sandy Creek
Caroline Street North From the intersection of Caroline Street and Brown
Street to a point 175 feet west thereof
Clinton Street
[Repealed 8-8-2001 by L.L.
No. 5-2001]
East Avenue
[Amended 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
North and
South
From Main Street east to the Village limits
East Avenue
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
East Avenue
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
East Bank Street Both From Platt Street to a point 25 feet east thereof
East Bank Street South From Platt Street to a point 46 feet west thereof
East Park Street South From Main Street to Platt Street
East State Street North From Platt Street to a point 42 feet east thereof
East State Street South From Goodrich Street to a point 100 feet west thereof
East State Street South From Platt Street to a point 50 feet west thereof
Erie Street North Entire length
Erie Street
[Added 9-10-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997]
South Entire length
Goodrich Street
[Added 6-13-2001 by L.L.
No. 4-2001]
Both From the center point of East State Street south 113
feet
Hazard Parkway North East of a point 154.5 feet west at a right angle from the
center line of South Main Street
Hazard Parkway South East of a point 92.8 feet west at a right angle from the
center line of South Main Street
Liberty Street
[Added 8-8-2001 by L.L. No.
6-2001]
East From the center of West State Street south 110 feet
Liberty Street West From Beaver Street south to the Penn Central
Transportation Company property line
Liberty Street West From West Bank Street to West State Street
Liberty Street West From West State Street to West Park Street
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 270/376
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street East From East Park Street to a point 20 feet north thereof
Main Street East From East State Street to a point 65 feet south thereof
Main Street East From the north bounds of the Barge Canal to the old
north bounds of the corporation limits of the Village of
Albion
Main Street
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
Main Street West From West Avenue to Penn Central Railroad property
east and west side of Main Street
Main Street
[Amended 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
West and East From West Avenue south to the Village limits
Main Street West From West Park Street to a point 20 feet north thereof
Main Street West From West State Street to a point 65 feet south thereof
Main Street West From a point 50 feet north of Hazard Parkway to a
point 50 feet south of Hazard Parkway
North Main Street East From a point 48 feet south of the center line of East
Bank Street south for a distance of 20 feet thereof;
provided, however, that Albion Police Department
vehicles shall be exempt from these provisions
North Main Street
[Added 1-14-2004 by L.L.
No. 1-2004]
East and West From 40 feet north of center line of East Bank/West
Bank north a distance of 20 feet
Platt Street East At the east/west island in the Municipal parking lot, and
immediately adjacent thereto, except for private
vehicles owned or operated by Village of Albion active
volunteer firemen or employees of the Village of
Albion.
Platt Street Platt Street
[Added 11-14-2001 by L.L.
No. 8-2001]
East West From East Park Street to a point 50 feet south thereof
From East Park Street south 105 feet
South Clinton Street
[Added 7-10-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
East From West Park Street to Washington Street
South Main Street
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
South Main Street West From West Park Street to a point 40 feet north thereof
South Main Street
[Added 1-12-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
West From West State Street to a point 100 feet south
thereof
South Main Street
[Amended 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
West and East From West Avenue and East Avenue northerly to West
Park Street and East Park Street
West Academy Street East From West Bank Street to West State Street
West Avenue
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
West Avenue
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 271/376
Name of Street Side Location
West Avenue
[Amended 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
South and
North
From Main Street west to the Village limits
West Street
[Added 9-10-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997]
Both From West Bank Street to West State Street
West Bank Street North From Main Street to a point 300 feet east of the fire
hydrant at the intersection of West Street and West
State Street
West Bank Street South From Main Street to Clinton Street
West Park Street South From Main Street to Clinton Street
West State Street North From Main Street to the western end of State Street
West State Street
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
West State Street
[Amended 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
South From Main Street to Clinton Street
§ 263-50. Schedule XIV: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-18, no person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
South Main Street Both From 150 feet north of Park Street south to a point 150
feet south of the southerly rail of Penn Central Railroad
§ 263-51. Schedule XV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-19, no person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-52. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-20, no person shall park a vehicle between the times
specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Bank Street Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Ingersoll Street to Liberty Street
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 272/376
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Main Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and public
holidays
Between East Park Street and West Park
Street on the north and points on the
south of both sides of Main Street 150
feet south of Beaver Street and the south
line of Beaver Street extended easterly
across Main Street
Main Street Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Park Street to the Canal Bridge
Platt Street East From State Street to a point 55 feet north
thereof; provided, however, that this shall
only be in effect during such times as
church services are being conducted in
the Methodist Church situate on the east
side of Platt Street and for an additional
time of one-half hour prior to and one-half
hour subsequent to such services
§ 263-53. Schedule XVII: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-21, no person shall stop a vehicle between the times
specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-54. Schedule XVIII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-22, no person shall stand a vehicle between the times
specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-55. Schedule XIX: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-23, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time
limit specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
East Bank Street Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday,
except holidays
From Main Street to Ingersoll Street
Main Street Both 10 mins.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:30 p.m./All except
Sundays and public
holidays
From East and West State Streets south
to East and West Park Streets
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 273/376
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Main Street Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday,
except holidays
From the Barge Canal to East and West
State Streets
Main Street
[Repealed 12-12-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
North Main Street East 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday,
except holidays
From a point 52 feet north of the center
line of East Bank Street to a point 95 feet
north thereof
West Bank Street South 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From North Main Street to Liberty Street
West State Street
[Added 12-12-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
North 15 mins./Monday
through Saturday
First two parking spots
§ 263-56. Schedule XX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-24, no person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described below, except at the angle designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
East Bank Street North — From a point 25 feet west of Platt Street to a
point approximately 180 feet west thereof
East Bank Street North — From a point 29 feet east of Main Street to a
point approximately 133 feet east thereof
East Bank Street
[Repealed 8-9-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
East Bank Street
[Repealed 8-9-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 263-57. Schedule XXI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-25, the following described locations are hereby designated
as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-58. Schedule XXII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-26, the following described locations are hereby designated
as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 274/376
§ 263-59. Schedule XXIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-27, the following described locations are hereby designated
as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-60. Schedule XXIV: Handicapped Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 263-28, the following described locations are hereby designated
for use only by vehicles displaying a valid handicapped parking permit:
Name of Street Side Location
East Bank Street Both First 20 feet of parking space from the intersection of Main
Street and Bank Street
East Bank Street North From a point 120 feet east of the intersection of Main
Street to a point 135 feet east of the intersection of Main
Street
East Bank Street
[Added 8-9-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006]
North From a point 55 feet west of Platt Street continuing to a
point 20 feet west thereof
East Bank Street South From a point 193 feet east of the intersection of Main
Street to a point 206 feet east of the intersection of Main
Street
East Park Street North First 20 feet of parking space west of the first driveway
located east of the intersection of Main Street and the
north side of East Park Street
East Park Street North From a point 120 feet east of Main Street to a point 140
feet east of the intersection of Main Street
East State Street North From a point 128 feet east of Main Street to a point 148
feet east of Main Street
East State Street
[Added 3-27-2013 by L.L.
No. 2-2013]
North From a point 164 feet east of Main Street to a point 184
feet east of Main Street. This space will be designated for
handicapped parking on Sundays only.
East State Street
[Repealed 1-14-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
Main Street West First 20 feet of parking space south of the intersection of
Main Street and Bank Street
North Main Street West From a point 23 feet north of the intersection of Bank
Street to a point 45 feet east of the intersection of Bank
Street
North Main Street
[Added 11-8-2000 by L.L.
No. 7-2000; repealed 1-10-
2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
Platt Street
[Added 6-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
East From a point 178 feet south of East Bank Street to a point
198 feet south of East Bank Street
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 275/376
Name of Street Side Location
Platt Street East From a point 37 feet south of East State Street to a point
20 feet south thereof
Platt Street East First 20 feet of parking space south of the first driveway
located south of the intersection of the east side of Platt
Street and State Street
Platt Street East From a point 139 feet north of Park Street to a point 159
feet north of Park Street
Platt Street East From a point 139 feet north of State Street to a point 159
feet north of State Street
Platt Street West From a point 174 feet south of Bank Street to a point 191
feet south of Bank Street
Platt Street West From a point 232 feet south of Bank Street to a point 252
feet south of Bank Street
Platt Street West From a point 3 feet south of the south line extended east to
the west curb line of Platt Street, of a driveway north of the
building known as the "V.F.W." and continuing south for a
distance of 20 feet
South Main Street West From a point 102 feet north of the intersection of Park
Street to a point 124 feet north of Park Street
South Main Street West From a point 105 feet north of the north line of West Park
Street to a point 20 feet north thereof
West Park Street North First 20 feet of parking space west of the first driveway
located west of the intersection of Main Street and the
north side of Park Street
West Park Street North From a point 123 feet west of Main Street to a point 143
feet east of the intersection of Main Street
West State Street
[Added 1-10-2001 by L.L.
No. 1-2001]
North From a point 117 feet west of Route 98 to a point 138 feet
westerly
Part V: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 275. Planning Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-10-1996 as L.L. No. 1-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 152.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 165.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 179.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 280.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 275-1. Creation.
The Albion Village Board of Trustees establishes a Planning Board of five members on this day of
1996.
§ 275-2. Terms of office.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 276/376
[1]
The terms of the members of the Planning Board first appointed shall be fixed so that the term of one
member shall expire at the end of the year in which such member was initially appointed. The terms of
the remaining members first appointed shall be fixed so that one term shall expire at the end of each
official year thereafter. At the expiration of the term of each member first appointed, his or her
successor shall be appointed for a term of five years.
§ 275-3. Chairperson.
The Board of Trustees shall designate a member of the Planning Board to act as Chairperson thereof,
or the Board of Trustees shall permit the Planning Board to name its own Chairperson.
§ 275-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall have the powers granted by §§ 7-718, 7-722, 7-725-a, 7-725-b, 7-728, 7-
730, 7-732, 7-734, 7-736, 7-738, 7-740 and 7-741 of the Village Law.
§ 275-5. Removal of members.
Any member of the Planning Board may be removed by the Mayor for cause after a public hearing.
§ 275-6. Fees.
The fee for the review of site plans by the Planning Board shall be as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees on the fee schedule in the Village Clerk's office.
Chapter 278. Subdivision of Land
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 4-13-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 132.
Clearing, filling and grading — See Ch. 145.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 152.
Exterior property maintenance — See Ch. 155.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 165.
Planning Board — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
Editor's Note: This local law was adopted as Ch. 117, but was renumbered to fit into the organizational
structure of the Code.
§ 278-1. Authority.
By authority of the resolution by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion on the 13th day of April
2005, pursuant to the provisions of Article 6-A of the Village Law (Chapter 64 of the Consolidated Laws
of New York), and pursuant to Article 7 of the Village Law, which became effective September 1, 1973,
as amended, and the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Planning Board has the power and authority to
approve plats for subdivisions pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 278-2. Purpose.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 277/376
A.
B.
For the purpose of providing for the future growth and development of the Village and affording
adequate facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and
welfare of its population, the Village Board of Trustees, by resolution, does hereby authorize and
empower the Planning Board to approve preliminary and final plats of subdivisions showing lots, blocks
or sites, with or without streets or highways.
§ 278-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as follows:
BOARD
The Planning Board of the Village of Albion.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A long-range or master plan for the development of the Village of Albion.
ENGINEER
The duly designated Engineer of the Village of Albion or, if there is no such official, the planning
consultant or engineer employed by or assigned to the Village Planning Board.
FINAL PLAT
The final map, drawing or chart, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the
Planning Board for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk for
recording.
PRELIMINARY PLAT
The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Board for its consideration.
SUBDIVISION
The division of any parcel of land into a number of lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or
highways, for any purpose. Approval must be obtained from the Planning Board, as provided in
§§ 7-728 and 7-730 of the Village Law, as in effect at the time such plat was approved; or a street
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of such
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to approve plats.
VILLAGE MAP
The map established by the Village Board showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore
laid out, adopted and established and any amendments thereto adopted by the Village Board or
additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats.
§ 278-4. Application for permit; fee.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any contract for the sale of
or any offer to sell such subdivision or any part thereof is made by lot numbers and before any
permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted to the subdivider or owner thereof or his
agent, the subdivider, owner or agent shall apply, in writing, to the Board for approval of such
subdivision. The application of the subdivider, owner or agent to the Board shall conform to the
specifications §§ 278-8, 278-9 and 278-10 of this chapter.
A general filing fee for each lot in a subdivision shall be paid to the Village Clerk when the
preliminary plat is filed in the Clerk's office for the conditional approval of the Planning Board.
§ 278-5. Preapplication procedure.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 278/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may
submit general site information, a location map and a sketch plan with a request for informal
consideration and advice. This step does not require formal application, fee or the filing of a plat. The
purpose of the preapplication procedure is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to consult early and
informally with the Planning Board before preparation of the preliminary plat in order to save time and
money and to make the most of opportunities for desirable development.
§ 278-6. Preliminary plat procedure.
The preliminary plat, topographic map, street profiles and formal subdivision plat and all procedure
relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provision of §§ 7-728 and 7-730
of the Village Law and these regulations, except where variation therefrom may be specifically
authorized by the Board.
Seven copies each of the preliminary plat, as described in § 278-9, designated as such, at the
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, a topographic map at the same scale and proposed
street profiles at appropriate scales shall be filed with the Board. The Board shall then study the
preliminary plat and proposed street profiles in connection with the topography of the area, the
existing requirements of chapter 290, Zoning, if any, the Master Plan and the Village Map, if any,
and shall take into consideration the general requirements of the community and the best use of
the land to be subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to matters enumerated in §§ 7-728
and 7-730 of the Village Law as well as to specific requirements for parks, playgrounds, school
sites, boulevards and main thoroughfares, the adequacy of street connections and the suitability of
the land for development.
A public hearing must be held on the preliminary plat within 45 days of receipt of the plat by the
Clerk of the Board. Publication of a notice advertising the public hearing shall be made not later
than five days prior thereto in the official Village newspaper.
Not later than 45 days from the date of the hearing, the Board must either approve, with or without
modifications, or disapprove the preliminary plat. The grounds upon which the decision is made
shall be stated upon the records of the Board, and modifications, if any, shall be specifically sated
in the records.
The time in which the Board must take action on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of
the owner and the Board. Within five days of the approval of such preliminary plat, it shall be
certified by the Clerk of the Board as granted preliminary approval, a copy filed with the Village
and a certified copy mailed to the owner.
If the Board fails to take action on a preliminary plat within 45 days, plus any extensions, such plat
shall be deemed granted preliminary approval.
§ 278-7. Final plat procedure.
The subdivider, after official notification by the Board with respect to the preliminary plat and the
changes, if any, to be made thereto, shall, within six months thereafter, file with the Board original
drawings and seven copies of the final plat and street profiles
If such final plat is not so submitted, approval of the preliminary plat may be revoked by the Board.
Within 45 days of the submission of the final plat for approval by the Board, a public hearing shall
be held by the Board and shall be advertised at least once in the official newspaper at least five
days before such hearing.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 279/376
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
If the Board deems the final plat to be in substantial agreement with a previously approved
preliminary plat and properly modified, if the preliminary plat was so approved, the Board may
waive the requirement for the second public hearing.
The Board shall, by resolution, conditionally approve with or without modifications, disapprove or
grant final approval and authorize signing of such final plat within 45 days of receipt if the hearing
is waived or within 45 days of the date of such hearing. The time in which the Board must take
action may be extended by mutual consent of the owner and the Board. If the Board fails to take
action on a final plat within the time prescribed therefor, the plat shall be deemed approved.
If the Board grants conditional approval of such final plat, the resolution shall empower a duly
authorized officer to sign the final plat subject to completion of requirements set forth in the
resolution. Within five days of such resolution, the final plat shall be certified by the Board as
conditionally approved and a copy filed with the Village and a certified copy mailed to the owner,
including a certified statement of such requirements which, when completed, will authorize the
signing of the conditionally approved final plat. Conditional approval shall expire 180 days after the
date of the resolution unless such requirements have been certified as completed. The Board may
extend such time, if warranted, not to exceed two additional periods of 90 days each.
The approved final plat must be filed in the Orleans County Clerk's office within 60 days from
approval. Approval shall constitute signing by the authorized Board officer or the date of a
certificate of failure to act under Subsection E.
Under no circumstances will construction or improvements be started before final approval of the
plat. The subdivider will be required to file with the Board a bond complying with §§ 7-728 and 7-
730 of the Village Law satisfactory to the Village Board as to form, sufficiency and surety for the
completion of such improvement. The Board will require from the Village Attorney or other
designated legal advisor a certificate as to the adequacy of any bond that may be proffered. The
subdivider will be required to tender offers of cession, in a form certified as satisfactory by the
Village Attorney, of all land, including streets, highways or parks, not specifically reserved for him
or her. Approval of the final plat by the Planning Board does not constitute an acceptance by the
Village of the dedication of any street, highway, park or other public open space.
Upon compliance with the foregoing and notation to that effect upon the final plat, it shall be
deemed to have final approval. The final plat shall then be referred to the Orleans County
Planning Council. Within 90 days after approval by the Village Planning Board, the developer must
file the final plat with the County Clerk or Registrar. Otherwise, such approval shall expire. It
should be noted that the developer must notify the Village prior to any construction or
improvements so that the Village may have an inspector available.
§ 278-8. General regulations.
The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and principles of land subdivision:
In general, the proposed subdivision shall conform to the Village Map and to the Master Plan, if
such exist.
The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal
streets in adjoining subdivisions and for their proper projection when adjoining property is not
subdivided and shall be of a width at least as great as that of such existing connection streets, but
in no event shall the width of said continuing streets be less than 60 feet. All streets shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by Albion Village Board, subject to approval
of the Village Superintendent of Highways.
Main highways and secondary highways shall not be less than the width shown on the Master
Plan, if such exists. Parkways and boulevards shall be such width as may be designated by the
Board. The width of minor streets shall not be less than 50 feet.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 280/376
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
Dead-end streets, in general, shall have block lengths not exceeding 800 feet. At this point, if
practical, a sixty-foot right-of-way extending to the tract limits shall be set aside as a future cross
street. Temporary turnarounds at the end of dead-end streets must be constructed with the
approval of the Board.
Block lengths generally shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
Each block shall be planned to provide two rows of lots, but irregularly shaped blocks indented by
dead-end streets and containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed and
covered by agreements as to maintenance of interior parks.
Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet, and property lines shall be adjusted
accordingly.
Side lines of lots, so far as practicable, shall be at right angles or radial to street lines. The size of
lots shall comply with Chapter 290, Zoning.
Care shall be exercised in the layout of lots at street intersections. Corner lots shall be increased
in size to provide that any structure to be placed thereon will conform to the building line of each
street.
Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and shall not in general be less than
0.5%, preferably no more than 5% and in no case more than 7%.
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the Board to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for
residential occupancy nor such other uses and may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the final plat shall be set aside for such uses as
shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.
In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be
arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision.
In general, no privately owned reserved strips controlling access to land dedicated or to be
dedicated to public use shall be permitted.
In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other at any point more than 10° and
less than 45° shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the inner street line shall not
be less than 350 feet on main thoroughfares, 250 feet on secondary thoroughfares and 100 feet
on local streets. The outer street line in each case shall be parallel to such inner street line. If the
deflection is 46° or more, it shall be considered a street intersection and treated accordingly.
Variations of the general requirements above outlined may be permitted by the Board, on
application, when, in its judgment, special favors warrant such variation.
§ 278-9. Preliminary plat specifications.
Subdividers shall present to the Board a preliminary plat. Seven copies shall be filed at the scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch, showing or accompanied by the following information. All of the
information set forth above is required by the Board for the purpose of complying with the Village Law
and for the information of the public at the public hearings. Due care in the preparation of this material
will expedite the process of passing upon the formal subdivision plat:
The proposed subdivision name, township, range and great lot number in which the subdivision is
located.
The name and address of the record owner, subdivider and designer of the preliminary plat.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 281/376
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
Locations of property lines, existing easement, buildings, watercourses and other essential
features.
The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of record of adjacent acreage.
The location of any existing sewers and water mains, culverts and drains on the property to be
subdivided or on streets which border the property.
The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements,
building lines, alleys, parks and other public open spaces and similar facts regarding property
adjacent.
Any changes in the use, height, area and density, districts or other regulations under Chapter 290,
Zoning, applicable to the areas to be subdivided and any boundaries of such districts affecting the
tract; all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication.
The width and location of any streets or other public ways or places shown upon the Village Map
or the Master Plan, if such exists, within the area to be subdivided, and the width, location, grades
and streets profiles of all streets or other public ways proposed by the developer.
Typical cross sections of the proposed grading and roadways of sidewalks and topographic
conditions, if different from the Village of Albion Highway Department minimum specifications for
new highways.
The date, true North point and scale.
Connection with existing water supply or alternative means of providing water supply to the
subdivision.
Connection with an existing sanitary sewage system or alternate means of treatment and disposal
proposed as provided by the Orleans County Health Department.
Provision for collecting and discharging surface drainage. Storm sewers shall be constructed in
conformance with standards adopted by the Village Board of Albion.
Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required.
The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and suggested location of buildings.
The boundaries of proposed permanent easements over or under private property, which
permanent easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width and which shall provide satisfactory
access to an existing public highway or other public open space shown upon the layout or upon
the Village Map.
Where the preliminary layout submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a
sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the
street system of the submitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections
with the street system of the part not submitted.
§ 278-10. Final plat specifications.
The final plat submitted for approval and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink
upon tracing cloth and prepared by a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer or registered
architect. The size of sheets shall be 20 inches by 20 inches or 40 inches, including a margin of one
inch outside ruled border lines on three sides and two inches' border along the left side of the forty-inch
side for binding.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 282/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
The drawing shall be at the scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch.
The final plat shall show:
The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the Village and county in
which the subdivision is located; the name and address of the record owner and subdivider,
and the name, license number and seal of the licensed professional engineer.
Street lines, lots, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use.
Sufficient data acceptable to the Engineer to determine readily the location, elevation, bearing
and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, benchmark and monument and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practicable, those should be referenced to
monument and benchmarks included in the state system of plane coordinates and levels and
in any event should be tied to reference points previously established by a public authority.
The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, and radii, length of curves and control
angles of all curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings shall be given for each street. All
dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall also be given. All dimensions shall be
shown in feet and decimals of a foot. The final plan shall show the boundaries of the property,
location, graphic scale and true North point.
The final plan shall also show, by proper designation thereon, all public open spaces for which
offers of dedication to public use are included and those spaces title to which is reserved by the
developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with the final subdivision plat copies of
agreements or other documents showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained
and the provisions made therefor.
All offers of dedication and covenants governing the maintenance of uncoded open space shall
bear the certificate of approval of the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered in accordance with the prevailing Village
practice.
Permanent reference monuments shall be indicated. They shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications of the Village and, when referenced to the state system of plane coordinates, shall
also conform to the requirements of the State Department of Public Works. They shall be placed
as required by the Engineer and their location noted and referenced upon the plat.
All lot corner markers shall be permanently located satisfactory to the Engineer, at least 3/4 inch in
diameter, of metal, and at least 24 inches in length, shown thus "0", and located in the ground to
permanent grade.
Monuments of a type approved by the Engineer or other authorized officer shall be set at all
corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided and at all street
intersections, angle points in street lines, points of curve and such intermediate points as shall be
required by the Engineer.
The developer's engineer shall submit computations for determining pipe, culvert or bridge sizes
for the drainage area.
The final plat shall show a certificate of the developer's engineer that all lot sizes comply with
Chapter 290, Zoning.
The owner or owners of this proposed subdivision agree to execute the necessary petition to form
a stormwater drainage district to cover the proposed subdivision. The formation of a sanitary
sewer district and a water district (if applicable) may be required by the Board.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 283/376
L.
M.
Insofar as possible, the natural beauty and resources of the property to be developed shall not be
destroyed. Trees, streams, rolling ground, etc. are of real value and should be preserved.
Any advertising signs must conform to Chapter 290, Zoning.
Chapter 280. Swimming Pools
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 5-13-1974 as Ch. 58 of the 1974
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 112.
Water — See Ch. 116.
Zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 280-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Swimming Pool Ordinance of the Village of Albion, New York."
§ 280-2. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating
and restricting the location, use and operation of swimming pools and accessory structures, it being
recognized that there is a need to regulate such installation and maintenance of swimming pools in the
Village of Albion in that private swimming pools have become so common and numerous that they do
present a danger to the public health, safety and general welfare if unregulated and uncontrolled.
§ 280-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SWIMMING POOL
Any body of water or receptacle of water having a depth at any point greater than 24 inches, used
or intended to be used for swimming or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained either
above, below or partly above and partly below ground level, except that a natural body of water
such as a lake, quarry or creek will not be considered a "swimming pool" for the purposes of this
chapter.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]; 7-11-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 280-4. Compliance required.
No swimming pool shall hereafter be erected, constructed or excavated except in compliance with the
following regulations and requirements, and all existing swimming pools shall, within 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter, comply with the following regulations and requirements.
§ 280-5. Permit required.
[Added 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
No swimming pool shall be erected, constructed or excavated without having applied for and obtained
a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Chapter 161, Fire Prevention and Building
Construction, of the Code of the Village of Albion.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 284/376
[1]
§ 280-6. Location.
All swimming pools shall be located to the rear of the front line of the main structure on the premises
and shall be at least four feet from the rear and side property lines of the premises. The Board of
Trustees of the Village of Albion may vary the requirements of this section after public hearing held
with at least five days' public notice published in the official newspaper of the village, where undue
hardship is imposed hereby; provided, however, that all existing swimming pools shall not be required
to comply with the terms of this section; however, all such existing swimming pools may not be
modified, enlarged or changed in any manner without complying with the provisions of this subsection.
§ 280-7. Drain requirements.
A swimming pool shall be provided with adequate drainage into the storm sewer system of the Village
of Albion. Where drainage into the storm sewer is impractical, the swimming pool may be drained onto
a lawn or other area, or to a dry well or wells, provided that the water does not overflow onto adjoining
property or otherwise provide damage to the adjoining properties or cause inconvenience to the
owners or occupants of such adjoining properties.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 112, Sewers.
§ 280-8. Filling operation.
There shall be no permanent physical connection between a potable public or private water supply
system and a swimming pool; and when a temporary physical connection is installed, it shall be
operated so that no pool water can be discharged or siphoned into a potable supply system.
§ 280-9. Fence with gate required.
All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by a fence or similar barrier at least four feet in
height. All gates and said fence shall be equipped with a locking device and all such gates shall be
locked when the swimming pool is not in use. The structure adjacent to the swimming pool may serve
as a portion of the fence requirement of this section. Walls or other structural components of the
swimming pool may also serve as a portion or as all of the fence requirements of this section, provided
that the walls or other structural components are at least four feet in height and that any entrance,
ladder or other means or structural component is equipped with a gate or similar barrier capable of
being locked, and which said gate or similar barrier shall be locked when the swimming pool is not in
use. Swimming pools which are completely enclosed shall be considered as complying with this
section, provided that all entrances to the pool from the exterior are capable of being locked.
§ 280-10. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 8-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with the requirements hereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisoned for not more
than 15 days, or be subject to both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 290. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion 12-20-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 285/376
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
290a Parking Schedule
290b Zoning Schedule
Article I. General Provisions
§ 290-1. Title; effect on prior legislation.
The title of this chapter is the "Village of Albion Zoning Local Law, Orleans County, New York" and shall
include this text, schedules and Zoning Map.[1] All existing zoning local laws of the Village of Albion,
Orleans County, New York, are hereby repealed upon the effective date of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 290-2. Purpose.
This Zoning Chapter is adopted pursuant to the Village Law of the State of New York to promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare and in furtherance of the following related and
more specific purposes:
To prevent overcrowding of the land and undue concentration of population;
To provide for adequate light, air and convenience of access;
To provide for solar access and the implementation of solar energy systems;
To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers;
To lessen congestion in the streets and facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
To protect and conserve property values throughout the Village;
To protect the character of residential neighborhoods;
To provide opportunities for businesses and industries to provide jobs and services to area
residents;
To protect the natural and aesthetic resources of the Village; and
To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development and redevelopment of the Village of Albion
in accordance with a well-considered plan and with long-term objectives, principles and standards
deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people.
§ 290-3. Conflict with other laws.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be
minimum requirements to promote and protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted rules, regulations, codes or local laws, the most restrictive of such rules,
regulations, codes or local laws or those imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 290-4. Compliance with SEQR.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 286/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
Prior to any action by a municipal board or official on any application made in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Village shall satisfy the requirements of the state environmental quality
review (SEQR) regulations.
§ 290-5. Fees.
Permit fees shall be collected and paid according to the fee structure in effect at the time of application.
A fee schedule is posted at the Village Clerk's office.
§ 290-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, company or corporation owning, controlling or managing any building, structure
or premises therein or where there shall be placed on or there exists anything in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter and any person, firm, company or corporation, who shall assist in the
commission of any violation of this chapter or any conditions imposed by the Village Board,
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals or who shall build or use any building or parcel of
land contrary to the plans or specifications submitted to the Code Enforcement Official and
certified as complying with this chapter and the Uniform Code, and any person, firm, company or
corporation who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act required by this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a period of not more
than 15 days, or both, and in addition may be ordered to pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Every such person, firm, company or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each day such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall continue.
Alternative penalty. In case of any new violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
conditions imposed by the Village Board, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals and in
addition to other remedies herein provided, the Village Board may institute any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, structural alteration, reconstruction, moving
and/or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of such building,
structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 290-7. Consistency with Comprehensive Plan.
The provisions and regulations of this chapter and interpretations thereof shall be made in accordance
with the objectives of the Village's Comprehensive Plan, pursuant to the applicable provisions of New
York State (NYS) Village Law.
§ 290-8. Amendments.
Procedure. The Village Board may from time to time, on its own motion, on petition or on
recommendation of the Planning Board and in accordance with the laws of the State of New York,
amend, supplement or repeal the regulations, provisions or district boundaries of this chapter.
Filing of petition. A petition to amend, change or supplement the text of this chapter or any zoning
district as designated on the Zoning Map established herein shall be filed with the Village Clerk
and shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the Village Board. A petition for a change to the Zoning
Map shall contain a map which clearly describes the affected property and its boundaries and
shall indicate the existing zoning district and the requested zoning change. In addition, every
petition for an amendment to this chapter shall contain an environmental assessment form
completed and signed by the petitioner or agent in accordance with the procedures set forth in
state environmental quality review (SEQR) regulations.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 287/376
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Referral to Planning Board. Each proposed amendment, except those initiated by the Planning
Board, shall be referred to the Planning Board for an advisory report. In reporting to the Village
Board, the Planning Board shall fully state its reasons for recommending or opposing the adoption
of such proposed amendment. The Planning Board may condition its approval, as may be
appropriate, and shall state whether such amendment is in harmony with the Village's
Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Board shall state its position relative to proposed zoning
amendment in writing within 45 days of its referral from the Village Board. Absence of a reply from
the Planning Board within the forty-five-day period shall indicate that the Board is in favor of the
proposed amendment.
Public hearing; notice; recording of actions. Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of the
Village Law of the State of New York pertaining to public hearings, official notices and proper
recording of zoning actions taken by the Village Board shall apply to all proposed amendments to
this chapter.
Disposition final; rehearing on petition. The disposition of a petition for amendment by the Village
Board shall be final; and disapproval or denial of the proposed amendment shall void the petition.
No new petition for an amendment which has been previously denied by the Village Board shall be
considered by it, except for a vote to table or to receive and file, and no public hearing shall be
held on such amendment within a period of one year from the date of such previous denial unless
the Planning Board shall submit a recommendation, with reasons stated therefor, certifying that
there have been substantial changes in the situation which would merit a rehearing by the Village
Board. Such rehearing may be granted only upon a favorable vote by not less than four members
of the Village Board.
§ 290-9. Annexation.
The zoning of lands annexed into the Village subsequent to the adoption of this chapter shall follow the
procedures for amendments specified in § 290-8 above. The process for establishing zoning for lands
to be annexed into the Village shall be coordinated with the annexation process.
Article II. Word Usage and Definitions
§ 290-10. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number
include the plural number, except as to the number of permitted structures, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
The word "person" includes an association, partnership or corporation.
Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally along the ground.
The word "building" includes the word "structure."
"Lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel," "tract" or "site."
The word "premises" includes a lot and all buildings or structures thereon.
To "erect," "to construct" and "to build" a building or structure each have the same meaning and
also include "to excavate" for a building and "to relocate" a building by moving it from one location
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 288/376
I.
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
to another.
"Used" shall be deemed also to include "designated, intended or arranged to be used or
occupied."
"Shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; "may" is permissive.
"He" shall include the feminine gender "she" as well.
§ 290-11. Administrative agencies defined.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Albion.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL
The official designated by the Village Board of the Village of Albion to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code in the Village.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board of the County of Orleans.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
The Orleans County Department of Health and any other health board or department established
pursuant to the laws of the State of New York and having authority for the regulation of matters
pertaining to the public health of the Village.
PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board of the Village of Albion.
VILLAGE BOARD
The Village Board of the Village of Albion.
§ 290-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
A detached building or structure which:
Is customarily incidental and subordinate to and serves a principal building;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building served;
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal
building or use; and
Is located on the same parcel as the principal building.
This definition shall include private garages and carports.
ACCESSORY USE
A contributory use on the same lot and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use and may include alternate energy systems and home occupations.
ADULT BOOKSTORES
Any business enterprise having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books,
magazines, pamphlets, pictures, drawings, photographs, motion-picture films or sound recordings
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 289/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
or printed, visual and audio material of any kind, which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic areas or buttocks with less than a
full opaque covering or specified sexual activities; or any business enterprise having more than
10% of the total floor area of its establishment devoted to the sale and display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT
Any business enterprise having as a substantial or significant portion of its activity on any given
day or night the presentation of live shows, motion-picture films or sound recordings or similar
visual or audio material, which are characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction
of human male or female genitals, pubic areas or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or
specified sexual activities; or any business enterprise serving food and beer, wine or liquor whose
entertainers or waiters and waitresses appear in a state that displays male or female genitals,
pubic areas or buttocks; or any business enterprise that offers services requiring the client or
customer to display male or female genitals, pubic areas or buttocks, except medical and health
services establishments.
ALTERATIONS
As applied to a building or structure:
The change or rearrangement in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or in the exit facilities;
An enlargement of a building or structure, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in
height;
The moving from one location or position to another; and
Any alteration whereby a structure is adapted to another or different use, including any
separation into rooms or spaces by the installation of nonbearing partitions.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS
Structures, equipment, devices or construction techniques used for the production of heat, light,
cooling, electricity or other forms of energy on site and may be attached to or separate from the
principal structure. Current examples include windmills, solar collectors and solar greenhouses,
heat pumps or other related devices. For the purposes of this chapter, this definition shall apply to
individual residences and businesses. Commercial generating plants are excluded.
AMUSEMENT CENTER (VIDEO ARCADE)
Any indoor place or enclosure in which is maintained or operated, for the amusement, patronage
or recreation of the public, three or more coin-controlled amusement devices, including the type
commonly known as "bagatelle," "baseball," "foosball," "pinball" and "video games."
ANIMAL HOSPITAL
A business that treats and regularly houses animals on the premises overnight and for extended
periods for treatment.
AWNING
A rooflike shelter, made of fabric and which may be retractable, that extends over a doorway,
window or the facade of a building in order to provide protection, as from the sun or weather.
AWNING SIGN
Any visual message incorporated into an awning attached to a building.
BASEMENT
That space of a building that is partly below grade which has more than 1/2 of its height,
measured from floor to ceiling, above the average established curb level or finished grade of
grounds adjoining the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 290/376
A single-family dwelling where overnight lodging, with or without the service of meals, is offered to
transient guests for compensation. This term includes hostels and tourist homes but does not
include hotels, motor lodge, tourist cabins or similar terms.
BUILDING
Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land, has one or more floors and a roof and is
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING AREA
The aggregate of the areas of all enclosed and roofed spaces of the principal building and all
accessory buildings. Such areas shall be computed by using outside building dimensions
measured on a horizontal plane at ground level.
BUILDING FRONT OR FACE
The outer surface of a building which is visible from any private or public street, highway, driveway
or off-street parking area, including window display areas.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance measured, in the case of a building with a flat roof, from the average
elevation of the finished grade level around the entire perimeter of the building to the level of the
highest point of the roof beams and, in the case of a building with a pitched roof, from the average
finished grade level to halfway between the top of the plate and the ridge, but not including
chimneys, spires, mechanical penthouses, towers, tanks and similar projections.
BUSINESS, DRIVE-IN
A retail sales or service facility at which a product is sold or a service is performed for customers
while they are in their motor vehicles in off-street parking or service areas. This term shall include
drive-in banking, drive-in photo processing, fast-food establishments, restaurants, refreshment
stands and similar uses. This term shall not include retail fuel outlets, drive-in theater or car wash
establishments.
BUSINESS, NEIGHBORHOOD
Small commercial establishments (of less than 6,000 square feet in gross floor area) catering
primarily to nearby residential areas and providing convenience goods and services, including but
not limited to grocery stores, drugstores, beauty salons, barbershops and carryout dry-cleaning
and laundry pickup stations.
BUSINESS, SERVICE
A commercial establishment primarily providing services rather than selling products.
BUSINESS SIGN
A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry conducted upon the premises
or to a commodity or service sold or offered by such business, profession or industry upon the
premises where such sign is located.
CARPORT
A roofed structure without enclosing walls, used for the storage of one or more motor vehicles.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
A certificate issued by the Code Enforcement Official stating that a structure or the use thereof is
in compliance with this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A certificate issued by the Code Enforcement Official upon completion of construction or alteration
of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all of the requirements of the
NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
CHURCH
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 291/376
Any structure used for worship or religious instruction, including social and administrative rooms
accessory thereto.
CLUB
Any organization catering to members and their guests or a building or premises used for
recreational, general, social or athletic purposes not open to the general public. Clubs shall not be
conducted primarily for gain, and vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities shall not
be conducted except as required for membership and purposes of such club. For the purpose of
this chapter, this term shall include religious organizations, lodges, fraternal organizations, mutual
benefit societies and other similar organizations.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
A development of lots to be used for single-family residences, each containing less area than the
minimum lot area required for the zone within which such development occurs, while maintaining
the density limitation imposed by said minimum lot area through the provision of open space as
part of the site development plan.
CONDOMINIUM
A building or groups of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure, common
areas and facilities are owned by all the owners of individual units on a proportional undivided
basis. Condominiums are a form of ownership of units which may be built in residential or nonresidential
districts. Condominiums are governed under Article 9-B of the Real Property Law, also
known as the "Condominium Act" of the State of New York.
COPY-CHANGE SIGN
Any sign on which the visual copy may be periodically changed, either manually or automatically.
DAY CARE
Care provided for three or more children away from their own home for more than three hours but
less than 24 hours per day per child, on a regular basis which care is provided with or without
compensation or payment.
DAY-CARE CENTER
A place which provides day care for seven or more children away from their own homes.
DAY-CARE HOME (FAMILY)
Day care of not more than six children provided in a family home.
DEVELOPMENT
Any change made to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
excluding normal maintenance to farm roads.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
Any sign limited to providing information on the direction to an activity, business or event.
DIRECTORY SIGN
A sign that lists two or more business enterprises, consisting of a matrix and sign components.
DRIVEWAY
A roadway or aisle, with a maximum pavement width of 30 feet, providing a means of access from
a street to a property or off-street parking area. An accessway may also be deemed a driveway.
DWELLING
Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place for
one or more persons. Structures which do not have permanent or approved sanitary facilities shall
not be considered a residential dwelling. In addition, no basement sited independently of a
structure shall be used exclusively as a dwelling.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 292/376
DWELLING UNIT
One room or rooms connected together, designed for occupancy by one family, for owner
occupancy or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from
any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing independent
cooking and sleeping facilities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
Erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance by municipal agencies or public
utilities of telephone dial equipment centers, electrical or gas substations, water treatment or
storage facilities, pumping stations and similar facilities or public receiving and retransmission of
communications signals.
EXCAVATION (QUARRY; SAND PIT; GRAVEL PIT)
A lot or land area or part thereof used for the purposes of extracting stone, sand or gravel for sale,
as an industrial or commercial operation, but which does not include the process of grading a lot
preparatory to the construction of a building which has an approved zoning permit.
FAMILY
One or more persons, related by birth, marriage or other domestic bond, occupying a dwelling unit
and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FENCE
An enclosure, barrier or boundary made of posts, boards, wire, stakes, rails, plastic, chain link
mesh or similar type materials, including landscaping, which prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel
or view between properties or portions of properties or between the street or public right-of-way
and a property.
FILLING STATION
See "retail fuel outlet."
FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT
Refer to the Village of Albion Code Chapter 165, Flood Damage Prevention, as authorized by the
New York State Constitution, Article IX, § 2, and Environmental Conservation Law, Article 36.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS
For the purpose of applying the requirements for off-street parking and loading, in the case of
offices, merchandising or service types of uses, the total floor area to be used or intended to be
used by tenants or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including
areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sales of merchandise. It shall not
include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, rest
rooms, fitting or alteration rooms or general maintenance or enclosed pedestrian malls or
corridors.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor or floors of a building which are enclosed and
usable for human occupancy or the conduct of business.
FREESTANDING SIGN
Any sign not attached or part of any building but separate and permanently affixed by any other
means in or upon the ground; included are pole signs, pylon signs and masonry-wall-type signs.
FRONTAGE
All of the property abutting a road, street or thoroughfare, measured along the road, street or
thoroughfare line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building which provides for the storage of motor vehicles or household items by the
occupants on the lot upon which it is erected, with no provision for repairing or servicing such
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 293/376
vehicles for profit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
Any garage, other than a private garage, operated for gain, available on a rental basis for the
storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boat and other tangible personal property.
GASOLINE STATION
See "retail fuel outlet."
HOME OCCUPATION
Any occupation or profession customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling or a building
accessory to the dwelling by the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. A home
occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following: commercial stables and kennels,
restaurants, musical and dancing instruction to groups exceeding four pupils, convalescent
homes, mortuary establishments, garages or shops for the repair of motor vehicles.
HOUSEHOLDER
An individual who resides in a dwelling unit and who owns, rents or otherwise has a legal
possession of such unit.
ILLUMINATED SIGN
Any sign illuminated, either from the interior or exterior of the sign, by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light, paint or tape.
JUNKYARD
An area, lot or unenclosed shed where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, sorted, baled, packed, disassembled or abandoned, including auto wrecking or
dismantling yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for use of
salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but not including pawn
shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture, household
equipment and clothing, for the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of
manufacture operations, or for the sale, purchase or storage of used motor vehicles or salvaged
machinery to be reused for the purpose for which originally manufactured.
[Amended 8-14-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
KENNEL
Any lot or premises on which three or more domestic animals more than four months of age are
housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET
Space logically and conveniently located for public pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery
vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles. Required off-street loading space is
not to be included as off-street parking space in the computation of required off-street parking
area.
LOT (CORNER)
A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets, roads or
thoroughfares.
LOT (THROUGH)
An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets, roads or
thoroughfares.
LOT
A parcel of land, the dimensions and extent of which are determined by the latest official records
or recordings.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 294/376
A.
B.
C.
LOT AREA
The square footage or acreage contained within the boundaries of a lot. Any portion of a lot
included in a public road, street or highway right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot
area.
LOT DEPTH
The mean distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line, measured in the general direction of
the side lines of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE
The width of a lot measured along the front lot line. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the highway. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards.
LOT LINES
The property lines bounding the lot:
LOT LINE, FRONT
The line separating the lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH
The width of the lot between side lot lines at the front setback line.
MINING
The use of an area of land to remove minerals, metals or other items of value from the ground for
a profit, including gas and oil wells.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME
A factory-manufactured dwelling, built on a permanent steel-framed chassis and designed to be
transported to a site in one or more sections, which is intended to be used as permanent living
quarters by a single-family unit when connected to the required plumbing, heating and electrical
utilities. For the purposes of this chapter, the removal of transport wheels and/or the anchoring of
the home to a permanent foundation shall not remove it from this definition. This term shall include
double-wide mobile/manufactured homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK
Any site, lot, field, plot, parcel or tract of land on which two or more mobile/manufactured homes
are parked or located and for which either said premises or mobile/manufactured homes are
offered to the public for a fee of any type, including cost sharing. This includes the rental of the
said premises and/or the mobile/manufactured homes.
MODULAR HOME
A factory-manufactured dwelling having no permanent support frame and designed to be
transported to a site in one or more sections for erection, construction or installation as a
permanent structure.
MOTEL
A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, containing transient
and/or permanent lodging facilities for transient guests. Accessory facilities, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, retail business activities and other similar services, are included in this definition.
The term "motel" includes buildings designated as auto cabins, auto courts, motor lodges, tourist
courts, hotels and similar terms.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 295/376
MOTOR VEHICLE
Any vehicle designed to be propelled or drawn by power other than muscle power. This term shall
include automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, tractor-trailers, boats, motor homes,
snowmobiles, garden and lawn tractors.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP
A building or portion of a building arranged, intended or designed to be used for making repairs to
motor vehicles for compensation.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
A series of multiple-family dwellings, designed and built as an integrated development with a
common architectural style.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of
each other with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units
provided.
NONCONFORMING LOT, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
A lot, building or structure legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or any
amendment thereto and which does not conform to the area regulations of the district or zone in
which it is located, as specified in this chapter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN
A sign which exists at the time of enactment of this chapter and which does not conform to the
regulations and restrictions imposed herein.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use of land legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto
and which does not legally conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is located,
as specified in this chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN
A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry conducted or a commodity or
service sold or offered on a site other than upon the premises where such sign is located.
PARKING, OFF-STREET
An off-street area, with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street, intended for the
temporary storage of vehicles.
PARKING SPACE
Space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having area dimensions of not less than
9 by 20 feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto.
PERMITTED USE
A land use allowed under the regulations of this chapter.
PORTABLE OR MOBILE SIGN
A sign that is designed and intended to be transported from place to place and is not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a building or structure. Portable signs may or may not have wheels.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is
located.
PRINCIPAL USE
The main or primary purpose for which a building, structure or lot is to be used.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 296/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
The office or place of business where professional services are offered and does not primarily
involve the sale of goods or the keeping of a stock-in-trade. Professional offices include but are
not limited to medical doctors, dentists, surgeons, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners,
accountants, real estate brokers, insurance brokers, psychologists and chiropractors.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
A specific activity performed by a qualified person(s) which requires training and/or specialized
study.
PROJECTING SIGN
A sign which is attached to the exterior of a building or a structure beyond the surface of that
portion of the building or structure to which the sign is attached and not parallel to the face of the
building.
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC BUILDING AND USES
Includes but is not limited to any one or more of the following uses, including grounds and
accessory buildings necessary for their uses:
Churches, places of worship, parish houses and convents.
Public parks, including playgrounds, golf courses and recreational areas when authorized or
operated by a governmental authority.
Nursery schools, elementary schools, high schools, colleges or universities.
Day-care centers approved by the New York State Department of Social Services.
Public libraries and museums.
Not-for-profit fire, ambulance and public safety buildings.
Proprietary or not-for-profit hospitals for the care of human beings, nursing homes,
convalescent homes for adults and homes for the aged as the same are defined under the
Public Health Law or the Social Services Law of the State of New York, provided that they are
duly licensed by the State of New York.
Not-for-profit membership corporations established for cultural, social or recreational
purposes.
RECREATION AREA
The sum of all open or covered areas in a residential development used for recreation purposes.
REPRESENTATION SIGN
A three-dimensional sign built so as to physically represent the object advertised.
RESTAURANT
Any establishment, however designated, at which food or drink is sold for consumption by patrons
seated within an enclosed building or on the premises.
RETAIL FUEL OUTLET
Any establishment that sells gasoline, diesel, kerosene, propane or similar fuels to the public. This
includes service stations, convenience stores, car washes or any other facility that sells fuels.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Land set aside for use as a street, alley or other means of travel.
ROOF SIGN
Any sign constructed on or supported by the roof of any building or structure.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 297/376
SATELLITE PARABOLIC ANTENNA
A dish-shaped accessory structure capable of receiving, for the sole benefit of the principal use,
radio or television signals from a satellite in planetary orbit or other source.
SETBACK, FRONT
The required open space between the front lot line and the front of the main structure, but not
including entrance steps.
SETBACK, REAR
The required open unoccupied space measured from the rear lot line to the nearest part of the
main or accessory structure.
SETBACK, SIDE
The required open unoccupied space measured from the side lot lines to the nearest part of the
main or accessory structure.
SIGN
Any material, structure or device or part thereof composed of letter or pictorial matter, which is
located out-of-doors or on the exterior of any building or indoors as a window sign, displaying an
advertisement, announcement, notice or name, and shall include any declaration, demonstration,
display, representation, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any
person or business or cause when such is in view of the public.
SIGN AREA
The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing all elements which form an integral
part of the sign. The structure supporting a sign shall be excluded unless the structure is designed
in a way to form an integral background for the display.
SIGN LIGHTING DEVICE
Any light, string or groups of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on or from a sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE
The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for the sign. In the case of the sign structure
consisting of two or more sides where the angle formed between any two of the sides or the
projection thereof exceeds 30°, each side shall be considered a separate sign structure.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A detached residential dwelling designed for and occupied by only one family.
SITE PLAN
A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography, location of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings and
any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Board (also referred to as "site
development plan").
SITE PLAN REVIEW
A review and approval process, conducted by the Planning Board, whereby site plans are
reviewed utilizing criteria stated in this chapter.
SOLAR ACCESS
Space open to the sun and clear of overhangs or shade.
SPECIAL PERMIT USES
Those particular uses which are specifically permitted in a given district only when the specific
criteria enumerated in this chapter are met.
STOCK ANIMAL
Includes horses, cows, goats, sheep, pigs, rabbits, fowls and other similar animals.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 298/376
STREET LINE
The right-of-way line of a street; the front lot line; the line separating a lot from a street.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something
having a fixed location on the ground. For example, structures include buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences, signs, sheds, billboards and poster panels, docks and/or similar construction types.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
SWIMMING POOL
Any body of water or receptacle for water, having a capability of a depth of 18 inches or more at
any point, used or capable of being used for swimming, bathing or wading and installed or
constructed either above or below ground.
TAVERN
Any establishment, licensed by the State of New York, that engages in the sale for on-premises
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign which is intended to advertise community or civic projects, real estate for sale or lease or
other special events on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY USE
An activity or use conducted for a specified limited period of time, not exceeding six months. This
term shall include those uses incidental to construction projects, festival tents/refreshments
stands, temporary real estate sales offices incidental to a subdivision project and similar type
uses.
TOWER
Includes any structure, including dish antennas, whether attached to a building or freestanding
and whether guyed or self-supporting, designed to be used as or for the support of devices to be
used for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, such as but not limited to
broadcast, shortwave, citizens band, FM or television signals or wind-driven devices, such as
energy converters and wind,speed and/or direction indicators.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
A detached building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two
families. This term shall include duplexes.
USE, SPECIAL PERMIT
A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district,
but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relating to the neighborhood, would promote
the public health, safety, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare.
Such uses may be permitted in a zoning district as a special permit use only if specific provision
for such special permit use is made in this chapter.
VARIANCE
A variance is any departure from these regulations granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals as it
applies to a particular piece of property. Variances run with the land and are not particular to any
one landowner.
VARIANCE, AREA
Authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed
by the dimensional or physical requirements of this chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 299/376
A.
VARIANCE, USE
Authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise
not allowed or is prohibited by this chapter.
VIDEO ARCADE
See "amusement center."
VILLAGE CLERK
The official appointed to the position of Village Clerk of the Village of Albion.
WALL SIGN
A sign which is painted on or attached to the outside wall of a building or structure with the face of
the sign in the plane parallel to such wall and not extending more than 15 inches from the face of
such wall.
WINDOW SIGN
A sign, visible from a sidewalk, street, off-street parking area or other public place, painted or
affixed on glass or other window material or located inside within four feet of the window, but not
including graphics in connection with customary window display of products.
YARD
An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT
The space within and extending the full width of the lot from the front lot line to the part of the
principal building which is nearest to such front line. (See also "setback, front.")
YARD, REAR
An open space extended across the entire width of the lot between the rear wall of the principal
building and the rear line of the lot and unoccupied except for accessory building and open
porches. In the case of corner and through lots, there will be no rear yards but only front and side
yards. (See also "setback, rear.")
YARD SALE
The temporary displaying of household items and clothing for sale on a yard or porch or in a barn
or garage. This term shall include garage sales, barn sales, porch sales and sales similar in
nature.
YARD, SIDE
An open space extending between the side building line and the nearest side lot line, situated
between the front and rear yards. (See also "setback, side.")
ZONING PERMIT
A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Official authorizing the construction and/or use of lots
and structures and the dimensions and characteristics of such lots and structures in conformity
with this chapter.
Article III. Permits and Procedures
§ 290-13. Permit required.
No development activities shall commence nor shall any building or structure be erected, moved,
added to or structurally altered or changed in use nor shall any land area or part thereof be
changed in use without a zoning permit therefor issued by the Code Enforcement Official. No
zoning permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Official except in conformity with the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 300/376
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
provisions of this chapter, unless he receives a written order from the Zoning Board of Appeals in
the form of an administrative interpretation or variance as provided by this chapter.
The zoning permit may be issued in conjunction with and on the same form as a building permit.
The certificates and permits enumerated herein are hereby established for the equitable
enforcement and administration of the provisions of this chapter. A zoning permit or special use
permit shall be a prerequisite for an application for a building permit for the erection or alteration of
a building, structure or use thereof or for the change in the use of any land area or existing
building.
§ 290-14. Issuance of zoning permits.
The Code Enforcement Official is hereby empowered under the procedures and requirements
specified herein to issue a zoning permit for any plans regarding the construction or alteration or
demolition of any building or part of any building or the change in the use of any land area or part
thereof or for the change in use of any existing building, where he shall determine that such plans
are not in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
If the proposed use is for the construction of a new single- or two-family dwelling, the expansion or
structural alteration of an existing single- or two-family dwelling or the erection of a use or
structure accessory to a single- or two-family dwelling, the Code Enforcement Official shall
carefully consider the application for compliance with this chapter and may either issue or deny
the permit applied for within 30 days after receipt of a complete application and determination of
environmental significance. In the event of disapproval, the reasons shall be stated clearly in
writing. The Code Enforcement Official shall deny a zoning permit until such conditions as the
disapproval are based upon have been corrected.
If the application is for any permitted use other than those specified in Subsection B, the Code
Enforcement Official shall, prior to the issuance of any permit, refer a copy of the zoning permit
application, environmental assessment and site development plan to the Planning Board for
approval in accordance with the procedures specified in Article X.
§ 290-15. Zoning permit types.
Under the terms of this chapter, the following types of zoning permits may be issued:
Permitted use. A zoning permit for a permitted use may be issued by the Code Enforcement
Official on his own authority.
Site plan approval. A zoning permit for a permitted use, other than a one- or two-family dwelling,
may be issued by the Code Enforcement Official after site plan approval from the Planning Board,
pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in Article X of this chapter.
Special permit uses. A zoning permit for a special permit use may be issued by the Code
Enforcement Official after site plan and special permit approval from the Planning Board, pursuant
to the procedures and standards specified in Articles VII, IX and X of this chapter.
Zoning permit after an appeal or request for variance. A zoning permit may be issued by the Code
Enforcement Official upon order of the Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing, as more
fully described in Article VIII.
§ 290-16. Application procedures and required information for
zoning permits.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 301/376
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Application. Application shall be made with the Code Enforcement Official on forms approved by
the Village Board and made available at the office of the Village Clerk or Code Enforcement
Official.
Information. All information on the application form shall be completed. In addition, two copies of a
property map shall be submitted with all applications. The map shall be either:
Sketch map. A sketch map shall be required with all applications for one- or two-family
dwellings and their customary accessory uses. The sketch map shall be drawn to scale and
shall show the dimensions and location of the lot and the exact size and location of all existing
and proposed buildings on the lot, parking areas, driveways, natural watercourses, surface
drainage patterns and location of existing or proposed easements; or
Site plan. A site plan shall be required with applications for all other uses. The requirements
and procedures for site plan approval are in Article X.
Evidence of property ownership or intent to purchase. Copies of deeds, titles, purchase
agreements or other proof of ownership or intent to purchase shall be attached to an application
before it shall be accepted. Surveys should be submitted, if available. If issue of ownership of land
or boundary exists, the Code Enforcement Official may require a survey by a licensed surveyor as
part of the application.
Licenses. Any use currently licensed by federal, state, county or Village agencies and already
operating within the Village shall present evidence of all currently valid licenses before any permits
for expansion of such uses are considered.
Fee. The appropriate nonrefundable fee established by the Village Board shall be collected at the
time of application. The fee structure shall be filed and posted at the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 290-17. Zoning permit granted.
If all requirements of this chapter have been met, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue a zoning
permit and return one approved copy of the map no later than 15 days after approval. The Code
Enforcement Official shall file one copy of the approved permit in the official files of the Code
Enforcement Official.
§ 290-18. Termination of permit.
Any zoning permit or special use permit for which construction has not completed or use initiated
within one year after issuance shall be automatically revoked, unless an extension is granted by
the Code Enforcement Official.
The Code Enforcement Official may grant an extension for the time of completion and may include
any conditions or requirements deemed necessary or desirable. Applicants shall justify the need
for the proposed extension. Unless such an extension is requested and approved, further work as
described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new permit has been obtained.
§ 290-19. Certificate of compliance.
The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Official when the structure or use is ready for final
inspection. The Code Enforcement Official shall then make a final inspection. If satisfied that the
regulations pertaining to the project have been complied with and that the project has been completed
as specified on the approved application, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue a certificate of
compliance with this Zoning Chapter, granting permission to occupy or use the structure. The
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 302/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
certificate of compliance may be issued in conjunction with and on the same form as any certificate of
occupancy granted pursuant to the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Article IV. Establishment of Zoning Districts and Applicability
of Regulations
§ 290-20. Establishment of districts.
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Village of
Albion, the Village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential
R-3 Multifamily Residential
R-MH Mobile Home Park
R-C Residential/Offices/Limited Commercial
CBD Central Business District
GC General Commercial
PC Planned Commercial
LI Light Industrial
C Canal Overlay
F Flood Hazard Overlay
§ 290-21. Zoning Map.
Said districts are bounded as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the Village of Albion," as
certified by the Village Clerk. The map and all explanatory matter are hereby made a part of this
chapter.
§ 290-22. Determination of location of boundaries.
Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any
of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map of the Village of Albion, the following rules
shall apply:
If district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or
highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
If district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
If district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center lines or rightof-
way lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no
distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said
Zoning Map.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 303/376
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
If a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a railroad line, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located midway between the outer tracks of said railroad line.
If a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a stream, lake or other body of
water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the Village of
Albion.
Split lots. If a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the effective date of this
chapter, a preexisting use established on such a lot may be extended to the entire lot but not more
than 25 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which such use is authorized.
In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the
Code Enforcement Official shall request the Zoning Board of Appeals to render an interpretation.
§ 290-23. Application of regulations.
The regulations set by this chapter shall be the minimum regulations within each district and shall
apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or use of land, except as hereinafter provided:
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or
part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
except in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered which:
Exceeds the height limitation for any structure within a specified district;
Accommodates or houses a greater number of families;
Occupies a greater percentage of lot area; or
Has narrower or smaller yards or other open spaces than herein required or is in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or other applicable laws.
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required or provided in
connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations set forth
herein shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building or use except as provided in § 290-43.
No yard or lot existing at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or
area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective
date of this chapter shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements established herein.
§ 290-24. Permitted modifications to zoning district regulations.
Height regulations.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas,
domes, silos and other buildings not used for human occupancy.
Chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, freestanding towers, television and radio
antennas and similar features and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried on
and above the roof level may exceed the height limitation of this chapter by not more than 20
feet, except as otherwise provide by this chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 304/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
(1)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection of a parapet wall or
cornice or ornament which may extend above the height limits of this chapter by up to five
feet.
Elevator or stair bulkheads or roof water tanks or cooling towers (including enclosures) may
exceed the height limitations of this chapter, provided that such structures, in the aggregate,
do not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
Flagpoles, radio or television antennas, masts or aerials, located on a building, may exceed
the height limitations of this chapter, provided that they do not extend more than 20 feet
above the roof of such building.
Projections into required yards. Certain architectural features may project into required yards as
follows:
Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may project into side yards a
distance not exceeding two inches per one foot of side yard width but may not exceed a total
of three feet.
Fire escapes may project into side and rear yards a distance not exceeding four feet, six
inches.
Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and necessary landings and
chimneys may project a distance not exceeding three feet, provided that such features do not
occupy, in the aggregate, more than 1/3 of the length of the building wall on which they are
located.
Patios may be located in side and rear yards provided that they are not closer than five feet to
any adjacent property line.
Article V. District Regulations
§ 290-25. Single-Family Residential District (R-1).
Purpose. The purpose of the Single-Family Residential District (R-1) is to provide for
neighborhoods of predominantly single-family dwellings, protected from incompatible uses and
development.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
One-family dwellings.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
Home occupations, subject to the regulations in § 290-53.
One private garage or carport with a maximum capacity of 720 square feet for the parking of
automobiles of residents on the premises. The use of a private garage for the repair of
automobiles or other vehicles for a profit shall be prohibited.
Customary accessory structures serving residential uses, including but not limited to private
swimming pools, fences, storage buildings, toolhouses, greenhouses, tennis courts, pet
shelters and fireplaces.
Private swimming pools subject to the provisions of § 290-56 of this chapter, the NYS Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and other applicable laws.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 305/376
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Off-street parking subject to the provisions of § 290-43 of this chapter.
Signs subject to the provisions of Article XI of this chapter.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special permit regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Public and semipublic uses and buildings.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Cluster residential developments.
Townhouses.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet or the average of the front setbacks of existing buildings, if any, within 150
feet of the proposed building on either side thereof, whichever is less.
Side: five feet.
Rear: 25 feet.
Lot width: 75 feet.
Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet.
Height: 30 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Maximum lot coverage: 50% (including accessory structures).
§ 290-26. One- and Two-Family Residential District (R-2).
Purpose. The purpose of the One- and Two-Family Residential District (R-2) is to provide a stable
environment for single- and two-family residential developments, free from incompatible uses.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
One-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
Customary accessory structures and uses as permitted and regulated in the Single-Family
Residential District (R-1).
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special permit regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 306/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
D.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses.
Conversion of single-family dwellings into two dwelling units.
Townhouses.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet or the average of the front setbacks of existing buildings, if any, within 150
feet of the proposed building on either side thereof, whichever is less.
Side: five feet.
Rear: 25 feet or 25% of the lot depth, whichever is greater.
Lot width: 60 feet for the first dwelling unit plus 15 feet for each additional dwelling unit but
need not exceed 200 feet.
Height: 30 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet for the first dwelling unit and 2,500 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit.
Maximum building coverage: 50% (including accessory structures).
§ 290-27. Multifamily Residential District (R-3).
[Amended 6-28-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
Purpose. The purpose of the Multifamily Residential District (R-3) is to provide a stable
environment for multifamily residences, such as apartment complexes and townhouses.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Multifamily dwellings and developments, subject to the requirements in this section.
Townhouses, subject to the requirements of § 290-69, except that a special use permit shall
not be required.
Single-family and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures, subject to the
same requirements in the R-1 or R-2 District, respectively.
Permitted accessory structures and uses. Permitted accessory structures and uses shall be as
follows:
Customary accessory structures and uses serving multifamily dwellings and developments,
including but not limited to private swimming pools, fences, storage buildings, toolhouses,
greenhouses and recreational facilities.
Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 290-43 of this chapter.
Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XI of this chapter.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 307/376
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
[a]
[b]
[c]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
(a)
(3)
F.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses.
Specifications for multifamily dwellings and developments. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet.
Side: 15 feet. Multiple dwellings shall not be located closer to the side and rear property
lines than a distance equal to twice the height of the principal structure.
Rear: 25 feet. Multiple dwellings shall not be located closer to the side and rear property
lines than a distance equal to twice the height of the principal structure.
Lot width: 60 feet for the first dwelling unit plus 15 feet for each additional dwelling unit, but
need not exceed 200 feet.
Height: 40 feet.
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
Maximum building coverage: 30% (including accessory structures).
Other provisions and requirements for multifamily dwellings and developments.
No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing structures be occupied
until final site plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board and permits have been
issued by all governmental agencies involved.
Unit distribution.
No more than 30% of the total number of units within a multiple-family dwelling
development shall be efficiency units.
No more than 30% of the total units within a multiple-family dwelling development shall
have three or more bedroom units.
Minimum area and yard requirements.
Minimum area and yard requirements for each multiple-family structure within a multiplefamily
development shall be as follows:
Setback:
Front: 30 feet.
Rear: 25 feet.
Side: 15 feet.
Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet or the height of the highest adjacent
building, whichever is greater.
Every building shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all interior roads,
driveways and parking areas.
A strip of land at least six feet in depth surrounding each building shall be kept
completely open except for foundation plantings of less than six feet in height.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 308/376
[c]
(4)
(5)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
Courtyards bounded on three sides by the wings of a single building or by the
walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum court width of two feet for
each one foot in height of the tallest adjacent building.
No exterior wall shall exceed 100 feet in length unless there is a lateral offset of at least eight
feet in its alignment. Each offset shall occur no less frequently than along each 100 feet of
length of such exterior wall.
All stairways to the second floor or higher shall be located inside the building.
Access to public street.
All multiple-family dwelling developments shall have direct access to a public street or a
private street which is improved to meet Village standards.
Where there are 12 or more dwelling units in a development, access from the common
parking area(s) to the public street shall be provided by either a driveway, a private street
or a street dedicated to the Village by the developer. The minimum width of any private
street in a multiple-family development shall be:
Twelve feet if on-street parking is not allowed; or
Eighteen feet if parking is allowed on one side of the street.
If there are more than 50 dwelling units in a multiple-family development or if, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, the location or topography of the site indicates the need
for additional access, the Planning Board may require such additional access as a
condition of site plan approval.
In addition, all provisions of the Village Code regulating for the design of roads and
provision of fire lanes shall apply.
Requirements for off-street parking as provided in § 290-43 of this chapter shall be met,
except that the location of off-street parking lots may be modified to conform with the
approved site development plan, provided that off-street parking shall not be located within
any required setback areas. Paved pedestrian walkways, with appropriate lighting, shall be
provided from off-street parking areas to all living units each parking area is intended to serve.
Services.
Garbage pickup and other utility areas shall be provided. Such areas shall be located
with a view both to convenience and to minimizing the detrimental effect on the aesthetic
character of the building(s) and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing,
walls or shrubbery of at least six feet in height around the perimeter. Fencing and walls
shall be not more than fifty-percent open on the vertical surface.
Recreation; open space; maintenance.
Multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be designed to create usable private open
space. A minimum of 10% of the total tract area, exclusive of the required setback areas,
buffer strip and parking areas, shall be designated for common recreational purposes.
No recreational area shall be less than 10,000 square feet in area nor less than 100 feet
in width. Areas designated for recreation purposes shall be approved by the Planning
Board.
Multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be attractively landscaped and properly
maintained. Open space adjacent to, around or between driveways, parking areas,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 309/376
(d)
(a)
(b)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
structures or other required improvements shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick
stand of grass or other plant material.
Multiple-family developments shall be constructed in accord with the site plan approval
by the Planning Board and shall be designed to include adequate provisions for
stormwater runoff.
Utilities.
All public utility, electric, gas, cable television and telephone lines shall be installed
underground.
Multiple-family developments shall be served exclusively by public water and sanitary
sewer services. Connections to existing supply and disposal systems shall be approved
by the appropriate authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
§ 290-28. Mobile Home Park District (R-MH)
Purpose. The purpose of the Mobile Home Park Residential District (R-MH) is to provide a stable
residential environment for mobile homes in mobile home parks.
Permitted uses. Mobile/manufactured home parks, subject to the following:
All mobile/ manufactured home parks shall be developed and operated in conformance with
Chapter 179 of the Village Code, which is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing structures be occupied
until final site plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board and permits have been
issued by all governmental agencies involved.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
Customary accessory structures and uses as permitted and regulated in the Multifamily
Residential District (R-3) and in Chapter 179 of the Village Code.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses.
§ 290-29. Residential/Offices/Limited Business District (R-C).
Purpose. The purpose of the Residential/Offices/Limited Business District (R-C) is to provide for a
mix of residential, offices and limited business uses in transitional areas between residential and
commercial areas.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
One- and two-family dwellings.
Neighborhood businesses with less than 6,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Administrative, professional or medical offices.
Funeral parlors.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 310/376
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
E.
A.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses.
Permitted accessory uses.
Customary accessory structures and uses as permitted in the Single-Family Residential (R-1)
District.
Private garages and storage buildings which are necessary to store any vehicles, equipment
or materials on the premises and which are used in conjunction with a permitted business or
office use.
Dwellings on the upper stories of a commercial building, provided that 200 square feet of
open space shall be available for each dwelling unit on the lot exclusively for recreation and
household service activities.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities, subject to the provisions of §§ 290-43 and
290-44 of this chapter.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Multifamily dwellings and developments.
Townhouse developments.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet.
Side: five feet.
Rear: 25 feet or 25% of the lot depth, whichever is greater.
Lot width: 60 feet for the first dwelling unit plus 15 feet for each additional dwelling unit but
need not exceed 200 feet.
Height: 30 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size:
Single-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet.
Two-family dwelling: 10,000 square feet.
All other uses: as needed to comply with setback, parking and lot coverage requirements.
Maximum building coverage: 50% (including accessory structures).
§ 290-30. Central Business District (CBD).
Purpose. The purposes of the Central Business District (CBD) is to provide for a pedestrianoriented
business environment with establishments serving the needs of area residents, especially
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 311/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
B.
retail and service businesses and professional offices. Permitted uses are intended to create a
business district free from conflicting land uses.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Retail business establishments, such as but not limited to the following:
Stores selling groceries, meats, baked goods and other such food items.
Drugstores and pharmacies.
Stationery, tobacco and newspaper stores and confectionery stores.
Clothing, variety and general merchandise stores.
Hardware, appliance, radio and television sales and service.
Eating and drinking establishments.
Office supplies and equipment.
Furniture and home furnishings.
Personal service establishments, such as but not limited to the following:
Barbershops and beauty shops.
Shoe repair and fix-it shops.
Business and professional offices, including but not limited to medical, legal, engineering,
architectural, planning, real estate and insurance offices and banks. Banks with drive-in
facilities shall be permitted, provided that at least five car length spaces are provided in
the approach drive within the property line of the lot for each drive-in teller's window.
Such spaces shall be exclusive of required off-street parking spaces.
Dry-cleaning stores and laundromats.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), regarding commercial recreation or amusement
centers, was repealed 4-9-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003. See now Subsection D(3).
Assembly halls and theaters, excluding drive-in theaters.
Newspaper printing, including incidental job printing. Such operations shall be limited to
having not more than 15 full-time persons engaged therein at any one time and using not
more than 30 horsepower in electric motor power.
Funeral parlors.
Hotels and motels, subject to the following standards:
Restaurants, cafeterias, swimming pools, newsstands, pharmacies, barbershops,
hairdressers, gift shops and other personal service shops for the convenience of guests
may be permitted as accessory uses. With the exception of an identifying sign for the
restaurant, no external evidence of internal commercial activities shall be permitted.
All motels shall provide a commercial-type refuse container on site. Such containers shall
be placed on a concrete or stone pad, visually screened from view, and shall provide
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 312/376
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
D.
adequate rodent control measures and shall meet all other applicable codes and
regulations.
Exterior light sources shall not be erected higher than 50 feet above the ground and shall
be placed so as to not cast direct light or glare on adjacent properties.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses, provided that day-care centers comply with the
following standards:
All day-care centers shall have an active outdoor play area of 100 square feet per child.
Outdoor play areas shall be appropriately fenced or otherwise protected from roads and
nearby properties.
No outdoor play equipment shall be located within 10 feet of any property line, fence or
structure.
Off-street parking and loading shall comply with the provisions of §§ 290-43 and 290-44.
The operator shall have a valid license from New York State.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be follows:
Shops for the manufacture or processing of articles incidental to the conduct of a retail
business being lawfully conducted on the premises, provided that:
All such articles manufactured or processed are sold at retail on the premises.
No more than four persons are engaged in such manufacturing or processing at any one
time and in any one establishment.
Such activity shall not produce offensive odors, noise, vibration, heat, glare or dust.
Private garages and storage buildings which are necessary to store any vehicles, equipment
or materials on the premises and which are used in conjunction with a permitted use.
Dwellings on the upper stories of a commercial building, provided that such dwellings meet
the requirements of all applicable state and local codes and regulations.
Satellite TV dish antennas subject to the provisions of § 290-57.
Other customary accessory structures and uses, which, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, are similar in nature and scale to those listed above.
Special permit uses. uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Drive-in businesses (other than banks, which are permitted by right).
Commercial recreation or amusement centers, conducted within a completely enclosed
building, such as but not limited to:
[Added 4-9-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
Bowling alleys.
Pool halls.
Video arcades, subject to the following requirements:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 313/376
[1]
[2]
[3]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
Arcades shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
No one under the age of 16 shall be permitted in an arcade while school is in
session.
An owner or responsible person over the age of 18 shall be on the premises during
all hours of operations.
Other provisions and requirements.
Buffer strip. Commercial structures shall provide a natural buffer strip, free of buildings,
parking areas and driveways, not less than 10 feet in depth, to be perpetually maintained so
as to provide visual screening and separation between commercial and residential uses.
Landscaping utilized to provide this buffer shall be not less than four feet in height at the time
of planting and spaced not more than three feet apart. The necessity for the strip, and the
approval of the design of the strip, shall be determined by the Planning Board during site plan
review.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Refuse containers. Commercial structures shall provide a commercial-type refuse container
on site. Such containers shall be placed on concrete or stone areas and visually screened,
shall provide rodent control and shall be located no closer than 10 feet from any building.
Residential lot line. No commercial structure shall be permitted within 30 feet of the nearest
lot line in an R-1 or R-2 District.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading and access facilities shall be subject to the
provisions of §§ 290-43, 290-44 and 290-45 of this chapter.
Signage shall comply with the requirements of Article XI.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all permitted principal and accessory uses shall be
carried on in a fully enclosed building. Such provisions shall not apply to parking of registered
vehicles, outdoor loading or other service activities.
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided to minimize visual conflicts with adjacent land
uses. All fencing shall comply with § 290-46.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 20 feet or in line with adjoining buildings.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Side: none required
Rear: 10 feet.
Lot width: 60 feet.
Height: 40 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size: as needed to comply with setback, open space and off-street parking
regulations
Maximum building coverage: 50% (including accessory buildings).
§ 290-31. General Commercial District (GC).
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 314/376
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(14)
B.
Purpose. The purpose of the General Commercial District (GC) is to provide for business
establishments serving the needs of area residents, especially retail and service businesses.
Permitted uses are intended to create a business district free from conflicting land uses.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Any use permitted in the Central Business District (CBD).
Custom shops, including but not limited to printing, electrical, heating, plumbing or
woodworking.
Building supply and farm equipment stores.
Electrical, heating, plumbing or woodworking shops.
Wholesale establishments, provided that all sales activities are conducted in a completely
enclosed building.
Public and semipublic buildings and uses, including day-care centers [subject to the
provisions in § 290-30B(8)], churches, schools, hospitals and nursing homes.
Recreation or amusement enterprises, which need not be carried out within a completely
enclosed building.
Commercial greenhouses or nurseries.
Boat or marine sales or service.
Machine tool sales, rental or service.
Commercial storage buildings providing space for rent.
Veterinary animal clinics or offices with interior operations only.
Building materials storage, including the production of incidental millwork.
Automobile sales/rental establishments, subject to the following requirements:
Such sales shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building located on the same lot,
devoted to the sales and servicing of automobiles.
Accessory to such building, the sale of new and/or used automobiles may be carried on
in an unenclosed area, provided that:
Such area is on the same or an adjacent lot to such building. If the enclosed area is
on an adjacent lot, the lot shall be no more than 200 feet from the lot with the
building and shall further be in the same ownership as said building, be located in
the General Commercial District (GC) and be used for no other purpose.
The entire surface of the site to be traveled by motor vehicles shall be hard-surfaced
and shall be suitably drained.
No exterior light source shall be erected in excess of 50 feet above the ground
surface, and all lighting shall be placed to eliminate the casting of direct light or glare
upon adjacent properties.
Suitable landscaping and/or fencing of such unenclosed area shall be required.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 315/376
[5]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
(1)
E.
A minimum area of 180 square feet shall be provided for each automobile displayed,
parked or stored in any unenclosed area. Each automobile stored or displayed
therein shall be placed or parked parallel to each other facing in the same direction
toward the street upon which such lot fronts, and such automobiles shall be
arranged in an orderly manner in such spaces.
No vehicles shall be displayed for sale or rent within 25 feet of any property line.
No retail sale of fuels shall occur on the site at any time.
Repair of motor vehicles on site shall be prohibited unless the provisions of § 290-67 of
this chapter are complied with in full.
Other business uses which, as interpreted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, are similar in
nature and scale to those permitted above.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
Shops for the manufacture or processing of articles incidental to the conduct of a retail
business being lawfully conducted on the premises, provided that:
All such articles manufactured or processed are sold at retail on the premises.
No more than four persons are engaged in such manufacturing or processing at any one
time and in any one establishment.
Such activity shall not produce offensive odors, noise, vibration, heat, glare or dust.
Storage facilities in conjunction with permitted principal uses, provided that all products and
materials used or stored are in a completely enclosed building or enclosed by a masonry wall
fence or hedge not less than six feet in height. The height of all materials and equipment
stored shall not exceed the height of the wall.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities, subject to the provisions of §§ 290-43,
290-44 and 290-45 of this chapter.
Other customary accessory structures and uses determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals
to be similar in nature and scale to those listed above.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Motor vehicle service stations, including filling stations and auto repair shops.
Animal hospitals with outdoor facilities or kennels.
Drive-in businesses (except for drive-in banks, which are permitted by right).
Car wash establishments.
Other provisions and requirements.
Buffer strip. Commercial structures shall provide a natural buffer strip, free of buildings,
parking areas and driveways, not less than 10 feet in depth, to be perpetually maintained so
as to provide visual screening and separation between commercial and residential uses.
Landscaping utilized to provide this buffer shall be not less than four feet in height at the time
of planting and spaced not more than three feet apart. The necessity for the strip, and the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 316/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
approval of the design of the strip, shall be determined by the Planning Board during site plan
review.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Refuse containers: Commercial structures shall provide a commercial-type refuse container
on site. Such containers shall be placed on concrete or stone areas and visually screened,
shall provide rodent control and shall be located no closer than 10 feet from any building.
Residential lot line. No commercial structure shall be permitted within 30 feet of the nearest
lot line of any R-1 or R-2 Residential District.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be subject to the provisions of Article
VI of this chapter.
Signage shall comply with the provisions of Article XI.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Front: 20 feet.
Side: eight feet.
Rear: five feet.
Lot width: 60 feet.
Height: 40 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size: as needed to comply with setback, open space and off-street parking
regulations.
Maximum building coverage:
All uses except for kennels and motor vehicle service stations: 75%, including accessory
buildings.
Kennels and motor vehicle service stations: 50%, including accessory buildings.
§ 290-32. Planned Commercial Development (PC).
Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Commercial Development District (PC) is to provide for a
mix of business, office, institutional and/or residential uses, developed on a single parcel or a
group of adjoining parcels, developed on a coordinated basis with the benefit of an overall plan.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Neighborhood businesses.
Day-care centers and other public or semipublic uses.
Medical, professional and administrative offices.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 317/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
D.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
Private garages and storage buildings which are necessary to store any vehicles, equipment
or materials on the premises and which are used in conjunction with a permitted use.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities, subject to the provisions of §§ 290-43 and
290-44 of this chapter.
Signs, fencing and landscaping subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Other customary accessory structures and uses determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals
to be similar in nature and scale to those listed above.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet.
Side: 15 feet.
Rear: 25 feet.
Lot width: 60 feet.
Height: 40 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size: as needed to comply with setback, open space and off-street parking
regulations.
Maximum building coverage: 50%, including accessory buildings.
Other provisions and requirements.
During site plan review, the Planning Board shall determine that the street system serving the
site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic flows and that the proposal will not create a
burden or nuisance for adjoining property owners.
The Planning Board shall determine that the plans for storm drainage are capable of serving
the planned commercial area.
The development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with an overall plan for
the entire area and shall be designed with a single architectural theme, with appropriate
common off-street parking, service road access and landscaping.
The number, location and width of entranceways to provide access to such developments
shall be determined on an individual-case basis during site plan review by the Planning
Board.
Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided, pursuant to the Parking Schedule in § 290-43.
Private garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles used in conjunction with a
permitted business use shall also be permitted.
Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient amount to permit the transfer
of goods and materials on the premises rather than on a public street or customer off-street
parking area on the premises. A dense landscaping screen of not less than six feet in height
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 318/376
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
B.
shall be required where off-street loading and unloading areas abut residential uses, so that
such operations shall be shielded from view from such residences.
A natural buffer strip, not less than 20 feet in depth, shall be perpetually maintained so as to
provide visual screening and separation between commercial and residential uses.
A commercial-type refuse container shall be provided for each building located on site. Such
containers shall be placed on concrete or stone areas and visually screened, shall provide
rodent control and shall be located no closer than 10 feet from any building.
Lighting shall be provided in a manner so as to minimize potential disturbance to adjacent
properties.
No commercial structure shall be permitted within 30 feet of the nearest lot line of any
residential district.
§ 290-33. Light Industrial District (LI).
Purpose. The purpose of the Light Industrial District (LI) is to provide for light manufacturing,
assembly and storage type facilities.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
Scientific research or experimental development of materials, methods or products, including
engineering and laboratory research.
Administrative, educational and other related activities and facilities in conjunction with a
permitted use.
Manufacture or assembly of electric, electronic or optical instruments or devices.
Light manufacturing, assembling, fabricating or packaging of products from previously
prepared materials, such as cloth, plastic, paper, leather, precious or semiprecious metals or
stone.
Manufacturing of food products, pharmaceuticals and the like, but not including the production
of fish, meat or dairy products or fermented foods, such as sauerkraut, vinegar or the like, or
the rendering of fats and oils.
Manufacturing of cement products.
Contractors' equipment or materials storage.
Lumberyards or coalyards.
Warehouses.
Railroad freight or classification yards; freight depots.
Welding shops.
Sale or storage of grain and feed products.
Storage yards, not including junkyards or auto wrecking yards. These yards shall be
completely enclosed by a solid fence or wall not less than seven feet nor more than 10 feet in
height.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 319/376
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
Truck terminal facilities.
Commercial storage facilities.
Auto body shops.
Other uses which, based on an interpretation by the Zoning Board of Appeals, are similar in
nature and scale to those permitted above.
Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
Customary accessory uses and structures.
Outdoor storage, as shown in an approved site plan granted by the Planning Board pursuant
to the requirements of Article X.
Offices, in conjunction with a permitted use.
Loading and unloading ramps and structures.
Quarters for caretakers or watchmen.
Signs subject to the provisions of Article XI of this chapter.
Special permit uses. Uses requiring a special permit issued by the Planning Board (subject to
special use regulations, Article VII) shall be as follows:
Essential services and utilities.
Adult bookstores or adult entertainment uses.
General office complexes.
[Added 8-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
Other provisions and requirements.
All assembly, research, engineering, administration, storage and other related activities shall
be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings.
At no time shall any use result in or cause dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, observable
gas, fumes, odors, radiation or other atmospheric pollution, objectionable noise, glare or
vibrations or hazard of fire or explosive or any other physical hazard to any adjacent buildings
or to any plant growth or any land adjacent to the site.
The architectural treatment and general appearance of all buildings and grounds shall be in
keeping with the purpose of this district and shall be of such quality and design as to be a
visual asset to the area in which they are located as well as to adjacent development.
Industrial structures shall be located so as to be a minimum of 50 feet from any nonindustrial
district.
A landscaped buffer strip not less than 20 feet in depth shall be placed and maintained so as
to provide visual screening and separation between industrial uses and any adjoining
residential district.
Outdoor storage, loading, parking and other uses shall not take place within 30 feet of any lot
line in an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-MH District.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 320/376
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
E.
The provisions of §§ 290-43, 290-44 and 290-45 shall apply to all areas designated for
parking, loading and access.
Outdoor storage areas shall be shielded from view from public streets and adjacent
residential properties by fencing, landscaping or other appropriate means as determined by
the Planning Board during site plan review.
Specifications. Specifications shall be as follows:
Setback requirements:
Front: 30 feet.
Side: 15 feet.
Rear: 25 feet.
Lot width: 60 feet.
Height: 40 feet, unless a higher height is permitted for a particular use.
Minimum lot size: as needed to comply with setback, open space and off-street parking
regulations
Maximum building coverage: 50%.
§ 290-34. Canal Overlay District (C).
Purpose. The purpose of the Canal Overlay District (C) is to encourage appropriate development
along the Erie Canal within the Village of Albion, to preserve and enhance views of and from the
Canal and to preserve natural, scenic and historic resources along the Canal.
Applicability.
The Canal Overlay District is an overlay zone designated on the Zoning Map of the Village of
Albion.
The provisions of this district shall apply in addition to those of the underlying zoning district.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be determined by the regulations of the underlying zoning
district.
Permitted accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be determined by the regulations of the underlying zoning
district.
Private boat slips, docks and other mooring facilities, pursuant to the provisions of these
regulations, shall be permitted as accessory uses.
Other provisions and requirements.
Docking requirements:
A maximum of one boat slip per residence is permitted. Multiple boat slips may be
clustered.
All docks and canalside improvements shall obtain a permit from the New York State
Thruway Authority.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 321/376
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
A.
Docks or piers shall not impede navigation or other water surface.
Docks associated with multifamily dwellings or commercial uses shall require site plan
review by the Planning Board.
Public and commercial buildings located along the state-owned canal trail shall have an
entrance which opens onto the pathway.
Natural vegetation shall be retained, to the greatest extent practicable, in any required
waterfront setback to help preserve fish and wildlife habitats, reduce erosion and
sedimentation and decrease pollutant runoff into surface waters.
Fencing shall not block views of and from the Canal.
Stormwater drainage shall be managed to minimize the flow of silt and contaminated runoff
into the Canal.
Specifications. Principal and accessory structures shall be set back from the high-water mark of
the Canal by the distance specified as the required front setback in the underlying zoning district.
Site plan review.
Any proposed principal building or any proposed or expanded paved area exceeding 5,000
square feet, located partially or entirely within the Canal Corridor, shall be submitted for site
plan review by the Village Planning Board.
Site plan review of any proposed development in the Canal Overlay District shall take into
consideration views of and from the Canal, the potential for soil erosion and runoff into the
Canal and the character of the proposed building in relation to the historic, scenic and natural
environment of the area adjoining the Canal.
§ 290-35. Flood Hazard Overlay District (F).
The requirements of Chapter 165, adopted in 1988 by the Village of Albion, shall apply to all lands
determined to be within areas of flood hazard as shown on the FIRM Maps and Flood Boundary -
Floodway Map.
The Flood Hazard Overlay District (F) shall be mapped in conjunction with the underlying zoning
district. The area within the Flood Hazard Overlay District (F) shall be identical to the areas of
special flood hazard within the Village of Albion, as shown on the Federal Flood Insurance Rate
Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). The Zoning Map serves to provide a close approximation of the flood hazard
area. The FIRM Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Map shall be used to determine the exact
legal boundaries of the special flood hazard area.
The uses permitted and the dimensional requirements for land in the F District shall be determined
by the regulations specified in this article for the underlying zoning district.
Article VI. Regulations Applicable to all Zoning Districts
§ 290-36. Accessory structures and uses.
Accessory structures.
Accessory structures shall be located to the rear of the front building line.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 322/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
Accessory structures shall not occupy more than 30% of a required rear yard in any zoning
district.
No accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a lot line in any zoning district.
Access drives or walks, flagpoles or unenclosed steps or terraces, not extending more than
one foot above the adjoining finished grade, may be located in any portion of a lot,
notwithstanding any of the above provisions.
The following uses shall be permitted when located on the same lot as the authorized uses:
Building for storing products, merchandise or vehicles incidental or accessory to the
authorized use.
Signs as permitted and regulated under Article XI.
Other customary accessory uses, structures and buildings, provided that such uses are
clearly incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as
a business.
Game center.
Except with regard to construction on property principally used for agriculture, any accessory
building shall be located on the same lot with the principal building, and no accessory building
shall be constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has been commenced, and
no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is completed and used.
§ 290-37. Temporary structures or uses.
The following temporary structures shall be deemed to be permitted uses in all zoning districts,
provided that all laws and regulations of New York State, Orleans County and the Village of Albion are
adhered to:
Temporary structures or uses incidental to construction work shall be permitted for a period of time
not to exceed one year, provided that any such structure shall be removed forthwith upon the
completion or abandonment of the construction work. Any extension of such time shall require a
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The temporary use of a dwelling as a model home, in all zoning districts in which dwellings are
permitted, for a period of time not to exceed six months.
§ 290-38. Access to public street.
Every principal building shall have access to a public street improved to meet Village requirements.
Access may be direct or by a driveway or private road constructed to Village standards. Said driveway
or private road shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 30 feet and a pavement width of not less
than 16 feet, improved with a durable all-weather surface, subject to approval of the Village Streets
Superintendent. All structures shall be located on lots so as to provide safe and convenient access for
servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
§ 290-39. Lot for every principal use.
Except as specifically provided herein, no lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal
building. No yard or other open space provided about any building shall be considered to provide
a yard or open space for any other building.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 323/376
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
Where two or more adjacent parcels of land are in the same ownership at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, they shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be considered a single
parcel or lot.
§ 290-40. Corner lots and through lots.
For the purpose of regulating the location of buildings on corner lots and on lots with frontage along
two parallel streets, all portions of a corner lot or a through lot which front on a public street shall be
subject to the front yard requirements of the zoning district in which said corner lot or through lot is
located.
§ 290-41. Visibility at intersections.
No sign, fence, wall, hedge, shrub planting or tree foliage which obstructs vision at elevations between
three and seven feet above the street level shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area
formed by two intersecting street lines and a line connecting points on such street lines 25 feet distant
from their point of intersection.
§ 290-42. Required yards and setbacks.
Where a building lot has frontage on a street which is proposed for right-of-way widening, the
required front yard setback area shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part of a former lot on which
there is an existing building or use, the subdivision shall be carried out in such a manner as will
not infringe upon any of the provisions of this chapter either with respect to any existing structures
or use and any proposed structures, use or setbacks.
Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall comply with the yard requirements of this
chapter for the principal building.
No business establishment shall place or display goods for purposes of sale or permit any coinoperated
vending machine of any type to be placed in any location that would infringe upon the
required yard areas or setbacks specified in this chapter.
§ 290-43. Off-street parking.
In all districts, except for the Central Business District (CBD), there shall be provided, at the time any
building or structure is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or changed in use, improved and
usable off-street parking spaces for motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this article
and the Parking Schedule.[1] None of the off-street parking facilities as required herein shall be
required for any existing building or use, unless said building shall be enlarged or the use of land
changed. In such cases, off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinafter specified for the
building as enlarged or to accommodate the needs of the new use.
Parking requirements for single- and two-family dwellings.
Off-street parking for single- and two family dwellings shall be provided on a driveway which
provides access to such residences or a garage which is accessory to such residential uses.
Except for parking on driveways, no front yard shall be used to park or store boats, vehicles,
travel trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers and other similar equipment on a residential
lot.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 324/376
(3)
(1)
[2]
(2)
[3]
(3)
[4]
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
B.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Off-street parking of not more than one commercial vehicle shall be permitted in conjunction
with a single- or two-family dwelling, provided that the vehicle is used by the occupant of the
premises.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Design requirements.
Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in this chapter and shall be
furnished with necessary passageways and driveways. For the purposes of this chapter, a
parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in length, exclusive of
accessways and driveways.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-43B(2), regarding access area for nonresidential uses, was
repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
(Reserved)[3]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-43B(3), regarding fire lanes, was repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998.
(Reserved)[4]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-43B(4), regarding handicapped parking spaces, was repealed 7-
8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
All off-street parking shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning Board.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
All parking areas, passageways and driveways (except where provided in connection with
one- and two-family dwellings) shall be adequately drained and surfaced with a dustless,
durable, all-weather surface, subject to approval of the Superintendent of Streets.
Each off-street parking space shall be so designed, maintained and regulated so that no
parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall occur on any public street, walk or alley
and so that any motor vehicle may be parked and unparked without moving or damaging
another.
The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more buildings or uses located
on adjacent lots may be approved by the Planning Board during site plan review, provided
that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum required of the various buildings
or uses computed separately. Joint parking, as defined herein, is encouraged.
No more than two driveways, of not less than 20 feet (two-way traffic) or 12 feet (one-way
traffic) nor more than 30 feet in width, shall be used as a means of ingress or egress for each
nonresidential use, except where the deviation from the number of or width may be deemed
necessary by the Planning Board during site plan review due to site specific requirements.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Off-street parking for nonresidential and multiple dwellings shall be set back not less than five
feet from the front lot line. Off-street parking for such uses may be permitted in the rear and
side yards, subject to approval by the Planning Board during site plan review.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
No driveway providing access to an off-street parking area shall be located within 20 feet of
any side lot line or within 50 feet of a street intersection measured along the curbline of the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 325/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
[5]
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
same street on which the driveway is located. In addition, a minimum distance of 50 feet shall
be maintained between two driveways located on any one frontage.
Location of off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be located as hereinafter
specified. If a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the
nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest public entrance of the building that said parking
area will serve.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
For one- and two-family dwellings and for all types of residential structures: on the same lot
with the building they are required to serve.
For multiple-family dwellings: not more than 200 feet from the building they are required to
serve.
For other uses: not more than 500 feet from the building they are required to serve.
Screening and landscaping.
(Reserved)[5]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-43D(1), regarding fences, walls or hedges screening off-street
parking areas, was repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
When a parking area for five or more vehicles is within or abuts a residential zoning district, a
planted buffer shall be provided. Landscaping utilized to provide this buffer shall be not less
than four feet in height at the time of planting and spaced not more than three feet apart. The
necessity for the strip, and the approval of the design of the strip, shall be determined by the
Planning Board during site plan review.
[Amended 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Lighting.
All off-street parking areas and driveways (excluding areas serving one- and two-family
dwellings) shall be illuminated adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when
the use is in operation.
Any lights used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from the street and all adjoining properties.
Units of measurement.
For the purpose of applying the requirements for off-street parking and loading, gross floor
area in the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses shall mean the total floor
area to be used or intended to be used by tenants or for service to the public as customers,
patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for
display or sales of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic
purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, restrooms, fitting or alteration rooms or general
maintenance or enclosed pedestrian malls or corridors.
In churches and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches,
bleachers, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 18 inches of such seating facilities
shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street
parking facilities.
When the determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction less than 1/2 may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess
of 1/2 shall be counted as one parking space.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 326/376
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
K.
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
Mixed occupancies and uses not specified. In any case of mixed uses, the total requirements for
off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed
separately. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for offstreet
parking facilities shall be determined by the Planning Board during site plan review. Offstreet
parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities
for any other use, except as hereinafter specified for joint use.
Joint use. The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land
may be satisfied by the same parking or loading space used jointly to the extent that it can be
shown by the owners or operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their operations and
parking needs do not overlap in point in time. If the uses, structures or parcels are under separate
ownership, the right to joint use of the parking space shall be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract
or other appropriate written document to establish the joint use. Said document shall bind the
owner, his heirs and assigns to maintain the required joint uses throughout the life of such uses
and shall be approved by the Village Attorney.
Use of public parking. Where public off-street parking facilities are available, other than off-street
parking provided for a public building, the Planning Board, during site plan review, may permit a
reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces for uses located on any lot within 600
feet of such public parking facility.
Accessory uses.
No additional off-street parking shall be required for uses accessory to any institutional use
specified in the Parking Schedule included at the end of this chapter.
In the case of accessory retail sales, boat berths, restaurants or swimming pools, the parking
requirement for either the accessory use or the principal use, whichever requirement is less,
shall be reduced by 50%.
Required off-street parking space. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for specific
uses as regulated in this chapter are contained in the Parking Schedule included at the end of
this chapter.
Editor's Note: The Parking Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 290-44. Loading regulations.
For every building, structure or part thereof having more than 5,000 square feet of gross building
area erected and occupied for business or industrial use, as well as for other uses requiring the
receipt and distribution of materials and merchandise by vehicles, there shall be space provided
and permanently maintained for loading and unloading berths on the same lot with such building.
Such berths shall be located to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets, alleys or
parking areas and provided in accord with the following standards:
Five thousand to 25,000 square feet: one space.
For each additional 25,000 square feet: one space.
The loading berth in each instance shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14
feet in height.
Such space shall have convenient access to a public street, shall not be used for customer or
employee parking and shall not be considered as part of any required off-street parking area.
§ 290-45. Access control for nonresidential uses.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 327/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
A.
In order to encourage the sound development of street frontage, the following special regulations shall
apply to all nonresidential buildings and uses:
Each separate use, grouping of attached buildings or groupings of permitted uses shall not have
more than two points of access. Additional accessways may be approved by the Planning Board,
during site plan review, based on the need for such additional access which is supported by a
traffic analysis prepared and submitted by the applicant.
The use of common access points by two or more uses shall be encouraged by the Planning
Board in order to reduce the number and closeness of access points along the streets and to
encourage the fronting of significant traffic-generating uses upon a parallel access street and not
directly upon a primary road.
Access points for industrial uses shall not be less than 24 feet nor more than 40 feet in width.
Unless otherwise specified for specific uses, all other access points and driveways shall not be
less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet in width.
All access points on the same lot shall be separated by not less than 50 feet, measured in a
straight line between the two closest curbs.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-45E, regarding the distance of a driveway to a property line, was
repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 290-46. Fences.
Definitions of terms. The following definitions are applicable to this section:
BARBED WIRE
Strands of wire twisted together with barbs at regular, close intervals.
DECORATIVE FENCE
A fence used for protection of home gardens or for decorative lawn accents being of visually
unobtrusive construction, such as decorative wood or cast-iron picket fencing.
FENCE
A barrier, as of wooden or metal posts, rails, wire mesh, etc., used as a boundary, decorative
enclosure, means of protection or confinement.
HEDGE
A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes or other natural landscaping, forming a boundary or
fence.
HEIGHT
Unless otherwise noted, the distance measured from the average grade to the top of the
fence.
LIVING FENCE
Any fence or hedge composed of live materials.
PICKET
A stake or slat, usually pointed, used as an upright in a fence.
POST
A piece of wood, metal, etc., usually square or cylindrical, set upright to support a fence.
RAIL
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 328/376
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[2]
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
A bar of wood or metal, etc., placed horizontally between upright posts to serve as a barrier or
support.
RAZOR WIRE
Strands of wire with a continuous or combination of continuous and barbed sharp cutting
edges.
RETAINING WALL
A wall built to keep a bank of earth from sliding.
STRUCTURAL FENCE
Fencing types, such as masonry, chain link, stockade, basket weave, continuous board and
other visually obstructive fencing types.
WALL
An upright structure of wood, stone, brick, etc., serving to enclose, divide, support or protect.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-46B, Permit requirements and fees, was repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998.
Fence building and maintenance regulations.
Fences shall not exceed seven feet in height in any side or rear yard in any residential zoning
district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MH and R-C).
Fences shall not exceed four feet in height in any front yard, except that fenceposts may be
up to five feet in height.
Fences in the side or rear yard of property in the CBD, GC, PC or LI Zoning District may
exceed seven feet in height, provided that site plan approval is obtained from the Village
Planning Board.
Fences may be positioned a maximum of six inches above the ground to allow for grass
mowing under the fence.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-46C(5), regarding the finished side of a fence or wall, was
repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
No part of any fence or wall shall be located closer than six inches to any property line.
The fencepost shall be placed in the ground to a depth defined by generally accepted
standards to ensure stability. The fencepost shall be surrounded in the ground by a concrete,
crushed stone or packed dirt foundation of at least six inches greater than the post diameter.
Masonry fencing shall be supported with a footer in ground to meet state frostline
requirements in our area.
If site plan review is required for proposed fencing located in a front yard, the Village Planning
Board shall consider, in its review, the suitability of said fencing with regards to the general
architectural standards of the surrounding properties.
No fence or wall shall be erected which creates a traffic hazard or endangers public safety.
Any fence constructed before this regulation was in effect may be repaired or maintained, in
keeping with the original architecture of the fence. Any substantial improvement or changes in
height, length or material shall require that the new fencing comply with the regulations of this
section.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 329/376
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
[3]
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
Fences and walls shall be maintained in a safe and sturdy condition. Paint, stain or wood
preservative shall be applied to wood and metal fences as necessary for maintenance. No
fence or wall shall be permitted to become unsightly or remain in a state of disrepair.
Barbed, razor or other security-type wire shall be allowed only in the Light Industrial Zoning
District (LI) or for essential services or utilities in any district and shall be used only as a
security barrier at the top of other fence material. Minimum height above grade for barbed,
razor or other security-type wire shall be eight feet. Installation of this type of fence shall
require site plan review by the Village Planning Board.
Chain link fences shall be erected with the closed loop at the top of the fence.
All entrance gates shall open into the property.
(Reserved)[3]
Editor's Note: Former § 290-46D, Temporary fences, was repealed 7-8-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 290-47. Individual mobile homes.
No individual mobile/manufactured home shall be allowed to locate outside of an approved
mobile/manufactured home park in the Village of Albion. Refer to Article V for
mobile/manufactured home park provisions.
Those individual mobile/manufactured homes located on single lots, which lawfully exist at the
time of enactment of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain subject to the provisions found in
§ 290-50, Nonconforming uses, structures and lots, of this chapter. No such mobile/ manufactured
home shall be replaced with another mobile/ manufactured home.
§ 290-48. Modular homes.
Modular homes shall be affixed to a permanent site-built foundation and shall meet the requirements of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 290-49. Preservation of natural features.
No structure shall be built within 50 feet of the bed of a stream or drainage swale carrying water
on an average of three months of the year, except for:
Public bridges, public waterworks and other municipal or public utility facilities.
Such private bridges, fords, drainage conduits, embankments and similar structures as are
necessary to permit access to a lot or portion thereof or as are incidental to a lawful use of a
lot, provided that such structure shall not have a material adverse effect on the stream nor
alter the flow of water therein nor substantially increase the likelihood of flood or overflow in
the area.
No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for use other than on the premises
from which taken, except in connection with the approved construction or alteration of a building,
swimming pool or other use or structure on such premises pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
No movement of earth or erosion shall be permitted at any time in any district which adversely
affects conditions on any other property.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 330/376
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
E.
Whenever natural features, such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and views, interfere with the
proposed use of property, the retention of the maximum amount of such features consistent with
the intended use of the property shall be encouraged.
§ 290-50. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit nonconforming uses and structures to continue until
they are removed but not to encourage their survival.
Construction approval prior to adoption of this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building or site complying with
existing laws, a permit for which had been duly granted before the date of adoption of this chapter
or any applicable amendment thereto.
Continuance. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or buildings
existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be continued although such use or building
does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone district in which such
land or building is located. The following provisions shall, however, apply to all nonconforming
uses, structures and lots:
A nonconforming lot shall not be further reduced in size.
A nonconforming building shall not be enlarged, extended or increased unless such
enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of nonconformance.
A nonconforming use shall not be expanded except as may be authorized by the Zoning
Board of Appeals through variance procedures.
A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use. When a nonconforming use is
changed to conform to the requirements of this chapter, the use of the building or tract of land
shall not be changed again except in accordance with these regulations.
Where such nonconforming use is upon the land itself and not enclosed within a structure or
where such use involves the removal of soil, minerals or the excavation of gravel or rock or
other material, such use may be continued upon the land being so used at the time of the
adoption hereof. Any such nonconforming use of the land may be extended or expanded to
include any part of the plot or parcel of land now being used or held in reserve for future use,
provided that such enlargement does not involve the use of any lot acquired or the excavation
rights of which were acquired by the excavation operator after the effective date of this
chapter. However, such extension or expansion of such nonconforming use shall comply with
the setback and fencing requirements of this chapter.
Abandonment. In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, building or
structure or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued for a period of one year, such
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished and all future uses shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and continuous operation of
such nonconforming use or part of portion thereof for such period of one year is hereby construed
and considered to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use, regardless of any reservation
of an intent not to abandon the same or of an intent to resume active operations. If actual
abandonment in fact is evidenced by the removal of buildings, structures, machinery, equipment
and other evidences of such nonconforming use of the land and premises, the abandonment shall
be construed and considered to be completed, and all rights to reestablish or continue such
nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate.
Existing lots of record. A nonconforming lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter
may be used for any purpose permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, irrespective of
its area or width, provided that the owner of such lot does not own any adjoining property which
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 331/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
H.
I.
would create a conforming lot if all or part of said property were combined with subject lot and
provided that all other provisions of this chapter are adhered to. No lot or lots in single ownership
shall hereafter be reduced in size so as to create one or more nonconforming lots.
Restoration.
Any building damaged by fire or other unintentional causes to the extent of more than 50% of
its true value shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformance with this chapter.
Provisions of Chapter 135, Buildings, Unsafe, of the Code of the Village of Albion shall apply
to the removal of debris and restoration of land. In the case of a permitted restoration of a
nonconforming use, such restoration shall not increase the degree of nonconformance.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any wall
or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Code Enforcement Official.
Normal maintenance repairs and incidental alteration of a building or other structure
containing a nonconforming use shall be permitted, provided that it does not extend the area
or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use.
Any building which is nonconforming due to insufficient yard distances or lot area shall not be
considered a nonconforming use. Any alterations or structural changes may be accomplished
within the existing frame of said building, but any additions shall conform to the specific
setback and yard distance requirements of this chapter.
Moving. Should any structure be moved for any reason for any distance, it shall thereafter conform
to the requirements for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
Zoning district changes. Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing provisions
shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
Certification of nonconformance. After the effective date of this chapter, upon the written request
of the user of any structure or premises or at the instance of the Code Enforcement Official, an
examination by the Code Enforcement Official of any existing use shall be made. A report of the
findings made upon such examination shall thereafter be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals,
together with a certificate of existing nonconforming use, which shall clearly describe the premises
and structure, if any, referred to and shall specify the nature and extent of such existing use. Such
certificate shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy of which shall be maintained by the Code
Enforcement Official, one copy of which shall be furnished to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
one copy to be furnished to the owner or user.
§ 290-51. Stormwater drainage.
All construction plans shall include consideration of stormwater drainage needs. Whenever possible,
site grading shall direct water away from buildings and structures to the natural drainageway.
§ 290-52. Sewage disposal.
Connection to the public sewer system shall be required for the use of any lot or building which
involves the disposal of sewage or wastewater. Such connections shall be approved by the Code
Enforcement Official and other local or state officials as may be required by state or local law or
regulations.
§ 290-53. Home occupations.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 332/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
The type of business that may be permitted as a home occupation includes, but is not limited to,
the following:
Professional or business office.
Beauty shop or barbershop.
Repair of furniture or small appliances.
Production and sale of baked goods or other food products or crafts.
Other similar business as determined by interpretation of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Such use shall be located within a dwelling and shall be clearly incidental to the primary residential
use. In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the
residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential
character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting or signs or the emission of
sounds, noise or vibration.
No more than one person, other than a member of the immediate family occupying such dwelling,
shall be employed as part of the home occupation.
No article shall be sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced by members of the
family residing on the premises.
There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to
the operation of the home occupation.
A minimum of one off-street parking place shall be provided in connection with the home
occupation, plus one parking space for any employee of the home occupation who does not reside
on the premises, in addition to the two parking spaces required for a dwelling. Parking for such
vehicles shall be provided off the street and other than in a required front yard.
The use shall not generate traffic, parking, noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference beyond that which normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
One nameplate shall be allowed. It may display the name of the occupant and/or the name of the
home occupation. It shall not exceed one square foot in area and shall be attached to the
structure.
No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence shall be used for the conduct of a home
occupation.
Only one commercial-type vehicle, not exceeding a rated capacity of 3/4 of a ton, may be used in
connection with the home occupation.
Video arcades and amusement centers shall not be permitted as home occupations.
§ 290-54. Alternate energy systems.
This section is intended to reduce impacts on neighboring property owners and health and safety
problems which may accompany alternate energy systems.
An open area, free of all buildings or structures, shall be provided around all wind energy towers,
on the owner's property, with a radius at least equal to the height of the tower.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 333/376
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Energy collection/storage facilities and appurtenant electrical equipment shall not cause undue
interference, noise or glare.
Windmill blades shall clear the ground at their lowest point by at least 20 feet.
Height exemption. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to wind energy towers or
solar collectors, provided that such structures are erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose for which they are intended and that such structures do not obstruct solar
access to neighboring properties.
§ 290-55. Habitation.
All residential habitation shall be in residential dwellings as defined in this chapter. No basement sited
independently of a structure shall be inhabited as a dwelling.
§ 290-56. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools may be installed as accessory structures to a dwelling for the private use of the
owners or occupants of such dwelling and their families and guests or in conjunction with a club or as a
public or commercial recreation use. Swimming pools shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
Such pools shall be installed in the rear or side yard of the premises.
The setbacks from the side and rear lot lines shall be at least five feet.
Fences shall be erected and maintained, in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and all other applicable laws and regulations.
Every gate in a fence enclosing any pool, including an opening through the dwelling or other main
building of the premises, shall conform to the requirements of the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
This section does not apply to farm ponds or other natural or artificially made bodies of water.
§ 290-57. Satellite parabolic antennas
This section is intended to provide the minimum level of control necessary to accomplish the health,
safety and aesthetic objectives of the Village.
Antennas smaller than 36 inches in diameter shall be permitted in any district without a permit.
All parabolic antennas larger than 36 inches in diameter shall require a zoning permit from the
Code Enforcement Official. Such antennas shall be located on in the rear yard only.
Antennas larger than 36 inches in diameter and located in a front or side yard or attached to a
building or tower shall require site plan review from the Village Planning Board. The Planning
Board may require the applicant to screen the dish in order to reduce potential nuisance or
disturbances to adjacent properties. Although locations in side and rear yards shall be
encouraged, a ground-mounted satellite TV dish antenna may be located in a front yard if the
applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that locating the dish in either
the side or rear yard would not provide adequate reception.
Antennas shall be set back from all other structures and all property lines a distance which is not
less than 1 1/2 times the distance between the highest part of such antenna or tower and the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 334/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
ground. Guy wires, anchors and other supports for an antenna shall not be closer than 10 feet to
any property line.
§ 290-58. Storage or disposal of liquid or solid waste.
No lot shall be used for the commercial storage or disposal of solid or liquid waste without the prior
approval of the Village Board. Duly approved individual sewage disposal systems shall be excepted
from this provision. Village Board approval shall be given only upon a finding that the proposed use
shall not have a detrimental effect upon surrounding properties and evidence of any required permits
necessary from the Department of Health and/or New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation. The Village Board may require the submission of any documents necessary to make the
foregoing finding.
Article VII. Special Permit Regulations
§ 290-59. General provisions.
The uses specified in this article are hereby declared to possess unique characteristics, requiring that
each proposal for any such use shall be considered by the Planning Board as an individual case. A
special use permit may be approved by the Planning Board and issued by the Code Enforcement
Official (CEO) only if the following standards are met:
The proposed special use is consistent with the general intent of the Village's Comprehensive
Plan and with the specific purposes set forth in this chapter.
The location, size and use of the structures involved, nature and intensity of the operations
involved and size and layout of the site in relation to the proposed special use are such that it shall
be compatible with the orderly development of the district.
The operation of the proposed special use is no more objectionable to the uses of nearby
properties, by reason of dust or smoke emission, noise, odors, fumes, pollution of air or water,
including subsurface waters, unsightliness or similar conditions, than would be the operation of
any permitted use.
The proposed special use satisfies each and all standards and conditions specified for such
special use by the relevant provisions of this article.
The Planning Board may impose additional conditions or restrictions as it may deem necessary
prior to approving any special use permit application in order to protect public health and safety,
the quality of the Village's neighborhoods and natural resources and the value of property. The
Code Enforcement Official shall make an on-site visit to each property authorized as a special use
not less than one time each year. The purpose of said site visit is to ensure that the use is being
operated in accord with the conditions specified by the Planning Board. If the Code Enforcement
Official determines that a violation of this Zoning Chapter or the conditions imposed by the
Planning Board exists, the certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of compliance shall be null
and void. A new special use permit application shall be required to be submitted and approved
prior to the reestablishment of said use.
Any structure proposed to be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to accommodate a
specially permitted use shall comply with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Construction Code and all other applicable laws, codes and regulations.
§ 290-60. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 335/376
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
K.
L.
(1)
A.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for bed-and-breakfast establishments in the R-1
Single-Family Residential, R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential and R-C Residential/Offices Districts,
provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
The minimum lot size, frontage and setback requirements shall conform to the specifications set
forth in the Zoning Schedule of this chapter[1] for single-family dwellings.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
The building proposed for occupancy as a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall contain no more
than four lodging rooms for hire.
The operator of the bed-and-breakfast establishment shall reside on the premises.
The structure proposed for use as a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall meet the requirements
of the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
The dwelling shall not be altered in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its
residential character, nor shall any extensions or additions to the dwelling be made for the purpose
of renting such space for overnight accommodations.
Outbuildings detached from the principal dwellings shall not be used for the purpose of a bed-andbreakfast
establishment.
No bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be permitted where access is provided by a shared
driveway.
No bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be permitted in an individual mobile home or mobile
home park.
Each rentable unit in a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall maintain a working smoke detector,
which shall meet the requirements of the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
At least two spaces shall be provided for the family residing on the premises plus not less
than one additional space for each lodging room.
No such parking space shall be located in the front yard area, outside of an approved
driveway, and each space shall be not less than 9 by 20 feet in size.
The operator of the bed-and-breakfast establishment shall not provide more than one meal per
day to any guest.
The Planning Board shall specify the minimum amount and location of landscaping and buffer
screening to ensure that the use does not create a nuisance for adjoining property owners.
§ 290-61. Car wash establishments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for car wash establishments in the General
Commercial District (GC), provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
Coin-operated vehicle washers. These washers are intended to be those in which the vehicle
operator washes the vehicle by using a hose which is geared to a coin-operated, timed
mechanism.
The vehicle washing facility or customary uses or operations associated with the facility shall
be located no closer than 200 feet to any residential district and shall be separated from a
residential district by another nonresidential use.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 336/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building which shall be designed in
keeping with the facades of adjacent land uses.
Vacuuming facilities may be located outside the building but shall not be in the front yard and
shall meet the respective setback requirements as required for the specific district in which
the use is proposed. Such area shall be buffered or screened as deemed necessary by the
Planning Board.
Off-street parking shall be provided on the property in the ratio of not less than four reservoir
parking spaces entering each washing stall and three reservoir parking spaces at the exit
from each stall plus one space per employee.
Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent standing water on-site.
All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced and paved with asphalt or concrete.
Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
Automatic vehicle washers. These vehicle washers are intended to be those in which the vehicle
is either slowly driven through or pulled through by an automatic chain mechanism and in which
the vehicle operator does not perform any of the washing function other than to drive the vehicle
where necessary.
The vehicle washing facility and customary uses or operations associated with the facility
shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a residential district.
All vehicle wash operations shall be so soundproofed, the entire development shall be so
arranged and the operations shall be so conducted that the noise emanating therefrom, as
measured from any point on the adjacent property, shall be no more audible than the noise
emanating from the ordinary street traffic and from other commercial or industrial uses
measured at the same point on said adjacent property.
There shall be provided no less than 10 reservoir parking spaces for the entrance to each
washing area if there are two bays and seven if there are three or more bays and five parking
spaces at the exit of each washing area. One parking space shall also be provided for each
employee on the maximum shift.
Vacuuming facilities may be provided outside of the building but shall meet the setback
requirements as required for the specific district in which the use is proposed. Such area shall
be buffered or screened as deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent standing water on-site.
Any lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced and paved with asphalt or concrete.
All washing operations shall be conducted within enclosed structures which shall be externally
designed to be in keeping with the exterior facades of adjacent land uses.
Operators of car wash establishments may be permitted to sell gasoline on the site of the car
wash property. The Planning Board, in considering such a request, may require the operator to
submit additional information to adequately describe the location and operation of such activity
and, as a condition of granting such approval, may impose any conditions it deems necessary to
protect the health and safety of motorists and pedestrians and to protect adjacent properties from
potential adverse impacts of such use. Under no conditions shall the operator be allowed to
perform repairs to motor vehicles on the site. Further, any merchandise available for sale shall be
maintained within a fully enclosed building.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 337/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
§ 290-62. Cluster residential developments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for cluster residential developments of onefamily
detached dwellings in the R-1 District, provided that the following standards and provisions are
maintained:
A site plan shall be submitted in conformance with the requirements of Article X of this chapter.
The minimum tract size shall be three acres.
The lot size, yard, area and height requirements shall be established on an individual-case basis
which reflect the unique conditions of each site proposed for development, the potential impact on
adjacent properties and to ensure consistency with the Village Comprehensive Plan.
The number of lots or units (density of development) in a cluster plan shall not exceed that which
could be created under a conventional development plan for the same tract of land.
The developers shall set aside an area of not less than 20% of the gross acreage of the tract to be
devoted exclusively to permanent recreation areas or open space.
All recreation or open space areas shall, in the opinion of the Planning Board, be suitable for such
use. The ownership and future maintenance of such recreation areas shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Board or offered for dedication to the Village.
§ 290-63. Conversion of single-family dwellings into two dwelling
units.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for conversion of single-family dwellings into
two dwelling units in the R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential and R-3 Multifamily Residential District,
provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
Any building proposed to be converted to create additional living units shall have not less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
The conversion shall comply with the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, this chapter and all other applicable laws, codes and regulations.
The minimum lot size, bulk requirements and setbacks for structures proposed for residential
conversions shall comply with the standards specified in Article V of this chapter.
The minimum habitable floor area for living units shall be:
Five hundred fifty square feet for efficiency units.
Six hundred fifty square feet for one-bedroom units.
Seven hundred fifty square feet for two-bedroom units.
An additional one hundred twenty square feet for each additional bedroom.
Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each independent housekeeping
unit.
§ 290-64. Drive-in business.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 338/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
The Planning Board may approve a special permit for drive-in businesses, such as drive-in photo
processing, fast-food establishments, restaurants, taverns, refreshment stands and similar uses, in the
Central Business District (CBD) or the General Commercial District (GC), provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
The following information shall be submitted as part of the application for site plan approval and
for a special use permit for a drive-in business, in addition to that information required in other
sections of this chapter.
The location and dimensions of all structures, including buildings, screened trash areas,
fencing and lighting. (Show direction and level of illumination.)
The locations and dimensions of all off-street parking areas and driveways.
Proposed landscaping of site.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the minimum distance required between drive-in
businesses, was repealed 7-10-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013.
All drive-in businesses shall provide suitable storage of trash in areas which are so designated
and constructed as to allow no view of the trash storage from the street, to prevent wastepaper
from blowing around the site or adjacent properties or public right-of-way and to permit safe, easy
removal of trash by truck or hand.
The minimum distance of any driveway to a property line shall be 20 feet.
The minimum distance between driveways on the site shall be 50 feet measured from the two
closest driveway curbs.
The minimum distance into the site shall be from a street intersection shall be 50 feet measured
from the intersection of the street right-of-way to the nearest end of the curb radius.
Drive-in businesses adjacent to or integrated in a shopping center or cluster of commercial
facilities shall use accessways in common with other business establishments in that center.
Exterior lighting proposed for the site shall be planned, erected and maintained so as not to cast
direct light or glare upon adjacent properties or public right-of-way. The light source shall not be
higher than 20 feet.
Landscaping and fencing shall be provided in accordance with § 290-46 to minimize visual
impacts and minimize conflicts with adjacent land uses.
§ 290-65. Essential services and utilities.
Essential services and utilities may be allowed as special permit uses in all districts by the Planning
Board. Prior to approving a special permit, the Planning Board shall determine the following:
The proposed installation in a specific location is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of
the essential service or the satisfactory and convenient provision of service to the area in which
the particular use is located.
The design of any building in connection with such facility shall conform to the general character of
the area and shall not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property in the
district in which it is to be located.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 339/376
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
H.
Adequate landscaping shall be provided to create a visual and sound buffer between such
facilities and adjacent property.
All new and replacement electric distribution, telephone, cable TV and other lines shall be placed
underground.
All service connections from distribution lines to consumers shall be placed underground.
All points of necessary access or transformers shall be placed in secure structures at ground level.
All major electrical transformer facilities or substations, if above ground, shall be secured by an
outer and inner fence, each 10 feet from each other at any point; also, no transformer or
associated switches shall be closer than 100 feet from any lot line.
Additional requirements for communications towers.
In addition to the application requirements specified for site plan review in Article X, the site
plan proposals for a telephone, radio or other communications tower shall also show:
The location of all structures and trees on the site and on any adjacent property within 10
feet of the subject property line.
All information prepared by the manufacturer of the antenna or tower or the applicant for
which a special use permit is being sought, including but not limited to the following:
Make and model of tower to be erected.
Manufacturer's design data for installation instructions and construction plans.
Applicant's proposed tower maintenance and inspection procedures and records system.
Identification of any anticlimb device to be installed.
Identification of the levels of radiation to be emitted by or from the communication tower.
Identification of the effects such communication tower's operation will have on other existing
communication towers or antenna within 1,000 feet of the proposed structure.
A statement from any federal, state or county regulatory agency attesting that all other
agency approvals have been obtained, including but not limited to acceptable levels for
dissipate nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) as established by any regulatory
agency, or by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Certification by a registered professional engineer or manufacturer's certification that the
tower design is sufficient to withstand wind load requirements for structures.
The minimum setback for each communication tower from any property line shall be the
height of the tower to be erected plus 20 feet.
No communications tower shall exceed 200 feet above finished grade level.
All communications towers more than 150 feet in height above finished grade level shall be
marked and lighted in accordance with Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) Part 77 standards.
A minimum radius of 8,000 feet shall be maintained between any proposed tower and any
existing tower, whether located in the Village of Albion or any adjacent municipality.
No communications tower shall contain any signage except that identifying a health, safety or
general welfare message intended solely for the protection of the general public.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 340/376
(13)
(14)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(16)
(17)
(18)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All commercial communications towers shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight feet
in height above ground level.
The applicant shall demonstrate that feasible options for colocating communications facilities
on other towers have been thoroughly investigated and that the proposed tower is necessary
to provide adequate communications services.
The applicant shall provide assurance that the proposed tower will be made available for
colocating additional communications devices.
Exceptions. The following communications towers are excepted from the provisions of this
section:
Facilities under the control or ownership and used exclusively by a governmental agency.
Satellite dish antennas as regulated elsewhere in this chapter.
Conventional television and radio antennas when used exclusively for private benefit and
involving a structure with a height less than 15 feet above existing grade or if attached to
a structure 35 feet above existing grade.
Removal. In the event that a communications tower is no longer used for the purpose
specified in the application or the communication facility ceases operations for a period of 90
days, such tower, structures or facilities shall be dismantled and removed from the site within
30 days of receipt of written notice from the Village Board and based upon the Village Board's
declaration to the effect specified herein.
Assurances. The Planning Board may, as a condition of special use permit approval, require
the applicant to provide a letter of credit, performance bond or other financial guaranty to the
Village that funds will be available for the Village's use to remove said structure in the event of
noncompliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 290-66. Kennels and animal hospitals.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for kennels and animal hospitals with outdoor
facilities in the General Commercial District (GC), provided that the following standards and conditions
are maintained:
Adequate landscaping and/ or fencing shall be provided to create a visual, sound and smell buffer
between such facilities and adjacent properties.
All buildings, structures or other accessory uses shall be at least 75 feet from any property line.
All animals shall be kept within a totally enclosed building between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Lot coverage shall not exceed (50%.
One parking space shall be provided for each employee and one space for every three kennel
runs at all kennels and animal hospitals.
§ 290-67. Motor vehicle service stations, including filling stations
and auto repair shops.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for motor vehicle service stations, including
filling stations and auto repair shops, in the General Commercial District (GC), provided that the
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 341/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
following standards and conditions are maintained:
In addition to the information required in the special permit application and site plan and
enumerated in Article X herein, the site plan submitted shall also show the location and number of
fuel tanks to be installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth the tanks
shall be placed below the ground and the number and location of fuel pumps to be installed. Such
site development plans, including the location of tanks and fire suppression equipment, shall
comply with the requirements of the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all other
applicable laws, codes and regulations.
Such uses shall be screened from adjacent uses by a buffer area, including screening and fencing
to be determined by the Planning Board, so as to prevent the transmission of headlight glare
across the property line. The Planning Board shall determine on an individual-case basis how
close to the right-of-way the landscaped buffer shall be required to be installed. Such buffer
screen shall be a minimum height of six feet above the ground. If said shrubbery becomes
decayed and fails to provide an adequate screen, the Code Enforcement Official shall direct the
property owner to replace said shrubs.
The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be hard-surfaced and of asphalt or
concrete construction.
Motor vehicle service stations may include facilities for the sale of food, household items and
convenience merchandise, provided that the sale of such items takes place entirely within an
enclosed building.
Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and the building island only. The
outdoor display of oil cans and/or antifreeze and similar products may be displayed on the
respective island if provided for in a suitable stand or rack.
No motor vehicle service station or auto repair shop shall have more than two driveways on any
public street fronting the site. Entrance and exit driveways shall have an unrestricted width of not
less than 20 feet and not more than 30 feet and shall be designed as to avoid the necessity of any
vehicle backing out into any public right-of-way. No driveway shall be closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of two street corner lot lines or within 20 feet of an adjacent lot line. No driveway shall
be closer than 50 feet to another driveway on the same lot, as measured between the two closest
curbs.
No building or structure, including gasoline pump or automotive service appliances, shall be
erected within 30 feet of any street line.
All repair of motor vehicles, except for minor servicing, shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No more than two partially dismantled motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an
enclosed building at any one time.
No more than 10 licensed motor vehicles being serviced or repaired shall be stored or parked
outdoors for more than 48 hours, and these shall be in areas effectively screened from all property
lines. All such vehicles shall be stored in a neat, orderly manner.
No more than two motor vehicles shall be offered for sale on the premises, outside of an enclosed
building, at any one time.
No motor vehicle service station or auto repair shop and no driveway to any such use shall be
established within 200 feet of the boundary line of a residence, cemetery, school, church, hospital,
nursing home, senior citizen housing or other place of public assembly designed for occupancy by
more than 50 persons or within 500 feet of another motor vehicle repair shop or gasoline station
on the same side of the street. Said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the
nearest points of each of the lots or premises.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 342/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
§ 290-68. Public and semipublic buildings and uses.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for public and semipublic uses of an
institutional, health, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and RMH
Districts, provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
A statement setting forth the details of the operation of the use shall be submitted with the
application.
The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with evidence of approval, certificate of need,
license or other similar document required to initiate or expand such a use from any and all
appropriate regulatory agencies.
Landscaped areas at least 10 feet in depth or other suitable screening shall be provided for the
entire length of any lot line adjacent to any residence or adjacent street.
No structure or use shall be located within 15 feet of any adjacent property line.
The proposed use shall meet the minimum off-street parking and loading and unloading
requirements of this chapter as well as provisions for landscaping, buffering, signs and
accessways.
The Planning Board, in considering the request for a special use permit, may impose any
conditions it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the Village.
§ 290-69. Townhouse developments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for townhouse developments in the R-1, R-2, R-
3, R-C and P-C Districts, provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
General requirements. No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing
structures be occupied until final site plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board and
permits have been issued by all governmental agencies involved. The following general
requirements and standards shall govern the review and approval of site plans for townhouse
developments:
Each townhouse dwelling unit shall be located, constructed and served by public facilities and
services and utilities in such fashion that each dwelling unit may be sold individually.
Each individual dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be separated from other such dwelling units
by a fire wall or fire separation as required by the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
Natural features, including streams, drainageways and existing trees, shall be preserved and
incorporated in the landscaping of the development.
All utility lines which provide electric, gas, telephone, television or other similar services shall
be installed underground. Surface-mounted equipment shall be located in a manner so as to
minimize potential conflict with other uses and activities.
Plans submitted for townhouse developments shall identify areas proposed for dedication to
the Village, areas to be held in common ownership and property to be owned by individuals.
Common property shall, except when accepted by the Village Board for dedication, be
privately owned. If property is to remain in common ownership, the developer shall provide for
and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of such common property.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 343/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Rules and regulations proposed to govern the operation and maintenance of all common
property shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning Board. Common property
shall not be changed from its status or use as common property without specific authorization
of the Village Board.
In reviewing proposals for the establishment of organizations to govern the ownership and
maintenance of any common property, the Planning Board shall consider and determine the
adequacy of:
The timetable for the creation of the organization.
The requirements for membership in the organization by residents.
The safeguards to ensure the continuance of the common property as common property.
The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes and maintenance of all facilities.
The provision for pro rata sharing of costs and assessments.
The financial capacity of the organization to maintain and administer common facilities.
The proposed relationship between the developer and the organization and the plan to
turn over the responsibility for the maintenance and administration of common facilities to
the organization.
Minimum standards for townhouse developments.
Area. The minimum land area for townhouse developments shall be two acres.
Densities. The maximum density of residential development per gross acre of land (including
roadways, pedestrian walkways, common recreation and off-street parking areas, open areas
and all nonresidential areas) for townhouse developments shall not exceed six units per acre
in the R-1 Residential District, eight units per acre in the R-2 Residential District and ten units
per acre in the R-3 Multifamily Residential District.
Open space. Not less than 25% of the land area within a townhouse development, excluding
parking areas and vehicle access facilities, shall be developed and maintained as open space
for the use and enjoyment of residents of said development and their guests.
Lot coverage. The coverage of all buildings and structures within a townhouse development
shall not exceed 25% of the area of the tract.
Building height. No townhouse building shall exceed 32 feet in height.
Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two townhouse dwelling
buildings shall be 60 feet. The minimum distance between a townhouse dwelling building and
any other structure, including a swimming pool, shall not be less than 25 feet.
Setbacks. No minimum front, side or rear setbacks shall be required within a townhouse
development except for those instances in which dwelling units are positioned relative to a
public street. If a structure faces or abuts a public street, no part of the structure shall be
located closer than 60 feet to the public right-of-way. No structure shall be set back less than
20 feet from any common parking area.
Building standards.
No more than eight townhouse dwelling units shall be included in a single building.
No building shall exceed a maximum length of 240 feet on any exterior facade.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 344/376
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
F.
Townhouse buildings shall be related to one another in design, building mass, materials and
placement to provide a visually and physically integrated development.
The treatment of the sides and rear facades of all buildings in a development shall be
comparable in amenity and appearance to the treatment of any building facade which faces a
public street and complimentary in architectural design to adjacent residential structures.
Building walls shall be oriented so as to ensure adequate exposure of light and air to each
dwelling unit and to the interior rooms.
Buildings shall be arranged so as to preserve visual and audible privacy between each
townhouse dwelling unit and adjacent townhouse buildings.
Building entranceways of adjacent dwelling units in the same structure shall be designed to
ensure the privacy of occupants. This may be accomplished by varying the setbacks of
entranceways or by providing screening or landscaped plantings, as appropriate.
Building entranceways shall be provided with appropriate illumination for the convenience and
safety of residents. Such lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing other properties.
All townhouse dwelling units shall include ground-floor living space. The location of an
enclosed garage shall not qualify as meeting this requirement.
Townhouse parking standards.
No less than two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse dwelling unit.
The requirements for off-street parking may be met by providing parking spaces in an
enclosed garage plus any combination of spaces on private driveways and/or in a common
parking lot.
No common off-street parking lot or outdoor storage area shall be located closer than 25 feet
to any adjacent property.
All off-street parking areas shall be privately owned and maintained.
Common off-street parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public view to the
extent necessary to eliminate the unsightliness of parked cars.
Common off-street parking areas shall be designed with careful regard to orderly
arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of access and shall be developed as an
integral part of the overall site development plan.
Common off-street parking areas shall be provided with suitable lighting for the convenience
and security of residents but positioned and shielded to minimize glare and potential
inconvenience to residents of the townhouse development and adjacent properties.
Minimum habitable floor area requirements:
One-bedroom unit: 650 square feet.
Two-bedroom apartment unit: 750 square feet.
For each additional bedroom: an additional 120 square feet per bedroom.
Landscape site design standards.
Landscaping shall be provided along and adjacent to all streets, common driveway areas and
common off-street parking areas. Landscaping treatments shall be designed, coordinated and
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 345/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
installed in accordance with the site development plan approved by the Planning Board.
Landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover and street trees and shall be
designed and installed to provide an attractive development pattern. Landscape materials
selected should be appropriate to the growing conditions of the local environment.
Whenever possible, existing trees shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape
design plan.
All landscaping, except for trees, shrubs and grasses either existing or to be installed within
the public right-of-way, shall be privately owned and maintained.
Site circulation system design standards.
An adequate, safe and convenient circulation system shall be provided.
The arrangement of streets and common parking areas shall be designed as integral parts of
an overall site development plan. These features shall be properly related to existing and
proposed buildings and appropriately landscaped.
Miscellaneous townhouse regulations.
No home occupations and no business activities of any type shall be permitted within a
townhouse development.
Signage shall comply with the provisions of Article XI.
All fencing of common areas shall be shown on the site development plan approved by the
Planning Board.
Individual owners may erect privacy fences to enclose outdoor areas of individual dwelling
units. Such fences may be up to six feet above ground level, provided that such fencing is
located not less than 15 feet from a public street, common off-street parking or storage area
or vehicular accessway thereto. Fencing closer than 15 feet to a public street or common offstreet
parking or storage area or vehicular accessway thereto shall not exceed three feet
above ground level.
Except for land which is owned in common, no property owner shall erect or place an
accessory building or structure on the premises.
The storage of any unregistered vehicles or other similar equipment out-of-doors overnight
shall be prohibited, except in a common parking area.
Special accessory uses. The following special accessory uses may be established for the
common and exclusive use of the occupants of townhouse residences and their guests. Such
special accessory uses shall be operated on a not-for-profit basis and subject to the approval of
the Planning Board.
Recreational facilities, such as open or enclosed tennis courts, exercise facilities, picnic
areas, gazebos or swimming pools as regulated herein.
One structure to house maintenance shops and vehicles to be used exclusively for the
maintenance and management of the townhouse development.
Common space for the exclusive use and convenience of residents of the townhouse
development and their guests to park vehicles. Such common space shall be adequately
landscaped and buffered so as to screen the site from adjacent areas and uses.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 346/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
§ 290-70. Adult bookstores and adult entertainment
establishments.
Adult bookstores and adult entertainment establishments, as defined herein, may be approved in the
Light Industrial District (LI) by the Village Planning Board, following a public hearing and provided that
the standards and provisions specified below are maintained:
Purpose.
In the execution of this chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses which, due to their
very nature, have serious objectionable characteristics. The objectionable characteristics of
these uses are further heightened by their concentration in any one area, thereby having
deleterious effects on adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure
that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood or land uses.
It is further declared that the location of adult bookstores or adult entertainment
establishments in areas where youth may regularly assemble and the general atmosphere
encompassing their operations is of great concern to the Village of Albion.
These special regulations are intended to accomplish the primary purpose of preventing a
concentration of these uses in any one area and restricting their accessibility to minors.
General regulations.
The proposed use shall be operated in a manner that is consistent with the New York State
Penal Law relating to exposure, obscenity or lewdness.
An adult bookstore or adult entertainment establishment use shall not be operated within
1,000 feet of:
A church, synagogue or place of worship.
A public or private elementary or secondary school, day care, preschool or other uses of
a similar nature.
A boundary of any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MH or R-C Zoning District.
A public park, municipal building or community center.
An adult bookstore or adult entertainment establishment shall not be operated within 1,000
feet of another adult bookstore or adult entertainment establishment or on the same lot or
parcel of land.
An adult bookstore or adult entertainment establishment shall not be operated in the same
building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult bookstore or adult entertainment
establishment.
For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structures as
part of the premises where an adult bookstore or adult entertainment establishment is
conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of any of the uses specified in
Subsection B(2)(a) through (d) identified above or to another adult bookstore or adult
entertainment establishment.
All adult bookstores or adult entertainment establishments shall be conducted in an enclosed
building, regardless of location.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 347/376
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
No exterior sign shall contain any photographic or artistic representation of the human body.
All building openings, entries, windows, doors, etc., associated with an adult bookstore or
adult entertainment establishment shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as
to prevent a view into the interior of the building from any public right-of-way or adjacent
property.
No adult bookstore or adult entertainment use shall be established in any building which is
used, in part, for residential purposes.
No residential use shall be established in any building which contains an approved adult
bookstore or adult entertainment use.
No more than one of the adult uses as defined above shall be located on any lot.
Waiver of restrictions. The restrictions enumerated in Subsection B above may be waived by the
Village Planning Board if the applicant shows and the Board finds that the following conditions
have been met in addition to the general conditions contained in Article VIII of this chapter:
The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties
and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed;
That the establishment of an additional use of this type in the area will not be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation or improvement, either residential or nonresidential;
and
That 51% or more of the property owners within the restricted area as defined in Subsection
B(2) of this chapter have signed a petition stating that they have no objection to the
establishment of the uses defined above.
Amortization. By amortization, the right to maintain a legal nonconforming adult use shall
terminate in accordance with the following schedule:
Amount of Capital Investment*
As of Effective Date of This Chapter
Date Before Which Use Shall
Terminate
$0 to $5,000 January 1, 1998
$5,001 to $8,000 January 1, 1999
$8,001 to $15,000 January 1, 2000
$15,001 to $22,000 January 1, 2001
$22,000 or more January 1, 2002
*NOTE: The term "capital investment," as used above, is defined to mean the initial outlay by the
owner or operator of the use to establish the business as of the date of the enactment of this
chapter, exclusive of the fair market value of the structure in which the use is located.
Article VIII. Administration and Enforcement
§ 290-71. Duties and procedures of Code Enforcement Official.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is hereby conferred upon the
Code Enforcement Official (CEO), who shall be appointed by the Village Board and shall have such
powers as are conferred upon him by this chapter. The Code Enforcement Official shall receive such
compensation as the Village Board shall determine.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 348/376
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
F.
Review plans and inspect premises. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official or his
duly authorized assistants to cause any plans, buildings or premises to be examined or inspected
to determine that they are not in violation of the provisions of this chapter. In the fulfillment of his
duties, the Code Enforcement Official, or his authorized assistants, may enter any premises or
building during reasonable hours, in accordance with state law, after due written notice has been
given.
Cite zoning violations.
If the Code Enforcement Official shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, he shall notify, in writing, the owner of the property, as well as the person responsible
for such violations if such person is not the owner. Such notice shall indicate the nature of the
violation and specify the action required to correct the violation.
In his efforts to attain compliance, the Code Enforcement Official shall have the authority to
order:
Discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures;
(b)Removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural
changes;
Stop work; or
Discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
On the serving of notice by the Code Enforcement Official to the owner of any property
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance, as appropriate, for such building or use shall be held null and void. A new
certificate of occupancy and/or compliance shall be required for any further use of such
building or premises.
Issue permits. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official to issue permits and
certificates to applicants who fully comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Referral to Zoning Board of Appeals. An applicant, after being denied a zoning permit, may appeal
the Code Enforcement Official's findings to the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) for an
interpretation or a variance. Should an appeal be requested, the Code Enforcement Official shall
notify the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the request and forward all necessary
supporting information to the Zoning Board of Appeals for action.
Referral to Village Planning Board. Any application for a special permit, a change in a zoning
district or a change in use that requires site plan review shall be forwarded by the Code
Enforcement Official to the Secretary of the Village Planning Board for action. All necessary
supporting information shall also be forwarded.
Public record and monthly report to Village Board. The Code Enforcement Official shall maintain a
permanent and current record of all applications for permits and certificates, his action upon same,
any conditions relating thereto and any other matters considered and action taken by him. Such
records shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available for use by Village
officials and for inspection by the public. The records to be maintained shall include the following:
Application file. An individual permanent file for each application for a permit or certificate
provided for herein shall be established at the time the application is made. Said file shall
contain one copy of the application and all supporting documents and plans; notations
regarding pertinent dates and fees; one copy of any resolutions or actions of the Village
Board, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals in acting on the application; and the date
the permit or certificate applied for was issued or denied.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 349/376
(2)
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Monthly report. The Code Enforcement Official shall prepare a monthly report for the Village
Board. Said report shall cite all actions taken by the Code Enforcement Official, including all
referrals made by him; all permits and certificates issued and denied; all complaints of
violation received and all violations found by him, and the action taken by him consequent
thereon; and the time spent and mileage used. A copy of this monthly report shall also be
transmitted by the Code Enforcement Official to the Tax Assessor, Planning Board and Board
of Appeals at the same time it is transmitted to the Village Board.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Official denies a permit or certificate he shall, in writing, inform
the applicant of the specific reasons for denial and instruct the applicant on the proper methods to
apply for relief.
The Code Enforcement Official shall maintain a current list and a map of nonconforming uses to
determine if discontinuance or destruction or change in use or vacancy has taken place.
The Code Enforcement Official shall maintain a current list and a map showing activities operating
pursuant to variances and special use permits, in order to determine whether such activities are in
compliance with the conditions and safeguards required as a condition of approval of such
variance or special permit.
Upon written direction from the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue special
use permits. Upon approval of a variance by the Board of Appeals, the Code Enforcement Official
shall be empowered to issue the necessary permits with the specific conditions to be imposed.
The Code Enforcement Official shall be authorized and empowered to issue appearance tickets
pursuant to the New York State Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 290-72. Creation, appointment and organization of Planning
Board.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law applicable thereto, the Village Board hereby creates
a Planning Board. The existing Planning Board shall be continued.
The Planning Board shall consist of five members, each with a term of five years. The terms of
membership shall run concurrent with the governmental year. The Board is hereby vested with the
powers and duties subject to the limitations set forth in § 7-718 of Article 7 of the Village Law, as
the same may be amended, modified, or changed from time to time, or any sections subsequently
adopted pertaining to Planning Boards.
Members and the Chairperson of such Planning Board shall be appointed by the Village Board.
Minimum requirements for Planning Board members are:
[Amended 2-9-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
Training. Each Board member is required to complete a minimum of two hours of training per
calendar year. At the discretion of the remaining members of the Planning Board, and upon
recommendation to the Village Board or the Village Board of its own accord, may move a
member for failure to comply with this requirement.
Attendance. Each Board member shall be required to attend 75% of the scheduled meetings
in each calendar year. In addition, failure to attend three consecutive meetings without good
cause may be grounds for removal from the Board.
No person who is a member of the Village Board shall be eligible for membership on the Planning
Board.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 350/376
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The terms of members of the Planning Board first appointed shall be so fixed that the term of one
member shall expire at the end of the Village governmental year in which such members were
initially appointed. The terms of the remaining members first appointed shall be so fixed that one
term shall expire at the end of each governmental year thereafter. At the expiration of the term of
each member first appointed, his or her successor shall be appointed for a five-year term.
If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, the Mayor shall appoint the new
member for the unexpired term, subject to the approval of the Village Board.
The Village Board shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any member of the
Planning Board for cause and may provide by local law for removal, after public hearing, of any
Planning Board member for noncompliance with minimum standards relating to meeting
attendance and training as established by the Village Board by local law.
All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other
times as such Board may determine.
No person shall be disqualified from service as a member of the Planning Board by reason of
serving as a member of the Town or County Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall establish such rules and regulations as are required by law and the
provisions herein for the transaction of its business and may amend, modify and repeal the same
from time to time.
§ 290-73. Powers and duties of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
To prepare and from time to time recommend changes to the Comprehensive Plan for the
development of the Village.
To review proposals to approve or disapprove the laying out, closing off, abandonment or changes
in lines of streets, highways and public areas and to make recommendations to the Village Board.
To make investigations and reports relating to the planning and development of the Village as it
deems desirable. This shall include, but not be limited to, changes in boundaries of districts,
recommended changes in the provisions of this chapter, other land use and development matters
of importance to the Planning Board and any matter lawfully referred to it by the Village Board.
To review, act on or provide advisory reports as specified by this chapter.
Conduct site plan review as authorized by the New York State Village Law and prescribed in
Article X of this chapter.
Review and grant or deny special permits as authorized by Article IX.
To review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove plats showing lots, blocks or
sites for subdivisions under § 7-728 of Article 7 of the Village Law.
All such powers as are conferred upon Village planning boards by the provisions of the Village
Law now or hereafter in effect.
The Village Board can by resolution authorize the Planning Board to modify applicable provisions
of the Zoning Chapter simultaneously with plat approval in accordance with the New York State
Village Law.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 351/376
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
§ 290-74. Creation, appointment and organization of Zoning
Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to § 7-712 of the Village Law, there shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five
members, holding staggered five-year terms, appointed by the Village Board.
Of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals first appointed, one shall hold office for the term
of one year, one for the term of two years, one for the term of three years, one for the term of four
years and one for the term of five years. All terms shall run concurrent with the governmental year.
Their successors shall be appointed for a term of five years from and after the expiration of the
terms of their predecessors in office.
Minimum requirements for Zoning Board of Appeals members.
Training. Each Board member is required to complete a minimum of two hours of training per
calendar year. At the discretion of the remaining members of the Zoning Board of Appeals,
and upon recommendation to the Village Board or the Village Board of its own accord, may
remove a member for failure to comply with this requirement.
Attendance. Each Board matter shall be required to attend 75% of the scheduled meetings in
each calendar year. In addition, failure to attend three consecutive meetings without good
cause may be grounds for removal from the Board.
The Village Board shall appoint the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No member of the
Village Board shall be eligible for membership on the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any member of the Zoning Board
of Appeals for cause and may provide by local law for removal, after public hearing, of any Zoning
Board of Appeals member for noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to meeting
attendance and training as established by the Village Board by local law.
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as such Board may determine. Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence the
acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall establish such rules and regulations as are required by state
and local laws for the transaction of its business and may amend, modify and repeal the same
from time to time.
Whenever the Zoning Board of Appeals, after hearing all the evidence presented upon an
application for appeals under the provisions of this chapter, denies or rejects the same, said
Zoning Board of Appeals shall refuse to hold further hearings on the same or substantially similar
application for appeal by the same applicant, their successors or assigns, for a period of one year,
except and unless the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find and determine, from the information
supplied in the request for a rehearing, that a change in conditions has occurred which relates to
the promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare and
that a reconsideration is justified. Such rehearing may be granted only upon the favorable vote of
not less than four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 290-75. General procedures of Zoning Board of Appeals.
Meetings, minutes and records. Meetings of such Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the
public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the Public Officers Law. Such Zoning Board of Appeals
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 352/376
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
C.
other official actions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make factual record of all its proceedings,
including the reading of the case, public hearing, deliberation, voting and decisions of the Board.
These factual records shall be taken by stenographic and/or tape recorder means and shall be
accurate but not necessarily a verbatim transcript, but may be in narrative form.
Filing requirements. Every rule and regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk within five business days and shall be a public record.
Assistance to Zoning Board of Appeals. Such Board shall have the authority to call upon any
department, agency or employee of the Village for such assistance as shall be deemed necessary
and as shall be authorized by the Village Board. Such department, agency or employee shall be
reimbursed for any expenses incurred as a result of such assistance.
§ 290-76. Permitted actions by Zoning Board of Appeals.
Interpretations, requirements, decisions and determinations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination as in its opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the Code Enforcement
Official and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whose order,
requirement, decision or determination the appeal is taken.
Use variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination of the Code
Enforcement Official, shall have the power to grant use variances, authorizing a use of the
land which otherwise would not be allowed or would be prohibited by the terms of this
chapter.
No such use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals without a showing by
the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
Zoning Board of Appeals that:
The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that lack of return is
substantial, as demonstrated by competent financial evidence;
The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique and does not apply to
a substantial portion of the zone district or neighborhood;
The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and
The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the minimum
variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve and
protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
Area variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal from a decision or
determination of the Code Enforcement Official, to grant area variances from the area or
dimensional requirements of this chapter.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 353/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration the
benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination, the Board shall also consider:
Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or
a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method feasible
for the applicant to pursue, other than an area variance;
Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical or
environmental conditions in the neighborhood or zone district; and
Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be relevant to
the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant the minimum
variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve and
protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
Imposition of conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both use variances
and area variances, have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as
are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the property and/or the period of time
such variance shall be in effect. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this
chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact that such variance
may have on the neighborhood or community.
§ 290-77. Procedures for variances and other appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests for variances and appeals from and
review of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by an
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department or board of the Village.
All applications for variances shall be in writing on forms established by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Forms shall be available from the Code Enforcement Official.
Every application shall refer to the specific provision of the law involved and establish the details
of why the variance should be granted.
Upon receipt of the completed application the Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
Schedule a public hearing as provided in Subsection G of this section.
Arrange for publication of notice of the public hearing as described in Subsection G of this
section.
If required by New York State General Municipal Law § 239-m, refer the application to the
County Planning Board.
If required, initiate the environmental review process pursuant to SEQR.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 354/376
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
I.
Time of appeal.
Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the filing of any order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of
this chapter by filing with such administrative official and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought.
The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning
Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the Code Enforcement Official certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or
her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by
a court of record, on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
Public hearing on appeal.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing on the appeal or
other matter referred to it, not to exceed 30 days from date of Zoning Board of Appeals
receipt or 60 days for those cases referred to the County Planning Board.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall give public notice thereof by the publication, in a paper of
general circulation in the Village, of a notice of such hearing, at least seven days prior to the
date thereof, and shall mail notices thereof to the applicant at least five days prior to the
hearing.
The applicant shall place one sign on the property for which a variance or other appeal is
requested. Said sign shall be provided by the Code Enforcement Official. The sign shall be
placed in a location which is easily read from a public street. The sign shall specify the date,
time and place of the public hearing and a telephone number to call for more specific
information. Such sign shall be placed on the site not less than five days prior to the public
hearing and shall be brought to the hearing by the applicant or his designated representative.
The cost of sending or publishing any notices relating to such appeal shall be borne by the
appealing party and shall be paid to the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the hearing of such
appeal.
Voting procedures.
The concurring vote of not less than three members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such
administrative official or to grant a use variance or area variance.
In accordance with General Municipal Law § 809, a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals
having a conflict of interest shall abstain from any discussion or voting on that matter.
All votes shall be by roll call.
Notice to Park Commission and County Planning Board. At least five days before such hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall mail notices thereof to the Regional State Parks Commission
having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway within 500 feet of the property affected by such
appeal and to the County Planning Board as required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law,
which notice shall be accompanied by a full statement of the matter under consideration, as
defined in Subdivision 1 of Section 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 355/376
(1)
(2)
J.
K.
L.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Time of decision.
Within 62 days of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision.
The time within which the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render its decision may be extended
by mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.
If the matter was referred to the County Planning Board, a copy of the Zoning Board of
Appeals's findings and decision shall be sent to the County Planning Board within seven days
of rendering the decision.
Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals on the appeal shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five business days after the day such decision is
rendered, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
All decisions shall be by a majority vote of the membership (three), except in the case of the
County Planning Board recommending disapproval or modification of a referral. In such cases, a
majority plus one vote (total vote of four) shall be required to override the County Planning Board
recommendation.
§ 290-78. Referrals to County Planning Board.
Required referrals. New York State General Municipal Law § 239-m requires that any of the
following local zoning actions shall be referred to the County Planning Board prior to action by the
local board. Any proposal for a special permit, variance, site plan approval, change in the zoning
law text or map (rezoning, amending the zoning law) which would affect real property lying within a
distance of 500 feet from the boundary of the corporate limits of the Village; any right-of-way of
any county or state road or parkway; or any existing or proposed county- or state-owned land on
which a public building or institution is situated shall be referred to the County Planning Board,
which shall have 30 days from date of county receipt to take action on the matter. By mutual
agreement of the county and the municipality, such 30-day period may be extended in special
cases.
Effect of County Planning Board review.
If the County Planning Board approves a referral, then the local board's decision is governed
by a majority vote.
If the County Planning Board disapproves or approves a referral subject to stated conditions
or modifications, the local board may override the county opinion only by a majority plus one
vote.
Report on final local action. The local board shall send a copy of its final decision on a county
referral, and reasons for its decision to the County Planning Board within seven days after the
local decision is reached.
§ 290-79. State environmental quality review (SEQR).
The State Environmental Quality Review Act requires local governments to examine the
environmental impact of all actions they permit, fund or construct. Article 6 and Part 617 of Title 6
of the New York Code of Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted by reference.
All Type I and unlisted actions (6 NYCRR Part 617) shall require the submission of an
environmental assessment form.
For a zoning action to be undertaken by the Village, the following bodies shall be lead agency,
unless otherwise determined by the agencies with jurisdiction over the application:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 356/376
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Type of Action Lead Agency
Zoning text amendments Village Board
Zoning district amendments Village Board
Special permits Planning Board
Site plan review Planning Board
Variances Zoning Board of Appeals
If, in the opinion of the lead agency, after review of the environmental assessment form, there
appears the potential for a significant environmental impact, the lead agency shall cause the
applicant to prepare a draft environmental impact statement (EIS). Review, notice and action on
the EIS shall be conducted according to Part 617.
The lead agency's review of the action shall include the following procedures and general
considerations:
If the lead agency determines that the proposed action is not an exempt action or an action
listed in Section 617.4 of Title 6 NYCRR as a Type II action, and that it will not have a
significant effect on the environment or local plans, then the lead agency shall prepare, file
and circulate a negative declaration as provided for in Section 617.7(b) of Title 6 NYCRR, and
thereafter the proposed action may be processed without further regard to SEQR procedures.
The lead agency shall maintain files, that are open for public inspection, of all notices of
proposed actions, draft and final environmental impact statements and written determinations.
§ 290-80. Appeals; court proceedings.
Application to Supreme Court by aggrieved persons. Any person or persons jointly or severally
aggrieved by any decision of the Village Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board or any
officer, department or board of the Village may apply to the Supreme Court for review by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding shall be
instituted within 30 days after the filing of a decision of the Board in the office of the Village Clerk
or in the office designated by resolution of the Village Board. The Court may take evidence or
appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same with his or her
findings of fact and conclusions of law, if it shall appear that testimony is necessary for the proper
disposition of the matter. The Court, at special term, shall itself dispose of the cause on the merits,
determining all questions which may be presented for determination.
Costs of appeal. Costs shall not be allowed against the Village Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or
Planning Board unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad
faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
Preference of appeal to Court. All issues in any proceeding under this section shall have
preference over all other civil actions and proceedings.
Power of Court. If, upon the hearing at a special term of the Supreme Court, it shall appear to the
Court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or
appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the Court with his
or her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon
which the determination of the Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may specify the decision brought up for review.
Article IX. Special Permit Procedures
§ 290-81. Purpose.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 357/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
It is the intent of this chapter to use special permits to control the impact of certain uses upon areas
where they will be incompatible unless conditioned in a manner suitable to a particular location.
Special permits bring needed flexibility and individuality to the otherwise rigid controls of zoning
regulations.
§ 290-82. Administration.
The Village Planning Board shall administer the review and granting of special permits.
§ 290-83. Procedure.
The Code Enforcement Official shall refer the completed special permit application to the Village
Planning Board within 10 days after receiving a completed application.
At its next regular or special meeting, the Village Planning Board shall designate a public hearing
date within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 45 days from the date the application was
received, or 60 days in cases when the application shall be referred to the County Planning Board
in accordance with General Municipal Law § 239-m.
The Village Planning Board shall send a notice of the public hearing to the applicant and publish a
notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
The notice of the public hearing shall be sent and published at least 10 calendar days prior to the
date of the public hearing and shall contain sufficient information so as to identify the property
involved and the nature of the proposed action.
The Village Planning Board shall make a factual record of all its proceedings involving the granting
of a special permit. The decision of the Planning Board shall contain the reasons for its decision.
The Village Planning Board shall render its decision, either approving, approving with conditions or
denying the special permit, within 45 days after the hearing unless an extension is mutually
agreed upon.
Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a proposed plan showing the
information required for site plan approval as described in Article X of this chapter.
Each special permit application shall also receive site plan approval before the special permit may
be granted.
The Code Enforcement Official shall make an on-site visit to each property authorized as a special
use not less than one time each year. The purpose of said site visit is to ensure that the use is
being operated in accord with the conditions specified by the Planning Board. If the Code
Enforcement Official shall determine that a violation of this chapter or the conditions imposed by
the Planning Board exists, the certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of compliance shall be
null and void. A new special use permit application shall be required to be submitted and approved
prior to the reestablishment of said use.
No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing structures be occupied for
any special permit use until final site development plan approval has been granted by the Planning
Board and permits have been issued by all governmental agencies involved.
§ 290-84. Findings.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 358/376
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
The Village Planning Board may grant a special permit for uses described in Article VII, provided
that the proposed use complies with all requirements and conditions set forth in that Article.
The Planning Board shall make written findings for each special permit decision. Findings shall
state the reasoning behind, the basis for and the evidence relied upon to reach the decision.
Compliance with the requirements of Article VII shall also be maintained.
Article X. Site Plan Review
§ 290-85. Purpose.
The intent of this Article is to set forth additional general standards applying to certain uses and
activities. The nature of these uses and activities require special consideration of their impacts upon
surrounding properties, the environment, community character and the ability of the Village to
accommodate development consistent with the objectives of this chapter.
§ 290-86. Applications.
All applications for zoning permits, zoning variances or special permits, except for one- and two-family
dwellings, their permitted accessory uses and any addition to a single- or two-family dwelling, shall be
accompanied by a site plan. No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued until all the
requirements of this Article and all other applicable provisions of this chapter have been met.
§ 290-87. Procedure.
Each application for a building permit or zoning permit, variance or special permit for any
structure, building or use, other than one- or two-family dwellings, their permitted accessory uses
or any addition to a single- or two-family dwelling, shall be referred to the Village Planning Board.
The application shall be made to the Planning Board by filing it with the Code Enforcement
Official. The Code Enforcement Official shall present it to the Planning Board at the Planning
Board's next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant may attend the Planning Board meeting
to answer questions concerning the application.
Within 45 days of the receipt of the application, or within 60 days in those cases for which the
application is referred to the County Planning Board, the Planning Board shall render a decision to
approve, approve with conditions or deny the site plan and shall forward the decision to the Code
Enforcement Official. Any extension of this forty-five-day period may be granted upon consent of
both the applicant and the Village Planning Board. If the Planning Board fails to act within the
forty-five-day period or the extension period that has been granted, the site plan shall be
considered approved.
A full written record of the Planning Board minutes and decisions together with all documents
pertaining to the case shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be mailed to the
applicant.
§ 290-88. Preapplication conference.
A preapplication conference may be held between the Planning Board and the applicant to review the
basic site design concept and to determine the information to be submitted with the site plan.
§ 290-89. Application for site plan approval.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 359/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
An application for site plan approval shall be made in writing to the Code Enforcement Official and
shall be accompanied by information drawn from the following checklist. The Planning Board may
require additional information if necessary to complete its review.
Plan checklist for all site plans:
Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant and person responsible for
preparation of such drawing.
North arrow, scale and date.
Boundaries of the property, plotted to scale.
Existing watercourses and bodies of water.
Location of any slopes of 5% or greater.
Proposed grading and drainage.
Location, proposed use and height of all buildings and site improvements, including culverts,
drains, retaining walls and fences.
Location, design and construction materials of all parking and truck loading areas, showing
points of entry and exit from the site.
Location and design of all driveways and interior roads and sidewalks.
Location of outdoor storage, if any.
Location of proposed water and sewer connections.
Location, size and design and construction materials of all proposed signs.
Location and proposed development of all buffer areas, including existing vegetation cover.
Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities.
Location and design of all refuse collection and disposal facilities.
General landscaping plan.
Copy of property deed and a listing of all deed restrictions.
The Planning Board may require the following additional information:
Provision for pedestrian access.
Location of fire lanes and hydrants.
Other elements integral to the proposed development as considered necessary by the
Planning Board.
§ 290-90. Planning Board review of site plan.
The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include, as appropriate, the following:
General considerations:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 360/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
B.
C.
D.
Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation, including intersections,
road widths, pavement surfaces, dividers and traffic controls. This includes the maximum
feasible redesign of private roads to conform to public access and rights-of-way.
Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation, walkway structures,
control of intersections with vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian convenience.
Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street parking and loading.
Location, arrangement, size and design and general site compatibility of buildings, lighting
and signs.
The effect on views/vistas of existing properties due to the height, bulk or orientation of any
proposed structure.
Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
Effect on available water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other landscaping constituting a visual
and/or noise buffer between the applicant's and adjoining lands, including the maximum
feasible retention of existing vegetation.
In the case of an apartment complex or other multiple dwelling, the adequacy of usable open
space for play areas and informal recreation.
Protection of adjacent or neighboring properties against noise, glare, unsightliness or
nuisances.
Protection of solar access on adjacent or neighboring properties.
Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the provision of fire hydrants.
Special attention to the adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or erosion.
Special attention to the productive use and access with backlot areas, indicating present and
future intended uses.
Consistency with the general intent of the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
Consultant review. The Planning Board may consult with the Village Code Enforcement Official,
Fire Marshal, highway departments, County Planning Department and other local and county
officials, in addition to representatives of federal and state agencies, including but not limited to
the Soil Conservation Service, the State Department of Transportation and the State Department
of Environmental Conservation.
Optional public hearing. The Planning Board may conduct a public hearing on the proposed site
plan. If a public hearing is considered desirable by a majority of the Planning Board, such public
hearing shall be conducted within 45 days of the receipt of the complete application and shall be
advertised in the official newspaper of the town at least 10 days before the public hearing. If a
public hearing is held, a decision on the site plan shall be rendered within 45 days after the public
hearing.
Additional public notice. If the Planning Board determines that a public hearing shall be held, the
applicant shall place one sign on the property for which site plan review is requested. Said sign
shall be provided by the Code Enforcement Official. The sign shall be placed in a location which is
easily read from a public street. The sign shall specify the date, time and place of the public
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 361/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
hearing and a telephone number to call for more specific information. Such sign shall be placed on
the site not less than five days prior to the public hearing and shall be brought to the hearing by
the applicant or his designated representative.
Action on site plan.
The Planning Board may:
Grant final approval of the site plan;
Disapprove the site plan; or
Conditionally approve the site plan.
If the Planning Board grants final approval of the site plan, the Planning Board shall direct the
Planning Board Chairman to endorse its approval on the original Mylar and one copy of the
final site plan. Once signed, the Planning Board shall forward the Mylar and site plan to the
Code Enforcement Official. The Code Enforcement Official shall issue a zoning permit to the
applicant if the project conforms with all other applicable requirements and permits.
If the Planning Board disapproves the site plan, the Planning Board shall so inform the Code
Enforcement Official and the applicant. The Code Enforcement Official shall deny a zoning
permit to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also notify the applicant, in writing, of its
decision and its reasons for disapproval. A copy of the appropriate minutes may suffice for
this notice.
If the Planning Board conditionally approves the site plan, the site plan initially submitted shall
be considered to be the preliminary site plan, and the applicant may prepare his final detailed
site plan and submit it to the Planning Board for approval. If more than six months have
elapsed between the time of the Planning Board's report on the preliminary site plan and if the
Planning Board finds that conditions have changed significantly in the interim, the Planning
Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site plan for further review and possible
revision prior to accepting the proposed final site plan for review.
§ 290-91. Application for final detailed site plan approval.
The final detailed site plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary site plan that has received
conditional approval. It should incorporate any revisions or other features that may have been
recommended by the Planning Board during the preliminary review. All such compliances shall be
clearly indicated by the applicant on the appropriate submission.
The following additional information shall accompany an application for final site plan approval:
Detailed sizing and final material specification of all required improvements.
An estimated project construction schedule.
A detailed plan identifying all lands, easements and rights-of-way which shall be commonly
owned with the identification of the association responsible for said ownership, the method of
managing commonly owned properties and requiring that the officers of said association shall
be identified to the Code Enforcement Official, in writing, on an annual basis.
Information specifying the materials to be used and information as to the character of the
exterior design.
§ 290-92. Action on final detailed site plan application.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 362/376
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
Within 45 days of the receipt of a complete application for final site plan approval, the Planning
Board shall render a decision to the applicant and the Code Enforcement Official.
Upon approval by all involved agencies, an application for final site plan approval by the Planning
Board shall direct the Planning Board Chairman to endorse its approval on the original Mylar and
one copy of the final site plan. Once signed, the Planning Board shall forward the Mylar and site
plan to the Code Enforcement Official. The Code Enforcement Official shall issue a zoning permit
to the applicant if the project conforms with all other applicable requirements and permits.
Upon disapproving an application for a final site plan, the Planning Board shall so inform the Code
Enforcement Official and the applicant. The Code Enforcement Official shall deny a zoning permit
to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision and
its reasons for disapproval. A copy of the appropriate minutes may suffice for this notice.
§ 290-93. Supplemental regulations pertaining to site plan
approval.
Expiration of site plan approval. Such site plan approval shall automatically terminate one year
after the same is granted unless significant work has been done on the project.
Reimbursable costs. Reasonable costs incurred by the Village for consultation fees or other
extraordinary expenses associated with the review of a proposed site plan shall be charged to the
applicant in accordance with the fee schedule.
Performance guaranty. No zoning permit shall be issued until all improvements shown on the site
plan are installed or a sufficient performance guaranty, approved by the Village Board, has been
posted for improvements. The sufficiency of such performance guaranty shall be determined by
the Village Board after consultation with the Code Enforcement Official, Village Engineer, Planning
Board and Village Attorney.
Inspection of improvements and development. The Code Enforcement Official shall be responsible
for the overall inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the Village officials and
agencies, as appropriate. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted prior to a final inspection
and determination of conformity to the site plan and the New York State Uniform Code and all
other applicable laws, codes and regulations.
Integration of site plan approval procedure with other Planning Board approvals. Whenever the
particular circumstances of a proposed development require compliance with either the special
use permit procedures or other requirements of this chapter, the Planning Board shall attempt to
integrate, as appropriate, site plan review as required by this Article with the procedural and
submission requirements for such other compliances. In any case, all state permits and local land
use control approvals shall be procured prior to the issuance of a building permit for a
development project.
Conflicts. If any conflicts exist between this site plan review procedure and other land use controls
of the Village, this Article shall apply.
Article XI. Sign Regulations
§ 290-94. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is
intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate,
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 363/376
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
(1)
L.
enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, preserve the scenic and natural
beauty and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community. It is further intended hereby to
reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents,
reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way,
provide more visual open space and enhance the appearance and attractiveness of the Village of
Albion.
This Article is intended to promote attractive signs which clearly present the visual message in a
manner that is compatible with its surroundings. The appearance, character and quality of a
community are affected by the location, size, construction and graphic design of its signs.
Therefore, such signs should convey their messages clearly and simply to enhance their
surroundings.
§ 290-95. General regulations.
[Amended 4-11-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 7-12-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
No illuminated signs or outdoor illumination shall direct light in a way which would create a traffic
hazard or nuisance or be unreasonably detrimental to adjoining or neighboring properties.
No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to confuse or obstruct the view of any traffic sign,
signal or device.
No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners or similar fluttering devices.
No sign shall consist of animated or moving parts.
No sign shall be attached to fences, utility poles or trees.
No sign or sign support shall be erected or maintained above the peak of the roof of any building
or structure.
No sign which obscures visibility at elevations between three and seven feet above street level
shall be placed or maintained within 25 feet of the intersection of the street or highway lines.
No motor vehicle, mobile home or trailer on which is placed or painted any sign shall be parked or
stationed in a manner primarily intended to display the sign.
No sound amplifiers, public address systems or other sound devices shall be used as a means of
advertising or to attract attention to a sign.
No off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted other than as permitted under the exempt
sign provisions of § 290-98 and directional signs as provided for in § 290-101A.
No advertising message shall be extended over more than one sign placed along a street or
highway.
Electronic changeable message signs are prohibited within the Historic District but are otherwise
permitted, subject to the following limitations:
The maximum brightness of the sign shall be 0.3 footcandle above ambient light as measured
using a footcandle (lux) meter. All electronic changeable message signs shall come equipped
with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct
correlation with natural ambient light conditions at all times. No electronic changeable
message signs shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 footcandle above ambient light as
measured using a footcandle (lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. Prior to
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 364/376
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
the issuance of any permit, the owner shall provide the Village with a certification from the
sign manufacturer stating that the sign is capable of complying with the above brightness
provisions.
Electronic changeable message signs must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in
one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a measure to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions.
The images and messages displayed must be static, and the transition from one static display
to another must be instantaneous, with no special effects, or the transition may provide a
black screen for at least one second.
Each line of copy and graphics in an electronic changeable message sign must be at least six
inches in height.
Electronic changeable message signs shall not include animation, full-motion video, flashing,
scrolling, strobing, racing, blinking, or changes in color, fade in or fade out in any manner
imitating movement, or any other means not providing constant illumination.
Each message shall be illuminated for at least 10 seconds before transitioning to a new
message, except for electronic changeable message signs within 250 feet of an interchange,
an at-grade intersection not controlled by a stop sign or stop light, a signed curve, or a
pedestrian walkway, then each message shall be illuminated for at least 30 seconds before
transitioning to a new message.
The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in
content to the next image or message or to any other sign.
Electronic changeable message signs must be constructed perpendicular with the road in all
residential zoned districts, whether single-family, multifamily, townhouse, or mixed use where
residential housing is permitted, except for corner lots where the electronic changeable
message sign shall not be located within 25 feet of the point of intersection of the curb or
edge of two intersection streets and the placement of said sign can be arranged so that the
sign can be read from the intersection. The electronic message in all residential zoned
districts shall not be displayed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 290-96. Construction standards.
All internally illuminated signs shall be constructed in conformance with the Standards for Electric
Signs of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and bear the seal of the Underwriters Laboratories,
Inc.
If such sign does not bear the seal of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., the sign shall be
inspected and certified by an electrical inspector, as defined by the Fire Prevention and Building
Code of the Village of Albion. All transformers, wires and similar items shall be concealed. All
wiring to freestanding signs shall be underground.
All signs, including wall-mounted and projecting signs, shall be securely anchored and shall not
swing or move in any manner.
All signs, sign finishes, supports and electrical work shall be kept clean and painted and free from
all hazards, such as but not limited to faulty wiring and loose supports, guys and anchors.
All projecting, freestanding or wall-mounted signs shall employ acceptable, safe materials.
All signs shall be painted and/or fabricated in accordance with generally accepted standards.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 365/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
§ 290-97. Regulations for specific types.
Wall signs.
Wall signs shall not extend beyond the ends or over the tops of the walls to which attached
and shall not extend above the level of the second floor of the building.
Wall signs shall not extend more than nine inches from the face of the building to which
attached.
Any part of a sign extending over pedestrian traffic areas shall have a minimum clearance of
eight feet above grade.
Copy-change wall signs shall not be permitted.
Freestanding signs.
All freestanding signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not
less than 30 pounds per square foot of surface area.
Unless otherwise specified herein, no freestanding sign shall be located closer than 15 feet to
the front property line nor closer than five feet to the side property line. No freestanding sign
may be located closer than 25 feet to another freestanding sign.
No freestanding sign, except for directory signs as provided for herein, shall be more than 48
square feet in area per side.
No freestanding sign shall be more than 20 feet in height above finished grade. Such height
shall be measured vertically from the established grade directly below the sign or entry level
of the building or structure, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the sign, including
supporting structures.
No freestanding sign shall extend over or into the public right-of-way, nor shall it overhang the
property lines.
Freestanding signs under which a pedestrian walkway or driveway passes shall have a tenfoot
vertical clearance.
Masonry wall-type signs shall not exceed four feet in height and shall not be placed so as to
impair visibility for motorists.
Illuminated freestanding signs shall require site plan review by the Village of Albion Planning
Board.
Window signs.
No more than one sign per window and a maximum of two per business enterprise shall be
allowed.
The area of a window sign shall not exceed 25% of the area of the window, nor more than
four square feet.
Copy-change window signs shall not exceed three square feet in area.
Directory signs. Sign directories shall contain identification of and direction to several business
enterprises, but shall contain no promotional advertising.
Awning signs.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 366/376
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
No sign shall project from an awning.
Awning graphics may be painted or affixed flat to the surface of the front or sides of the
awning and shall indicate only the name and/or address of the enterprise or premises.
Awning graphics shall be a single line of lettering not exceeding six inches in height.
Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall not be permitted.
§ 290-98. Exempt signs.
The following signs may be erected and maintained without permits and fees, provided that such signs
comply with the general requirements of this chapter and other conditions specifically imposed by the
regulations, rules and laws of the Village of Albion:
Historical markers, tablets and statues, memorial signs and plaques; names of buildings and dates
of erection when cut into masonry surface or when constructed of bronze, stainless steel or similar
material; and emblems installed by government agencies or religious or nonprofit organizations.
Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.
Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in connection with commercial
promotion.
Any sign placed by any governmental agency for public purposes or any nonadvertising sign
identifying underground utility lines.
On-premises directional signs for the convenience of the general public, identifying public parking
areas, fire zones, entrances and exits and similar signs, internally illuminated or nonilluminated,
not exceeding two square feet per face and six feet in height. Business names and personal
names shall be allowed, excluding advertising messages.
Nonilluminated warning, private drive, posted or "no trespassing" signs, not exceeding two square
feet per face.
Number and nameplate identifying residents, mounted on house, apartment or mailbox, not
exceeding two square feet per face.
Private-owner merchandise sale signs for garage sales and auctions, not exceeding four square
feet for a period not to exceed seven days.
Temporary nonilluminated "For Sale," "For Rent," real estate signs and signs of a similar nature,
concerning premises upon which the sign is located: in a residential zoning district (R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-MH, R-C), one sign not exceeding six square feet in area per side; in a business, commercial or
industrial zoning district (CBD, GC, PC, LI), one sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area, set
back at least 10 feet from all property lines. All such signs shall be removed within three days after
the sale, lease or rental of the premises or property.
Holiday decorations, including lighting, in any district.
Integral graphics or attached price signs on gasoline pumps at gasoline stations.
Directional signs for meetings, conventions and other assemblies.
One sign, not exceeding six square feet in the residential zoning districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MH, RC)
nor 16 square feet in area in the business, commercial or industrial districts (CBD, GC, PC, LI),
listing the architect, engineer, contractor and/or owner, on premises where construction,
renovation or repair is in progress.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 367/376
M.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
A.
(1)
B.
Temporary, nonilluminated window signs and posters not exceeding 16 square feet in area or 25%
of the window area, whichever is smaller.
§ 290-99. Temporary signs allowed without a permit.
Political posters, banners, promotional devices or other temporary signs advertising any political,
educational, charitable, civic, religious or like campaign or event, and similar signs. Such signs
shall not exceed eight square feet in area in the residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-C, and RMH)
nor 16 square feet in area in the business, commercial or industrial districts (CBD, GC, PC
and LI). Such signs may be displayed for a period of up to 60 consecutive days and shall be
removed within seven days following the election or event advertised.
If such temporary signs are not removed within the seven-day period, the Code Enforcement
Official is authorized to remove said signs and to charge all costs incident to the removal of the
sign or signs to the organization responsible for the placement of the signs.
Temporary signs shall not be attached to fences, trees, utility poles, bridges or traffic signs and
shall not obstruct or impair vision or traffic in any manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the
health and welfare of the general public.
§ 290-100. Noncommercial speech signs.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, noncommercial speech signs may be displayed
without a permit subject to the following regulations:
Noncommercial speech signs, residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MH and R-C). Noncommercial
speech signs may be permitted in any residential district without a sign permit, subject to the
following conditions:
The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot shall be two, excepting posted
or preserve signs erected pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of
New York.
Of the total number of signs, only one shall be a window sign. No window sign shall exceed
25% of the total window opening or two square feet, whichever is smaller.
A building-mounted sign may not exceed two square feet in total area. Any building-mounted
sign shall be located in proximity to an exterior entrance.
A freestanding sign, unless otherwise specified herein, shall:
Not exceed six square feet in sign area;
Not exceed four feet in height above grade;
Maintain a minimum ground clearance of two feet;
Not be closer to any lot line than 1/2 of the required setback;
Not interfere with vehicle site distances either from, along or to a public way; and
Not be illuminated, except indirectly.
Noncommercial speech signs, business and industrial districts (CBD, GC, PC, LI).
Noncommercial speech signs associated with nonresidential uses may be allowed in any
business or industrial district without a sign permit, subject to the following conditions:
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 368/376
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot shall be two, excepting
posted or preserve signs erected pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law of the
State of New York.
Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not be closer to any lot line than 1/2 of
the required setback.
Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not exceed six feet in height above
grade level.
Building-mounted noncommercial speech signs shall be located on the first-floor front
facade of the structure.
Noncommercial speech signs shall not be illuminated, except indirectly.
Noncommercial speech signs associated with a residential use in a business or industrial
district shall comply with the standards specified above in Subsection A.
§ 290-101. Signs permitted in all zoning districts.
Within any zoning district, a sign permit may be granted for erection or alteration of the following types
of permanent signs, provided the number and total area of signs shall conform to the regulations in this
article:
Off-premises directional signs for the convenience of the general public and for the purpose of
directing persons to a business, activity, service or community facility may be erected, provided
that such signs do not exceed 10 square feet per establishment or not more than two such signs
per establishment. The message shall be limited to the name or identification, arrow or direction
and distance. Advertising messages shall be prohibited.
Nonilluminated, single-sided real estate development signs, including signs for industrial and
commercial development, residential subdivisions or construction signs denoting the architect,
engineer and/or contractor, not exceeding 32 square feet in the business, commercial and
industrial districts (CBD, GC, PC and LI) nor 16 square feet in residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-MH and R-C), may be erected on property being sold, leased or developed. Such sign shall be
erected parallel to the fronting street or highway and shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from
the property line or attached to the face of the building. Such sign shall be removed upon the
completion of the project and shall be in place for a period not exceeding two years.
For residential subdivisions, multiple-family dwellings or developments or townhouse
developments, one sign identifying the name of the development not exceeding 16 square feet
shall be permitted. One such sign shall be permitted for each entrance on a different street or
highway.
Signs or bulletin boards customarily incident to places of worship, libraries, museums, social clubs
or societies may be erected on the premises of such institutions. One such bulletin board, not
exceeding 16 square feet in area, may be erected for each entrance on a different street or
highway.
Recreation areas, day camps, golf clubs and other similar facilities permitted in this Zoning
Chapter shall in all zones be permitted one sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area.
Signs necessary for the identification, operation or production of a public utility, not exceeding 16
square feet in area, may be erected on the premises of such public utility.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 369/376
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
§ 290-102. Signs permitted in the CBD, GC, PC and LI Zoning
Districts.
Within business, commercial and industrial districts (CBD, GC, PC and LI), the following provisions
shall apply:
The total number of permitted signs on a single business, commercial or industrial lot shall not
exceed two, of which only one may be freestanding.
The total cumulative area of all signs permitted on such lot shall not exceed one square foot per
linear foot of building front, plus 1/4 square foot for every foot the principal building is set back
from the street line, up to a maximum of 120 square feet. However, each lot shall be permitted a
minimum cumulative sign area of 32 square feet.
Representational signs shall not project in any direction more than four feet beyond the principal
structure to which they are attached and shall not exceed 15 square feet in area. Only one such
sign per establishment shall be permitted, with the area of such sign structure included within the
total sign area permitted.
Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date or similar public service information
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall not employ less than 60% of the total sign area,
each side, for said public service information.
Gasoline service stations shall additionally be permitted two price, product or promotional signs
each, not exceeding 12 square feet or six square feet per side, if located on the pump island or set
not closer than 0 feet from the edge of the pavement, not exceeding eight feet above grade nor
situated so as to impair visibility for pedestrians or motorists.
§ 290-102.1. Signs permitted in the R-C District.
[Added 7-23-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
One nonilluminated monument sign, either solid base or suspended between two poles.
Dimensional requirements.
Minimum setback from curb of 15 feet.
Maximum height of five feet.
Maximum 16 square feet of area per side or 32 square feet in total combined surface area for
a two-sided sign.
§ 290-103. Regulations where more than one principal activity is
being conducted.
Notwithstanding the standard governing the total area of signs permitted to be erected or maintained
on any parcel of real property as set forth in § 290-102 above, the following standards shall guide the
regulation of all signs associated with projects when more than one principal building or business use
or activity is proposed to be conducted upon a single parcel of real property, such as in the case of a
shopping center, plaza or mall or other multiple-commercial-use facility or industrial park.
A single freestanding sign of up to 48 square feet in area and not more than 20 feet in height may
be erected which identifies the name of the center or facility as a whole and does not advertise
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 370/376
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
any individual business activity.
Freestanding signs advertising individual businesses within a shopping center or joint
development project shall be prohibited.
One sign identifying individual businesses or uses may be erected for each separate principal
activity. Individual business signs may be attached to the face of the building. Such signs shall not
exceed the lesser of one square foot of area for each linear foot of store frontage or 20% of the
surface area of the building face on which the sign is to be attached.
In a multiple-commercial-use facility or industrial park, there may be one directory sign at any
location therein which shall not exceed 12 square feet for each acre of land in such commercial
area or industrial park, provided that no such sign shall exceed 64 square feet in area. In addition,
at each point of entrance and exit for vehicular traffic into such multiple-commercial-use facility or
industrial park, one other directory sign shall be permitted which does not exceed two square feet
for each acre of land in such multiple-commercial-use facility or industrial park. Such signs shall
not exceed a total area of 12 square feet.
An overall sign design plan for any such center or facility shall be submitted with the application for
the site plan approval. The sign design plan shall include plans for each principal activity therein
and shall reflect a reasonable uniformity of design, lettering, lighting and material.
§ 290-104. Portable signs.
A new business or a business in a new location, awaiting installation of a permanent sign, may utilize a
portable sign for a period not more than 60 days or until the installation of a permanent sign, whichever
occurs first. Such portable sign shall conform to all of the construction standards of the Village of
Albion. A separate permit for such portable sign shall be required.
§ 290-105. Nonconforming signs.
In the event that a sign lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter does not conform to
the provisions and standards of this chapter, then such sign shall be modified to conform or be
removed according to the following regulations:
If a nonconforming sign includes features that area prohibited pursuant to § 290-95, General
regulations, then such sign shall be modified by its owner to comply or be removed within 30 days
after the owner receives written notice from the Code Enforcement Official to so comply.
A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or replaced with another nonconforming sign. Any
maintenance, repair or alteration of a nonconforming sign shall not cost more than 50% of the
current depreciated value of the sign as of the date of the alteration or repair.
§ 290-106. Removal.
Any sign, existing on or after the effective date of this chapter, which no longer advertises an existing
business conducted or product sold on the premises upon which such sign is located, shall be
removed.
If the Code Enforcement Official shall find that any sign regulated in the Village is not used, is
abandoned, unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public, the Code Enforcement Official shall
give written notice to the named owner of the land upon which such sign is located, who shall
remove or repair the sign within 30 days from the date of the notice. If the sign is not removed or
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 371/376
B.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
repaired within said time period, the Code Enforcement Official may remove or repair the sign and
assess the owner for any cost incurred for such service.
The Code Enforcement Official or Fire Marshal may cause any sign which is a source of
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed immediately without notice.
§ 290-107. Permit procedures.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, alter or relocate any sign without first
obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Official. Subsequent to this initial application, no
permit shall be required for a sign to be repainted, repaired or have its message changed.
Application procedure. Applications shall be made to the Code Enforcement Official on the form
prescribed and provided by the Village of Albion, accompanied by the required fee, and shall
contain the following information:
Name, address and telephone number of:
Applicant;
Owner of the property; and
Contractor installing the sign.
Location of the building, structure or land upon which the sign now exists or is to be erected.
If a new sign is to be erected, elevation and plan drawings to scale. In addition, a full
description of the placement and appearance of the proposed sign shall be included and shall
cover the following:
Location on the premises; specifically, its position in relation to adjacent buildings,
structures and property lines.
The method of illumination, if any, and the position of lighting or other extraneous
devices.
Graphic design, including symbols, letters, materials and colors.
The visual message, text, copy or content of the sign.
Written consent or a copy of the contract made with the owner of the property upon which the
sign is to be erected, if the applicant is not the owner.
Permit.
Upon the filing of a completed application for a sign permit and the payment of the required
fee, the Code Enforcement Official shall examine the plans, specifications and other data
submitted and the premises on which the sign is to be erected or now exists. If it shall appear
that the sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this article, the Code Enforcement
Official shall then, within five days of receiving the application, issue a permit for the erection
of the proposed sign, or for alterations of an existing sign. The issuance of the permit shall not
excuse the applicant from conforming to the other laws, rules and regulations of the Village of
Albion.
If the erection of the sign authorized under any such permit has not commenced within six
months from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void, but may be renewed
within 30 days prior to the expiration, for good cause shown, for an additional six months,
upon payment of 1/2 of the original fee.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 372/376
D. Permit fee. Fees for the sign permits shall be fixed by the Village Board of Trustees and listed in
the fee schedule.
Appendix
Chapter A295. Civil Penalties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Albion during codification; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A295-1. Specific penalties.
The following civil penalties are hereby established for the chapters or Articles of this Code indicated in
the table below:
Code Chapter or Article Type of Offense Amount
Ch. 116, Water Cross-connection $100.
Creation of backflow situation $1,000.
Broken seals not reported $100.
General offenses $100.
Ch. 124, Alarm Devices Failure to have alarm business or alarm
agent permit
$100.
Failure to have alarm system permit $100.
Failure to terminate audible alarm $100.
Activation of excessive avoidable alarms
within a 180-day period:
Third avoidable alarm $50.
Fourth avoidable alarm $100.
Each avoidable alarm thereafter $200.
Ch. 128, Brush, Grass and
Weeds
General offenses $100.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Albion adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code nor on this list is available
from the office of the Village Clerk. The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code
was L.L. No. 5-1996, adopted 8-14-1996. A complete listing, including disposition, of all legislation
reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code is on file in the office of the Village
Clerk.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 373/376
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 6-1996 12-20-1996 Zoning Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-1997 4-2-1997 Exterior property maintenance Ch. 155
L.L. No. 2-1997 9-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 3-1997 10-1-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 1-1998 3-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-1998 6-10-1998 Streets and sidewalks amendment Ch. 196
L.L. No. 3-1998 7-8-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-1998 8-12-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 1-1999 3-10-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 2-1999 9-8-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-1999 11-10-1999 Preservation of historic areas Ch. 173
L.L. No. 1-2000 4-12-2000 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 161
L.L. No. 2-2000 6-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 3-2000 8-9-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 4-2000 8-9-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 5-2000 9-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 6-2000 10-11-2000 Preservation of historic areas
amendment
Ch. 173
L.L. No. 7-2000 11-8-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 1-2001 1-10-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2001 1-10-2001 Loitering Ch. 218
L.L. No. 3-2001 3-14-2001 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 161
L.L. No. 4-2001 6-13-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 5-2001 8-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 6-2001 8-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 7-2001 9-12-2001 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 161
L.L. No. 8-2001 11-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 9-2001 11-14-2001 Clearing, filling and grading Ch. 145
L.L. No. 10-2001 11-14-2001 Abandoned, junked, discarded and
unregistered motor vehicles; exterior
property maintenance amendment
Ch. 121; Ch. 155
L.L. No. 1-2002 4-15-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 2-2002 4-26-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2002 7-10-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 4-2002 8-14-2002 Exterior property maintenance
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 155, Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2003 1-8-2003 Dog control amendment Ch. 208, Art. I
L.L. No. 2-2003 4-9-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2003 5-29-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 4-2003 10-8-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 374/376
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2004 1-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2004 1-21-2004 Termination of Village's status as
assessing unit for real property taxes
Ch. 82, Art. II
L.L. No. 3-2004 1-21-2004 Terminate and abolish Village Court
and Justice positions
Ch. 55, Art. III
L.L. No. 4-2004 2-11-2004 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 161
L.L. No. 5-2004 10-13-2004 Noise amendment Ch. 236
L.L. No. 1-2005 1-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2005 2-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2005 2-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 4-2005 3-9-2005 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 161
L.L. No. 5-2005 3-9-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 6-2005 4-13-2005 Subdivision of land Ch. 278
L.L. No. 7-2005 5-11-2005 Noise amendment Ch. 236
L.L. No. 8-2005 5-11-2005 Preservation of historic areas
amendment
Superseded by L.L.
No. 9-2005
L.L. No. 9-2005 8-10-2005 Historic preservation Ch. 173
L.L. No. 10-2005 12-14-2005 Water amendment Ch. 116
L.L. No. 1-2006 8-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2006 8-9-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2006 9-13-2006 Advisory Committee Ch. 4
L.L. No. 1-2007 1-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2007 6-13-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2007 9-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 4-2007 9-26-2007 Brush, grass and weeds amendment;
fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 128; Ch. 161
L.L. No. 5-2007 12-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 1-2008 3-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2008 11-12-2008 Establishment of one-year moratorium
on outdoor wood furnaces
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2009 1-14-2009 Taxation: historic property exemption Ch. 82, Art. III
L.L. No. 2-2009 1-14-2009 Taxation: exemption for capital
improvements to residential buildings
Ch. 82, Art. IV
L.L. No. 3-2009 1-14-2009 Taxation: exemption for conversion
from nonresidential to mixed-use
property
Ch. 82, Art. V
L.L. No. 4-2009 5-27-2009 Abandoned, junked, discarded and
unregistered motor vehicles
Ch. 121
L.L. No. 5-2009 6-24-2009 Progressive disciplinary procedure Ch. 26
L.L. No. 6-2009 8-12-2009 Brush, grass and weeds amendment Ch. 128
L.L. No. 1-2010 1-27-2010 Indemnification of Village employees Repealed by L.L. No.
4-2010
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 375/376
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2010 3-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 3-2010 4-14-2010 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 66
L.L. No. 4-2010 4-28-2010 L.L. No. 1-2010 (Indemnification of
employees) repealer
Repealer only
L.L. No. 5-2010 7-28-2010 Exterior property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 155
L.L. No. 6-2010 8-11-2010 Historic preservation amendment Ch. 173
L.L. No. 7-2010 8-11-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 8-2010 9-22-2010 Historic preservation amendment Ch. 173
L.L. No. 1-2011 4-13-2011 Residency Ch. 74
L.L. No. 2-2011 8-10-2011 Recreational vehicles and motor
homes
Ch. 184
L.L. No. 3-2011 9-14-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 1-2012 3-28-2012 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
L.L. No. 2-2012 4-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2012 4-25-2012 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 66
L.L. No. 4-2012 7-11-2012 Swimming pools amendment Ch. 280
L.L. No. 5-2012 10-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 6-2012 10-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 1-2013 1-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 2-2013 3-27-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 3-2013 3-27-2013 Tax levy limit override 2013 NCM
L.L. No. 4-2013 7-10-2013 Unsafe buildings amendment; fire
prevention and building construction
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 135; Ch. 161; Ch.
290
L.L. No. 1-2014 3-19-2014 Tax levy limit override 2014 NCM
L.L. No. 2-2014 5-28-2014 Records: public access Ch. 72, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2014 7-23-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2015 5-27-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 2-2015 6-24-2015 Garage sales Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2016 5-25-2016 Six-month moratorium on installation
of mobile homes outside mobile home
parks
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2017 6-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 2-2017 7-12-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2017 11-22-2017 Vehicles and Traffic amendment Ch. 263
L.L. No. 1-2018 4-11-2018 Trees Ch. 200
L.L. No. 2-2018 9-12-2018 Taxation: Cold War Veterans Tax
Exemption
Ch. 82, Art. VI
L.L. No. 3-2018 9-12-2018 Taxation: Alternative Veterans
Exemption
Ch. 82, Art. VII
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
7/14/2020 Village of Albion, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/AL0001?guid=AL0001&children=true 376/376
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No. 1-2019 6-12-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 263 33
L.L. No. 2-2019 12-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 263 33
L.L. No. 1-2020 3-11-2020 Mobile Food
Vendors
Ch. 242 33