The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 11.
Settlement of claims — See Ch. 19.
Continuity of government — See Ch. 22.
Ethics — See Ch. 33.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 62.
Police Department — See Ch. 68.
C:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ C-1. Incorporation and name; boundaries.
A. The citizens of the State of New York from time to time inhabitants of
that part of the County of Cayuga included within the City of Auburn, as
the same is now constituted and bounded, are, and are continued, a
municipal corporation in perpetuity under the name of "The City of
Auburn."
B. The territory of such City shall be as follows:
(1) BEGINNING at the point of intersection of the center of the
Owasco Outlet with the south line of Great Lot 47; thence easterly
and along the south lines of Great Lot 47 and part of Great Lot 48,
also being along the center line of Havens Avenue a distance of
4,330', more or less, to a point of intersection of the said south line
of Great Lot 48 and the west line of the Town of Sennett, said point
also being the present terminus of the center line of South Hunter
Avenue; thence northerly along the center line of South Hunter
Avenue 3,310', more or less, to a point in the west line of the Town
of Sennett, said point also being the southwest corner of lands
annexed to the City of Auburn from the Town of Sennett as shown
on a map of annexation dated April 4, 1982; thence easterly at a
deflection angle to the right of 89° 05' with the last described line a
distance of 291.01' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 90° 08'
30" with the last described line a distance of 479.12' to a point;
thence at an interior angle of 90° 46' 30" with the last described
line a distance of 182.49' to a point; thence at an interior angle of
153° 48' with the last described line a distance of 55.72' to a point;
thence at an interior angle of 296° 12' with the last described line a
distance of 80.00' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 90° 00'
with the last described line a distance of 52.00' to a point in the
west line of the Town of Sennett, said point also being in the east
line of the City of Auburn; thence northerly at an interior angle of
90° with the last described line a distance of 560', more or less, to a
point in the south line of Great Lot 29 and the north line of Great
Lot 39; thence westerly along the south lines of Great Lots 29, 28
and 27 a distance of 13,526.79', more or less, to a point in the south
line of Great Lot 26, said point being 680', more or less, westerly of
the intersection of Great Lots 26, 27, 36 and 37, said point also
being the southeast corner of lands annexed to the City of Auburn
from the Town of Throop as shown on a map of annexation dated
February 10, 1987; thence at a deflection angle to the right of 79°
40' with the last described line a distance of 325.52' to a point;
thence at an interior angle of 280° 52' with the last described line a
distance of 450.00' to a point in the center line of North Division
Street Road; thence at an interior angle of 79° 08' with the last
described line and along the center line of North Division Street
§ C-1 CHARTER § C-1
C:3
Road a distance of 60.81' to a point; thence at an interior angle
of 100° 52' with the last described line a distance of 572.61' to a
point; thence at an interior angle of 259° 08' with the last described
line a distance of 684.63' to a point; thence at an interior angle
of 100° 52' with the last described line a distance of 1,087.71'
to a point; thence at an interior angle of 270° 11' 30" with the
last described line a distance of 1,042.45' to a point; thence at an
interior angle of 90° 06' with the last described line a distance of
1,372.02' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 90° 07' 30" with
the last described line a distance of 2,127.33' to a point in the north
line of Great Lot 26; thence easterly along the north line of Great
Lot 26 a distance of 840', more or less, to a point; thence southerly
and along the west line of the City of Auburn and also the east line
of the Town of Aurelius a distance of 6,255.86', more or less, to a
point, said point being the northeast corner of lands annexed to the
City of Auburn from the Town of Aurelius as shown on a map of
annexation dated February 10, 1987; thence at a deflection angle
to the right of 86° 41' 27" with the last described line a distance of
471 32' to a point; thence southerly at an interior angle of 93° 18'
33" with the last described line a distance of 1,687.26' to a point in
the center line of Clark Street Road; thence easterly at an interior
angle of 79° 08' with the last described line and along the center
line of Clark Street Road a distance of 479.12' to a point, said point
being in the east line of the Town of Aurelius and also being in the
west line of the City of Auburn; thence southerly along said division
line between the Town of Aurelius and the City of Auburn a distance
of 7,716.88', more or less, to a point in the south line of Great Lot
55; thence easterly and along the south lines of Great Lots 55, 56
and part of Great Lot 57 a distance of 11,100.7', more or less, to a
point, said point also being the northwest corner of lands annexed
to the City of Auburn from the Town of Fleming as shown on a
map of annexation dated December 15, 1982; thence at a deflection
angle to the right of 77° 14' with the last described line a distance
of 546.7' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 160° 40' with
the last described line a distance of 314' to a point; thence at an
interior angle of 168° 13' with the last described line a distance
of 1,502.0' to a point, thence at an interior angle of 89° 56' with
the last described line a distance of 653.8' to a stone monument on
the west bank of the Owasco Outlet; thence at an interior angle of
74° 25' with the last described line a distance of 197' to a point;
thence at an exterior angle of 146° 44' with the last described
line a distance of 337.4' to a point; thence at an exterior angle of
132° 49' with the last described line a distance of 400' to a point;
thence at an exterior angle of 143° 17' with the last described line
a distance of 295.45' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 172°
02' with the last described line a distance of 180.45' to a point;
thence at an interior angle of 102° 00' with the last described line
a distance of 95' to a point; thence at an interior angle of 153° 20'
with the last described line a distance of 237' to a point; thence at
§ C-1 AUBURN CODE § C-1
C:4
§ C-2. Powers of City.
§ C-3. Election districts.
The Council shall create, consolidate, divide or alter the election districts
within the City in accordance with the Election Law.
an exterior angle of 157° 58' with the last described line a distance
of 67.8' to a point; thence at an exterior angle of 165° 43' with the
last described line a distance of 71' to a stone monument; thence
easterly and at a deflection angle to the right of 108° 41' with the
last described line a distance of 45', more or less, to the center line
of the Owasco Outlet; thence northerly and along the center line of
the Owasco Outlet as it winds and turns a distance of 6,094', more
or less, to the point and place of beginning.
(2) BEING AND INTENDING TO BE all of the lands situate in the City
of Auburn as established by Chapter 488, § 1 of the Laws of 1920
and annexations to the City of Auburn subsequent thereto.
A. The City of Auburn shall be a body politic and corporate and shall have
perpetual succession; may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued;
may acquire property within and without its boundaries for any
municipal purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate by
purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation; and may sell, lease, hold,
manage and control such property as its interest may require. The City
of Auburn shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges
and immunities of every name and nature wheresoever conferred on
cities by the Constitution of the State of New York and conferred or
imposed on it by general or special law.
B. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be
deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated or
implied herein or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City of
Auburn shall have and may exercise all powers which under the
Constitution of the State of New York it would be competent for this
Charter specifically to enumerate, and all powers necessarily incident
or fairly to be implied, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. All
powers of the City of Auburn, whether expressed or implied, shall be
exercised in the manner specifically provided in this Charter or, if not so
provided, then in the manner provided by local law, ordinance or
resolution of the Council or as otherwise provided by law.
§ C-1 CHARTER § C-3
C:5

ARTICLE II
Officers, Powers and Duties
§ C-4. Elective officers; qualifications.
The City of Auburn having adopted the simplified form of government,
defined as Plan C under the Optional City Government Law, known as
Chapter 444 of the Laws of 1914, the elective officers of such City are a
Mayor and four Councilors, all of whom shall be elected by the qualified
voters of all of the City. All such elective officers shall at the time of
nomination be citizens of the United States and residents of the City. The
removal of any such officer from the City during his or her term of office
shall render the office held by him or her vacant.
§ C-5. Terms of elective officers.
The terms of office of the Mayor and Councilors, hereafter elected, shall be
four years each. The terms of all such elective officers shall begin on the
first day of January, following their election.
§ C-6. Nomination and election of elective officers.
The Election Law of the State of New York shall apply to the nomination and
election of all elective officers of the City.
§ C-7. Council; compensation.
The Mayor and the four Councilors shall constitute the Council of the City
of Auburn, in which is vested all the legislative power of the City however
conferred or possessed. As such Council, they shall possess all the powers
and perform all the duties provided in the said Optional City Government
Law for the Council under Plan C thereof, in other general statutes of the
State, in this Charter, and in any other special or local act relating to the
City of Auburn and shall have power by local law, ordinance or resolution
to carry into force and effect all the powers belonging to, or conferred
upon, the City or the Council, by general or special law or otherwise. They
shall receive as compensation an annual salary payable pursuant to the
compensation pay plan enacted by the Council.
§ C-8. Meetings of Council. [Amended 3-22-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007;
6-7-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on a designated day each
week, each month. Special meetings may be held at any time on unanimous
consent, or may be called at any time by any member upon two days' notice.
Such call shall be signed and immediately filed with the City Clerk. The
Council shall have power at any of its meetings to adjourn to any time
and place it may deem proper. The Council may adopt rules governing its
proceedings and provide for the enforcement thereof.1
§ C-9. City Manager and Assistant City Manager.
§ C-4 CHARTER § C-9
C:7
§ C-10. City Clerk; Deputy City Clerk; Civil Service Commission.
[Amended 12-22-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994; 9-26-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996]
§ C-11. Civil Service Commissioners. [Amended 6-24-1993 by L.L.
No. 2-1993; 2-8-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
At the expiration of the term of each of the present Civil Service
Commissioners, there shall be appointed by the Council a Civil Service
Commissioner to serve for six years. The salary of such Commissioners shall
be fixed by the Council of the City. Such Civil Service Commissioners shall
have the powers and perform the duties imposed by law on Civil Service
Commissioners. Not more than two members of the Commission shall be
adherents of the same political party. Any Civil Service Commissioner may
be removed at any time by a unanimous vote of the Council by resolution
stating the reason for such removal and after such Commissioner has been
given an opportunity of making an explanation.
A. The Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall possess the powers
and perform the duties provided in and by said Optional City
Government Law, other general laws of the state, and the ordinances of
the Council of the City. He or she shall hold office during the pleasure of
the Council and receive compensation fixed by the Council.
B. The City Manager shall appoint an Assistant City Manager. The
Assistant City Manager is authorized to act generally for and in the
place of the City Manager and, in the absence, disability or vacancy in
the office of the City Manager, shall serve as Acting City Manager. The
Assistant City Manager shall be appointed on the basis of his or her
training and experience in the field of public administration or related
fields. [Amended by L.L. No. 3-1991]
A. The Council shall appoint a City Clerk, Deputy City Clerk and three Civil
Service Commissioners and may appoint such other officers as may be
provided in said Optional City Government Law.
B. The City Clerk and the Deputy City Clerk shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are prescribed by said Optional City
Government Law, and otherwise by law, and as the Council may from
time to time prescribe. The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Council and receive such salary as
shall be fixed by the Council.
C. The Deputy City Clerk shall, from time to time when required, act for
and in place of the City Clerk.
1. Editor's Note: The Rules and Procedures of the Auburn City Council are on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
§ C-9 AUBURN CODE § C-12
C:8
§ C-12. Appointive officers and employees.
The Council may, from time to time, determine and provide what other
City officers and employees are necessary for the administration of the
City, and the same shall be appointed by the City Manager. Any such
officer or employee may be removed by the City Manager at any time.
Each such appointment and removal shall be reported to the Council by
the City Manager at the next meeting thereof following such appointment
or removal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Mayor shall
appoint all members of all boards and commissions of the City.
§ C-13. Abolition, change or consolidation of offices and positions.
The Council may, from time to time, as it deems it advisable, abolish, change
or consolidate any office or position of the City and determine whether the
continuance of any such office or position is essential. It may authorize the
appointment of deputies, assistants or clerks to any officer.
§ C-14. Acceptance by officer of another office.
The acceptance by any officer of the City of any other City office shall vacate
his first office.
§ C-15. Delivery of property and papers upon termination of office
or position.
Any officer or employee of the City who shall have resigned, or shall have
been removed from office, or whose term of office shall have expired, shall
deliver to the City Manager forthwith all property, papers and effects of
every description in his or her possession, or under his or her control, which
belong to the City, or which appertain to the office held by him or her. In
case of the resignation or removal of the City Manager, he or she shall
forthwith deliver all like property, papers and effects to the Mayor.
§ C-16. Designation and modification of powers and duties of
officers.
The Council may by ordinance creating or continuing the various other
offices in the City define and state the powers of each such officer, and the
duties to be performed, which said powers and duties may, from time to
time, be changed, amended or otherwise modified as the Council may deem
advisable.
§ C-17. General powers and duties of officers and employees.
In addition to the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon any officer
by this Charter, each officer and employee shall perform such duties,
exercise such functions and have such powers as are conferred or imposed
by law upon such officers generally performing like duties and shall have
such additional powers and perform such additional duties as may be
conferred or imposed by ordinance of the Council.
§ C-12 CHARTER § C-18
C:9
§ C-18. Compensation of officers and employees.
The Council shall fix the salary or compensation of all persons in the service
of the City and the time of payment thereof. It may authorize the City
Manager to fix the salaries of laborers necessary or essential in his or her
judgment in the various departments of the City.
§ C-19. Fees in addition to salary prohibited.
No salaried officer of the City shall have or receive to his or her own use
any compensation or fees for services pertaining directly or indirectly to the
duties of his or her office, in addition to his or her salary, and all perquisites,
compensation and fees paid to, or received by, any such officer for services
pertaining directly or indirectly to his or her office, other than his or her
salary received from the City, shall be the property of the City and shall be
paid by the officer receiving the same into the City treasury.
§ C-20. Financial interest in contracts with or claims against City
prohibited.2
No member of the Council or officer or employee of the City shall be
pecuniarily interested in any contract, directly or indirectly, in which the
City is a party, nor furnish for pay or compensation, directly or indirectly,
to the City for its use any goods, wares, merchandise, labor, materials or
supplies, nor be interested, directly or indirectly, in any bill or claim, under
the penalty of loss of his or her claim except as provided in Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law.3
§ C-21. Oath of office; resignation.
Every officer shall, before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties,
take and file in the office of the City Clerk the constitutional oath of office.
Any officer may resign at any time by filing his or her written resignation
with the City Clerk.
§ C-22. Bonds; amount, approval and payment of premium.
The Council may require any officer or employee of the City before
assuming his or her duties to execute a bond to the City in such sum as it
may fix, to be approved as to execution and sufficiency of surety by the City
Manager, excepting the bond of the City Manager, which shall be approved
by the Mayor. When so approved such bonds shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk. All officers or employees may, from time to time, be required to
furnish additional or new bonds. The Council may in its discretion provide
for the payment of the premium upon such official bonds.
2. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 33, Ethics.
3. Editor's Note: Original § 21, pertaining to Supervisors, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted since the County of Cayuga has established a County Legislature.
§ C-18 AUBURN CODE § C-23
C:10
§ C-23. Vacancy in elective office.
Any vacancy in the office of Mayor or Councilman shall be filled as
prescribed by the said Optional City Government Law. Any vacancy in
any other elective office shall be temporarily filled by appointment of the
Council. Such temporary appointment shall continue in effect until the first
day of January next following the next general election held after such
appointment. At the next general election following any such vacancy in an
elective office, except the City Judge or Associate City Judge,4 a successor
shall be elected to serve the unexpired portion of the term for which the
vacating officer was elected, or as herein fixed, unless such term shall
expire on or before the first day of January next following such general
election, in which case such successor shall be elected for the full term.
§ C-24. Acting Mayor; disability of appointive officer.
§ C-25. Enumeration of powers.
A. Whenever the Mayor shall be temporarily unable for any cause to
perform the duties of his or her office, the Council may appoint one of
its members to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Mayor
during such absence or disability.
B. Should any appointive officer be temporarily unable for any cause to
perform his or her duties, the body or the officer having the power of
original appointment may make a temporary appointment of some
person to act until such official shall resume his or her duties.
A. In addition to all other powers conferred by law, the City of Auburn, and
the Council of the City, on its behalf, shall have power:
(1) Contracts; suits. To contract and be contracted with and to
institute, maintain and defend any action or proceeding in any
court.
(2) Acquisition, retention, and disposal of property. To take, purchase,
acquire, lease and hold real and personal property, or either, within
or without the corporate limits, for any public or municipal
purpose, and to sell, convey and lease the same, or any part
thereof, and to provide for the management and control of such
property and designate the particular purpose to which it shall be
devoted.
(3) Gifts; administering of property. To take by gift, grant or devise,
and to hold and administer, real and personal property, or either,
within or without the corporate limits, absolutely or in trust, for any
public or municipal purpose, upon such terms as may be prescribed
by the grantor or donor and accepted by the City.
4. Editor's Note: For filling a vacancy in the office of City Judge, see the Uniform City Court
Act, § 2104(f)(2).
§ C-23 CHARTER § C-25
C:11
(4) Sinking funds. To provide, establish and maintain sinking funds for
the liquidation of any bonds issued prior to January 1, 1939, and
serial bonds issued subsequent to such date.
(5) Satisfaction of claims. To pay any claim due or owing by the City, or
a binding obligation upon it; to pay any judgment recovered against
the City, providing the funds therefor, in whole or in part, either by
taxation or pursuant to the Local Finance Law; and to pay or
compromise any claim equitably payable by the City although not a
binding legal obligation.
(6) Taxes and assessments. Subject to the provisions of general law,
and of this Charter, to assess, levy and collect taxes on real and
personal property within the City, for the various purposes
authorized or contemplated by this Charter, and otherwise by law;
to assess, levy and collect, as tax, the charges or cost of all local
improvements; if not otherwise provided herein, to provide for the
payment of the cost of any local improvement to or for the benefit
of any property by assessment against such property, and for the
payment of such assessment; and to declare and provide that the
cost of all local improvements, or of any other work or benefit to or
for abutting property, as determined by it, shall be a lien upon the
property which, if not paid, may be added to the City tax roll and
collected as delinquent taxes by sale, auction or foreclosure.
(7) Reserve for uncollected taxes. To raise by real property taxes for
each fiscal year hereafter such sum as it may deem sufficient to
produce in cash an amount equal to the anticipated deficiency in
the collection of City taxes on real property required to be collected
by the City in such fiscal year. Such sum shall be known as the
"reserve for uncollected real property taxes."
(8) Assessments; maps. Subject to the provisions of law, to provide for
making assessments of property, and to provide and establish a
uniform system or method thereof; and to provide for, and have
made, maps of the City showing the various streets, highways, lots
and parcels, or any part of them.
(9) Records, accounts, and affairs of City. To regulate the method and
manner of transacting the City's business and affairs; to provide,
establish and maintain a system of records and accounts; and to
provide and establish a uniform system of examination and audit of
claims.
(10) Rights and franchises. To grant rights and franchises, or
permission, to use the streets, highways and public places, or any
part thereof, or the space above or under them, or any of them, for
any specified purpose, upon such terms and conditions as it may
deem proper, and as may be permitted by law.
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-25
C:12
(11) Condemnation of property. To acquire by condemnation
proceedings, conducted as provided by law, any lands or rights
needed or required for any municipal purpose.
(12) Commissioners of Deeds. To determine the number of
Commissioners of Deeds for the City and direct their appointment.
(13) Streets, highways and public places. To pave, repave, surface and
resurface streets, highways and public places, to provide for the
payment thereof, in whole or in part, as a general City charge, or
partly as a general City charge and partly as a local assessment on
abutting property, as in this Charter provided; to open, extend,
widen and straighten streets, highways and lanes, to acquire
necessary lands and rights therefor, and to provide for the
determination and assessment of the cost thereof upon the real
property benefited, as in this Charter provided; and to build, cover
with hard material, macadamize and improve other than as
hereinbefore provided, and to repair, level, grade, alter, clean and
maintain streets, highways, alleys, lanes and squares, and to
sprinkle, flush, cover with a dust-allaying substance, and oil such
streets, highways, alleys, lanes and squares, or any part thereof,
and to provide for the payment thereof as a general charge.
(14) Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. To construct, build, flag, surface,
resurface, alter, repair, grade, regrade, maintain, care for and clean
sidewalks, curbs and gutters in public streets; to direct and order,
as herein provided, any such work or improvement to be done by
the property owner or occupant and, on default, to have the same
done by the City and charged or assessed against the abutting
property; to regulate and prescribe the grade, width, materials,
construction and other specifications of any such work; at the
request of the property owner, to have any such work or
improvement done by the City, or by contract, to pay for the same
from City funds, and assess such total cost against the property
benefited; and to provide that the cost of any such work or
improvement be paid at once or in annual installments.
(15) Street names; house numbering. To designate streets by name, and
houses and lots by number, and from time to time to change such
designations and numbers; and to require owners and occupants of
lots and buildings to place thereon or in a prominent place the
designated number.
(16) Removal of snow, ice, dirt, etc. To require the owners and
occupants of lots abutting on streets to keep the sidewalks in front
of such premises free and clear of all snow, ice, dirt and other
obstruction, and to remove from such sidewalk any dirt, rubbish,
snow or ice which may be thereon, and all accumulations of dirt
and rubbish between the sidewalk and the center of the street; to
require such owner and occupant to keep such walk in a safe
condition for public travel and to repair and remedy all defects; and
§ C-25 CHARTER § C-25
C:13
to require the owners and occupants of lots fronting upon streets
to keep the grass, and grass plots, along the traveled portions of
streets cut and trimmed, to cut all noxious weeds, long grass and
other rank growths, and to erect barriers or safeguards along the
line of such streets at dangerous points.
(17) Underground conduits and subways; overhead wires and cables. To
lay out, establish, maintain, build, acquire, operate and continue
subways and underground conduits for wires and cables; to
control, manage, lease, and operate all such subways and
underground conduits now owned by the City or hereafter
acquired; to regulate and control the occupancy thereof; to provide
rules, regulations and bylaws for the management, care and use of
such subways, conduits and appurtenances thereto, and to
establish and promulgate rates and rentals therefor, and to make
and execute leases covering the use and occupancy thereof; to
prohibit and restrain any improper or unwarranted interference
with such subways, conduits and appurtenances, including
manholes and manhole covers; to control and regulate, or cause to
be removed, all overhead telegraph, electric light, power and
telephone wires, cables and other electrical conductors and poles
in or adjacent to all streets, or part of streets, in which said
subways or conduits furnish adequate facilities for carrying such
wires and cables; and to direct and require that all such wires,
cables and other overhead electrical conductors be placed in such
subways or conduits.
(18) Sewers and drains. To lay out, establish, build, rebuild, continue,
operate, control, alter, repair, clean, extend, discontinue and
maintain sewers, drains, laterals and sewage disposal plants, and
to provide for the cost thereof as in this subsection provided; to
create, continue, alter, amend and change sewer districts and
make, direct and provide that the cost of building and rebuilding
sewers and drains therein shall be paid by assessment upon the
real property of such districts, as in this Charter provided; to make,
direct and provide that the cost of building and rebuilding all
sewers and drains which are outside of sewer districts shall be paid
by local assessment upon the property thereby benefited in
proportion to the benefits received; to make, direct and provide
that the cost of building and rebuilding sewage disposal plants and
the cost of maintaining, operating and cleaning all sewage disposal
plants and all public sewers and drains, whether within a sewer
district or not, be a general City charge; to operate, manage and
control all public sewers, drains, sewer systems and sewage
disposal plants, whether built pursuant to the provisions of special
laws or not; and to provide that sewers intended and designed for
storm- or surface water exclusively may be a general City charge,
whether situated in sewer districts or not, anything in this Charter
to the contrary notwithstanding.
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-25
C:14
(19) Private sewers and drains. To regulate, control and prohibit the
construction, maintenance and use of private sewers and drains in
public streets and to order the discontinuance and removal thereof;
to prescribe terms and conditions upon which such sewers and
drains may be constructed, continued and used; and to require the
same to be kept in proper and sanitary condition by the owners and
users.
(20) Structures for public use. To lay out, establish, construct, alter,
repair, continue, discontinue, operate, build and maintain public
buildings, fire houses, police stations, parks, playgrounds, markets,
public places, bridges and other structures deemed needful or
convenient for public use.
(21) Leases. To provide for the leasing of buildings, or parts thereof, for
City purposes and to make such leases.
(22) Trees, shrubbery and playground equipment. To provide for the
planting, trimming, protecting, removing and preserving of trees in
streets, parks and other public places of the City; and to prohibit
any injury, defacement, mutilation or destruction of trees, shrubs,
or grass plots in public streets or places, or park or playground
equipment.
(23) Planning. To provide for a City Planning Commission, with advisory
powers in reference to public improvements, streets, parks and
other matters of general welfare, and to provide for the expense
thereof.
(24)Water supply and charges. To furnish and supply the City of
Auburn, and the people thereof, with a sufficient quantity of good
and wholesome water, except that no fluoride or fluoride solution
shall be added to or be made part of the water supply of the City of
Auburn, and for that purpose to take over, manage, operate,
continue, discontinue and extend the present water system of the
City, with all of the plant, equipment, mains, machinery, apparatus
and devices used, employed, owned or controlled by the City
through its Water Department in the supplying of the City with
water, including the filtration plant, and to take and conduct water,
and continue to take and conduct water, from Owasco Lake through
the pipes and mains now laid and in use, or hereafter laid or used,
to the City, subject to the rights and obligations specified in
Chapter 341 of the Laws of 1903; to enlarge, increase, contract and
extend such system and to provide therefor machinery, pumps,
mains and other necessary equipment, supplies, devices and
apparatus; to employ all labor and help necessary in supplying such
water; to furnish water to owners and occupants of property lying
outside of but adjacent to the City of Auburn; to buy, sell or acquire
by condemnation or otherwise all rights and property needed or
essential in the maintenance, control and extension of such system
and to sell, lease and convey the same, or any part thereof; to
§ C-25 CHARTER § C-25
C:15
adopt, continue and enact, and from time to time change,
ordinances, rules, regulations and bylaws for the preservation and
protection of such water works, system, property and shed, and
the sources from which such water is or may be furnished, and
to prescribe and impose penalties, fines and punishment for any
violation or infringement thereof; to continue the present sinking
fund for the retirement of water bonds and to provide for payments
thereto; to prescribe and establish rates and rentals for the use
of water and charges for service and from time to time to alter,
amend, modify, increase and diminish such charges, rates and
rents; and to provide that unpaid water rates and rentals and
charges shall become and be liens upon the property to which
such water was furnished, or service rendered, and that if the
same remain unpaid they may be added to the annual City tax to
be thereafter known as tax, and collected in the same manner as
taxes.
(25)Water distribution. To preserve and protect all hydrants, drinking
fountains, and all equipment, machinery and apparatus used in the
distribution of water; and to prohibit any injury thereto and any
tampering or interference therewith.
(26) Lighting facilities. To provide for lighting the streets in the City and
to make such lighting in whole or in part a general charge; to
create, continue and from time to time change, alter, amend and
abolish separate lighting districts and provide that special lighting
facilities and equipment be therein provided, and to assess the cost
of such special lighting upon the property in such district and
provide for the collection and payment of such assessments; and to
protect all lamps and other apparatus used in public lighting and to
prohibit injury thereto and tampering or interference therewith.
(27) Referendum. Except as otherwise provided by § 34.00 of the Local
Finance Law, to submit to the qualified voters of the City, at any
general or special election, for their approval or disapproval, any
proposition concerning the exercise of any power herein given, or
otherwise conferred by law, and to provide for the expense thereof.
(28) Charitable and correctional institutions; public conveniences. To
establish, maintain, continue, manage and administer hospitals and
dispensaries, a City jail and such other charitable and correctional
institutions deemed necessary; to relieve, assist, instruct and care
for children and poor, sick, infirm, defective and insane persons; to
provide for the burial of deceased indigent persons; to establish
and maintain such institutions and instrumentalities for education,
instruction, enlightenment, entertainment, recreation and welfare
of its inhabitants as it may deem appropriate or necessary for the
public interest; and to establish and maintain public drinking
fountains, public comfort stations, urinals and other conveniences
for the public.
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-25
C:16
(29) Garbage, ashes, rubbish and refuse; collection and disposal. To
provide for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, ashes
and rubbish and to fix and determine whether the same shall be a
general charge or in whole or in part a local assessment against the
people and property benefited, and if any part is made a local
assessment to arrange and provide for such assessment and
collection; to create, establish, alter and change special districts
for such purposes and to provide for the assessment and collection
of the cost within such districts; to provide for the collection of
dead animals and other refuse in, upon or near public streets and
highways; and to provide for the erection and operation of garbage
crematories and other apparatus for the destruction of garbage,
dead animals and other substances and to acquire sites therefor.
(30) Course of Owasco River. To keep open and preserve the course of
the Owasco River through said City; to prevent and punish
encroachments upon or over the flowing waters thereof; to prevent
the throwing into such river of any dead animal, earth or other
material; and to regulate and provide for places of bathing in such
river.
(31) Animals and fowl. To establish and regulate public pounds and to
restrain the running at large of animals and poultry in the streets,
highways and public places.
(32) Holidays, recreation and entertainment. To establish and proclaim
local holidays and to appropriate funds for band concerts, public
recreation, celebrations of holidays and other events and for the
entertainment and expense of municipal conventions and
conferences held in the City and of visiting delegations, officials
and persons whom it is desired to honor.
(33) Cemeteries. To regulate and control the establishment and
continuance of cemeteries within the City and the burial of dead
therein; to continue and discontinue existing cemeteries and
establish new ones and provide for the management,
administration, maintenance and upkeep thereof; to cause maps
and plats to be prepared and arranged for the sale of lots; to
provide and erect necessary buildings, vaults, fences and other
equipment; and generally provide for such things as are needful or
essential in connection therewith.
(34) Soule Cemetery. To continue the Soule Cemetery and to provide for
its management, control, maintenance and protection, including
protection of the rights and property of individual lot owners; to
make all necessary constructions and erections; to acquire
additional land to be used in connection therewith; to limit, control
and regulate the use of such cemetery, interments therein and the
erection of structures, monuments, fences and markers; and
generally to provide for the upkeep and repair of such cemetery
and of the roads leading thereto from the City.
§ C-25 CHARTER § C-25
C:17
(35) Fire protection. To prevent and extinguish fires and to protect the
people and property of the City from fire and other casualty; to
establish, continue, discontinue, alter and maintain a Fire
Department and all needed houses, equipment and apparatus and
to provide for the payment of the same; and to provide regulations
for the discipline, organization, operation, equipment and
compensation of such Fire Department.
(36) Police Department. To establish, continue and maintain a Police
Department; to regulate and control the number of employees
therein; and to provide for its discipline, organization, equipment
and compensation.
(37) Fire alarm system. To establish, provide and maintain a fire alarm
system and to prohibit false alarms and all interference and
tampering with the fire alarm system and fire apparatus.
(38) Traffic; littering. Subject to general laws of the state, to regulate
the use of streets, sidewalks and public places by pedestrians,
animals, and motor and other vehicles; to regulate and license the
running and operation of engines, omnibuses, trucks, taxicabs,
trolley cars, bicycles, motorcycles, motor vehicles, vehicles,
airplanes, and other instrumentalities and devices for
transportation and fix the rate of speed thereof; to regulate parades
and public assemblages in streets and public places of the City; to
regulate and prohibit the dropping of pamphlets, tracts and other
matter from airplanes and other aerial machines within the City; to
regulate and prevent the depositing of ashes, garbage, rubbish and
filth upon the streets; and to regulate and prohibit coasting on the
streets of the City.
(39) Excavations, drains, laterals and pipes in streets. To regulate and
license digging and excavating in streets and public places,
whether by persons or corporations; to require persons and
corporations having or controlling mains, pipes, water laterals,
drains and sewer laterals in streets to keep the same in proper
condition and repair; and to regulate and provide for the care and
maintenance of drains, laterals and water pipes in streets.
(40) Use of sidewalks and streets. To regulate the use of sidewalks and
store, house and other building fronts; to regulate and prohibit the
erection and construction of any stoop, steps, platform, bay
window, stairs, cellar, area, areaway, descent to or ascent from any
building, or any projection from any building in, to, over, upon or
under any street or public place; to control, regulate and prohibit
the building, use and occupancy of any cellar, underground
areaway or excavation under the sidewalk or street or any part
thereof and to provide terms and conditions of any permitted use;
and to control, prohibit and order removed any grating, manhole
cover or other construction in the walks or streets.
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-25
C:18
(41) Advertising. To regulate and control the erection and construction
in, upon and near streets and other public places of billboards and
other advertising media.
(42) Licenses, banners, noises, etc. To license, regulate and restrict
hawking, vending, peddling and the crying of goods, wares,
merchandise or other commodities in the streets and public places
and by going from house to house; to control and restrain the
distributing and peddling of handbills, pamphlets, tracts and other
like matter in the streets and by going from house to house; to
license distributors of bills and other advertising matter; to
regulate the use of the streets for lights, signs, awnings, horse
troughs, posts, poles and wires; to regulate and control the
hanging, exhibiting and swinging of banners, placards and flags in,
upon and across streets and from one building to another; and to
regulate and prohibit whistles, ringing of bells and noise.
(43) Destructive matter on streets and sidewalks. To prohibit the
placing, dropping and throwing of any glass, nails or other
destructive matter in public streets and the leaving and permitting
them, or any of them, to remain therein.
(44) Traffic. To regulate traffic pursuant to Article 39 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
(45) Oversize loads. To regulate, control and prohibit the moving of any
house or structure upon or over any street or sidewalk pursuant to
the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(46) Building and construction. To enforce the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and to enact more stringent
requirements pursuant to Article 18 of the Executive Law.
(47) Fire districts. To make, establish and fix, and from time to time
alter and amend, fire districts.
(48) Places of public assemblage. To enforce the provision of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and to enact
more stringent requirements pursuant to Article 18 of the
Executive Law.
(49) Dangerous construction, conditions and activities. To prevent
dangerous construction and conditions of buildings, chimneys,
fireplaces, stoves, boilers and other heating apparatus in any
building; to regulate the deposit of ashes; to provide for the
inspection of steam engines and boilers and to prohibit the use of
unsafe ones; and, subject to general provisions of law, to provide
for the licensing of steam engineers and persons managing and
operating steam plants, engines and boilers.
(50) Safety, health, comfort and welfare of inhabitants. To maintain
order and enforce law, protect property and preserve and care for
§ C-25 CHARTER § C-25
C:19
the safety, health, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the City and for any of such purposes to regulate, license and
control occupations, businesses and public exhibitions and the
construction, use and occupancy of buildings used for dwellings,
and other structures, and to adopt and promulgate general housing
regulations.
(51) Regulating enumerated pursuits. Subject to the Constitution and
general laws of the state, to provide for licensing and otherwise
regulating auctioneers, pawnbrokers, junk dealers, dealers in
secondhand articles, hawkers, vendors, peddlers, public cartmen,
truckmen, hackmen, cabmen, expressmen, taxicab drivers, drivers,
bootblacks, porters, scavengers, sweepers, theaters, movingpicture
houses, bowling alleys, shooting galleries, billiard parlors,
skating rinks, halls or places for dancing, circuses, menageries,
public exhibitions of any kind, places of amusement and shows.
(52)Rates of fare of vehicles for hire. To regulate and prescribe the
rates of fare to be taken or charged by owners and drivers of
taxicabs.
(53) Combustible materials; noxious businesses. To license, regulate
and prohibit within the limits of the City the manufacture, sale,
transportation, storage, preparation and use of gunpowder,
dynamite, nitroglycerin and other explosives, kerosene, petroleum,
gasoline, naphtha and other combustible and dangerous materials
and to license, regulate and prohibit within the limits of the City
slaughtering of animals, bone boiling, fat rendering and other
noxious businesses.
(54) Air pollution. To regulate and prohibit the emission of smoke,
noxious gases, deposits or other pollution from buildings,
locomotives, engines and other sources and to regulate, restrict
and prohibit the use of bituminous coal within the City or any
portion thereof.
(55) Public nuisances. To prevent, restrain, remove and abate public
nuisances.
(56) Private sewers, drains, sinks, vaults and privies. To regulate and
prohibit the construction and use of private sewers, drains, sinks,
vaults and privies and to compel the owner and occupant of any
premises upon which is situated any objectionable stable, privy,
sewer, drain, cistern, vault or any unwholesome or nauseous
condition to cleanse, remove or abate the same.5
(57) Sale of meat, poultry and fish. To regulate and control the sale of
meats and to provide for the inspection thereof and to prohibit the
sale of any diseased, tainted or bad meat, poultry or fish.6
5. Editor's Note: Original § 26(57), Milk control, which immediately followed this subsection,
was deleted as preempted by the state. See Art. 21 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-25
C:20
(58) Discharge of weapons; explosives. To prohibit, restrain and
regulate the discharge of firearms, fireworks, and the explosion of
gunpowder and gun cotton.
(59) Loitering. To prohibit persons collecting, loitering, standing upon
and occupying sidewalks, bridges, hallways, passageways and
stairways.
(60) Preservation of order. To preserve the public peace and good order;
to prevent fighting, threatening or challenging to fight, and
quarreling; and to prevent riots, disturbances and disorderly
conduct.
(61) Disorderliness, gambling, drunkenness and vagrancy. To suppress
and prohibit disorderly houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses, gambling, and the use of any fraudulent or chance device
of any kind; to prevent and prohibit drunkenness and disorderly
conduct in streets and public places; and to restrain and punish
vagrants, mendicants, street beggars, common prostitutes and
disorderly persons.
(62) Electric power.
(a) To furnish and supply the City of Auburn and the people
thereof with a public utility service which shall include works,
structures, poles, lines, wires, conduits, mains, systems,
waterpower and any and all other real and personal property
used or necessary for, connected with or appertaining to the
furnishing of such service; to construct, lease, purchase, own,
acquire, use and/or operate any public utility service within or
without its territorial limits for the purpose of furnishing to
itself or for compensation to its inhabitants any service similar
to that furnished by any public utility company specified in
Article 4 of the Public Service Law or as the same shall be
amended from time to time; and to purchase gas or electrical
energy from the state or from any state agency or other
municipal corporation or from any private or public
corporation. [Amended 9-9-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
(b) To provide an initial public utility system consisting of the
renovation of and construction of improvements to the Mill
Street Dam and the power station property on the Owasco
Outlet in order to produce economical electrical energy for
municipal use. The cost thereof is estimated to be $605,000
and the maximum cost thereof will not exceed $650,000.
[Amended 9-9-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
(c) To undertake future public utility system projects from time to
time in accordance with Subsection A(62)(a) hereof for the City
6. Editor's Note: Regulation of the inspection and sale of meat and poultry has been
preempted by the state. See Arts. 5-B and 5-D of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ C-25 CHARTER § C-25
C:21
§ C-26. Ordinances and local laws; penalties and enforcement.
The Council may make, continue, modify and adopt all local laws and
ordinances necessary to carry into full effect any and all powers conferred
upon the said City or said Council. It may provide for the enforcement of
local laws and ordinances by legal or equitable proceedings, prescribe in
its discretion that a violation thereof shall constitute a misdemeanor or
violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, and provide
for the punishment of such violations by civil penalty, fine, forfeiture or
imprisonment, or by two or more such punishments.
§ C-27. Publication of ordinances.
and its inhabitants, to include the construction of additional
hydropower and landfill/natural gas service systems, as well
as other potential public utility systems, and to expend a
maximum amount not to exceed $15,000,000 for each public
utility project and that any bond issued for each public utility
project may not exceed the maximum amount of $10,000,000.
[Amended 9-9-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993; 7-10-2009 by L.L.
No. 1-2009]
(d) To enter into all contracts necessary to accomplish the
purposes of Subsection A(62)(a) through (c) hereof.
(e) The powers designated in this Subsection A(62) shall be
exercised pursuant to the provisions and subject of the
limitations of Article 14-A of the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York and as the same shall be amended from time
to time.
(63) Ordinances for government of City; exercise of its powers. To take
all measures, do all acts and enact any ordinances not inconsistent
with the laws of the state as shall be deemed expedient or desirable
for the good government of the City, its management and business,
protection of its property, the safety and health of its inhabitants,
the protection of their property, preservation of peace and order,
suppression of vice, the benefit of trade, the preservation and
protection of the public streets, preservation of public health, the
prevention and extinguishment of fires, and the exercise generally
of the powers of the City.
A. Every ordinance or regulation imposing a fine or imprisonment or both
such fine and imprisonment shall take effect upon publication of a
notice as hereinafter provided or a later date specified in such
ordinance or regulation. The notice shall contain the title and a brief
description with a statement that such ordinance or regulation is on
record with the City Clerk, which notice shall be published at least once
in the official newspaper of the City or, if there is no official newspaper,
then in a daily newspaper published in the City. It shall not be necessary
§ C-25 AUBURN CODE § C-27
C:22
§ C-28. Oaths, affidavits, acknowledgments and subpoenas.
The Mayor, the Councilmen (Councilors), City Manager, City Clerk, and
each deputy of the City Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths
and take affidavits and acknowledgments within the City, the same as
Commissioners of Deeds. They shall also have power to administer any
oaths or take any affidavit in respect to any hearing, trial or matter pending
before them, or any of them, and to issue subpoenas and compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of papers and documents. Any
false testimony upon any such hearing, or inquiry, is hereby declared to be
perjury and may be punished as provided by law for that crime.
§ C-29. Council to prescribe notices.
Whenever any notice is required by this Charter or by law to be given and
details of such notice are not prescribed, the Council may, by ordinance,
prescribe for the giving of such notice, either by personal service, mail or
publication, and the length of time thereof.
§ C-30. Public hearing on local improvements.
Before determining to make any improvement, the cost of which shall be,
in whole or in part, a local improvement charge, or a charge against the
abutting property, a public hearing thereon shall be given by the Council
when practicable, upon such notice as it may prescribe. But this shall not
apply to directions or orders to individual owners or occupants of premises
to remedy or repair defective or dangerous conditions in walks or highways
in front of such premises, or to lay, relay or otherwise improve sidewalks,
curbs and gutters, or to any work or expenditure by the City in cleaning
or repairing sidewalks or otherwise remedying dangerous conditions which
are in violation of ordinances.
§ C-31. Public works improvements; award of contract.
The Council may prescribe that any improvement or public work which it
determines upon may be done by contract or by the City under the direction
of the City Manager. If ordered done by contract, the City Manager shall
prepare uniform terms and conditions for proposals, fix the security to be
given, and advertise for proposals. Upon receiving such proposals, he or
she shall, at the time fixed, open and tabulate them and report the result
to the Council, with such recommendations he or she may have to make.
Any or all of such proposals may be rejected by the Council. If a satisfactory
to publish any ordinance or regulation to be enforced within the City
except as herein provided.
B. In case of insurrection, riot, conflagration or other necessity requiring
immediate operation of such ordinance or regulation, it shall take effect
as soon as proclamation thereof by the Mayor and after such
proclamation has been posted in five conspicuous places in the City of
Auburn.
§ C-27 CHARTER § C-31
C:23
proposal is received, the Council may award a contract for the improvement
or work and direct the execution of such contract on behalf of the City.
Every contract so made shall provide that the improvement or work shall
be in substantial accord with plans and specifications previously adopted by
the Council for such work, so far as may be.
§ C-31 AUBURN CODE § C-31
C:24
ARTICLE III
Finance and Budgets
§ C-32. Accounts of financial activities.
In accordance with ordinances of the Council and general provisions of
law, accurate and concise records shall be kept of all moneys, funds, and
property received by the City and the disbursement thereof; of the funded
debt, its maturities, and various purposes and accounts for which issued;
of all funds and accounts for which money is raised by taxation or special
assessment; and, generally, of all financial activities of the City, all of
which shall conform so far as practicable to approved municipal accounting
systems. The City Manager shall prescribe rules and regulations covering
and controlling such systems of records and accounting.
§ C-33. Claims against City; examination and audit.
The Council shall prescribe and establish a system of examination and audit
of all claims against the City arising out of contract, express or implied;
no such claim against the City, except for a fixed salary, compensation of
officers or employees in any department, or for principal or interest on
bonded debt, shall be paid unless a claim therefor shall have been prepared
and audited, or approved by the Council. No costs shall be allowed in any
judgment recovered against the City on a claim arising out of contract,
express or implied, unless such claim shall first have been presented to
the Council, or for audit, at least 30 days before the commencement of an
action.
§ C-34. Fiscal year.
The City's fiscal year shall begin on the first day of July in each year.
§ C-35. Annual budget.
A. Annual estimate of revenue and expenditure. On or before the first day
of May in each year, all heads of departments and officers shall furnish
to the City Manager estimates in writing of the probable amount of
revenue and expenditures in their respective departments or offices for
the next fiscal year.
B. Preparation of budget.
(1) On or before the first day in June in each year, the City Manager
shall prepare an estimate or proposed budget for the City of such
fiscal year, which estimate, or proposed budget, shall show, so far
as ascertainable:
(a) The probable revenue to the City from all sources;
(b) The amount needed for conducting the business and affairs of
the City in its various departments and offices; for the various
purposes contemplated either by this Charter or by other
§ C-32 CHARTER § C-35
C:25
§ C-36. County and state tax.
provisions of law in relation to cities, including a sum for
contingent expenses; and for the payment of the principal and
interest of all bonded indebtedness of the City falling due
during the year;
(c) The amount deemed necessary to be raised by tax;
(d) The amount estimated to provide a reserve for all uncollected
City real property taxes, such amount to be not less than the
principal amount of City real property taxes as levied by the
Council for the last completed fiscal year and remaining
uncollected at the end of such year, including the amount of
such City taxes on real property sold to the City for such City
taxes but not redeemed at the end of such last completed fiscal
year.
(2) After he or she has made such estimate, he or she shall submit it in
writing with such reasons for it in detail as he or she may have to
give the Council, which shall order a public hearing thereon.
C. Public hearing; modification; adoption. After publication of notice of
such hearing, the Council shall, at the time appointed, hear any
taxpayer who wishes to be heard in reference thereto, and, after such
hearing, it may adopt such estimate as is submitted to it or increase,
diminish, reject or otherwise modify or amend the same, except as to
that part relating to the City debt, and adopt the estimate as so
modified or amended. When it shall have adopted such estimate, as
presented or amended, the same shall be entered at large in its minutes
and published in its proceedings, and the several sums in such final
estimate so adopted shall be and become appropriated for the several
departments, offices, purpose and indebtedness named in the estimate
for the ensuing fiscal year and may be disbursed by the heads of the
several departments, subject to the approval of the City Manager when
so required. Such estimate shall be known as the "City tax" budget.
D. Levy; payment date of City tax. The several amounts therein named
shall be levied, assessed, and extended upon the assessment rolls for
the year and raised by tax upon the real and personal property liable to
taxation in the City, according to the valuations thereof as fixed in such
rolls, at the time and in the manner herein provided or permitted. Such
amount, or tax, when so levied, assessed and extended, shall be known
as "City tax" and shall be due and payable on the first day of July in each
year.7
A. County Legislature to determine tax; delivery of resolution. The County
Legislature of the County of Cayuga shall in each year equalize the
7. Editor's Note: Original §§ 37 and 38, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for the collection of a school tax, were repealed by L. 1953, c. 878.
§ C-35 AUBURN CODE § C-36
C:26
§ C-37. Transfers to other funds.
The Council may by ordinance provide and permit moneys, except water
moneys, funds and accounts, to be transferred from one fund or account to
another. No fund, account or appropriation as fixed by the City tax budget
shall be overdrawn.8
§ C-38. Budget surplus.
In case there is a surplus in the aggregate of revenue estimated in the City
budget, such surplus shall be included with estimated revenues in the next
budget, if ascertainable at the time such budget is prepared.
§ C-39. Sale of City real estate and franchises. [Added 5-4-1989 by
L.L. No. 1-1989]
The City Council may, by resolution adopted by four affirmative votes, sell,
convey, exchange, grant or release any City real estate or any franchise
belonging to or under the control of the City, apply such real property for a
period not to exceed 40 years at public or private sale, and grant rights or
interests in, over, under and across any real property in which the City has
any right, title or interest, for such consideration and upon such terms and
conditions as the City Council may deem proper.
amount of the City assessment rolls, as certified by the City Clerk to
its Chairman or Clerk, as herein provided, with those of other towns of
the county, as required by law, and shall by resolution adopted on or
before the 15th day of December in each year ascertain and direct the
amount of tax to be levied, assessed and raised in the City of Auburn for
state, county and other lawful purposes within the control of the County
Legislature and shall cause a duplicate copy of such resolution to be
certified by its Chairman and Clerk, under the Seal of the county, and to
be delivered to the City Clerk not later than the 15th day of December
in each year.
B. Levy by Council. The City Clerk shall present the same to the Council at
its next meeting. The Council shall thereupon direct that the amount
required by such resolution be levied and extended on the assessment
rolls for that year by the Clerk, as herein provided. Such amount shall
be known as the "county and state tax" budget for the City and shall be
levied, assessed, extended on the assessment rolls for the year and
raised by tax upon the real and personal property liable to taxation in
the City according to the valuations thereof as fixed in said rolls, at the
time and in the manner herein provided.
C. Payment date. Such amount, or tax, when so levied, assessed and
extended, shall be known as the "county and state tax" and shall be due
and payable on the first day of March in each year.
8. Editor's Note: Original § 41, which immediately followed this section and provided for the
advance of funds to the Board of Education, was repealed by L. 1953, c. 878.
§ C-36 CHARTER § C-39
C:27

ARTICLE IV
Taxes and Assessments
§ C-40. Assessor; Board of Review.
§ C-41. Form and content of assessment rolls.
The rolls upon which such assessments are made, herein called and known
as "assessment rolls," shall be prepared so as to conform so far as
practicable to the Real Property Tax Law and shall be in such form and with
such columns as the Council may direct.
§ C-42. Levy and extension of taxes.
A. "Assessor," as used in this Charter, shall mean the person appointed
pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law, charged with the duty of
assessing real property in the City of Auburn and to perform and
discharge the usual duties and functions of an Assessor under the Real
Property Tax Law.
B. Conformity with state law. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter,
the assessment of real property in the City of Auburn shall conform to
the Real Property Tax Law.
C. Board of Assessment Review. There shall be a Board of Assessment
Review consisting of five members who shall be appointed and shall
have all the powers and duties prescribed by the Real Property Tax Law.
A. City tax. As soon as practicable after the adoption of the annual City
budget, the City Clerk shall forthwith proceed to extend and apportion
the amount to be raised by local taxation on the assessment roll upon all
real property on such roll liable to taxation in the City, according to the
valuations thereof on such roll. Such tax when completed and extended
shall be the "City tax."
B. County and state tax. Upon receiving from the County Legislature the
amount to be raised for county, state and other purposes and known as
the "county and state tax" budget, the City Clerk, when directed by the
Council, shall forthwith proceed to extend and apportion the same upon
such assessment roll for the year upon all real and personal property
liable to taxation, according to the valuation thereof on such roll. Such
tax when so completed and extended shall be the "county and state
tax." The annual cost and expense of such extension and
apportionment, fixed on the basis of the ratio of apportionment of the
state and county tax between the City and the towns, shall be a county
charge, payable by the county to the City.
C. Authority of Council. The Council may at any time prescribe that the
City tax and county and state tax budgets shall all be apportioned and
extended upon the same roll, or the same copy of such roll, or upon
§ C-40 CHARTER § C-42
C:29
§ C-43. Warrant and delivery to City Treasurer.
When the City Clerk shall have apportioned and extended any tax on
such assessment roll as directed and completed the same, he or she shall
forthwith present the same to the City Manager, and, when approved by
the City Manager, a warrant shall be annexed thereto signed by the City
Manager and the City Clerk in substance commanding the City Treasurer,
or such officer as may be designated, to receive, levy and collect the several
sums in said assessment rolls specified as assessed and taxed against
the persons or property therein described and named. The completed roll
containing the City tax, apportioned and extended as aforesaid, shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer on or before the 20th day of June in each
year. The completed roll containing the county and state tax, so apportioned
and extended, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer on or before the 20th
day of January in each year. The term "City Treasurer," as used herein, shall
mean and apply to the officer performing the usual duties and functions of
City Treasurer, by whatever name he or she may be known.
§ C-44. Lien of taxes and assessments; enforcement.
§ C-45. Liens for improvements or work; addition to City tax.
Every amount which may be directed by the Council to be paid by any
property owner for any improvement, benefit or work done to or for his
property, or to preserve the City from liability, and which is not represented
by a local improvement assessment shall be a lien upon such property
from the time when the amount thereon is determined by the Council and
ordered paid. If such amount is not paid when the next City tax becomes
payable, it shall be added to such tax against such property.
separate copies of such roll, and may direct and prescribe how and in
what manner the same shall be done and when completed.
A. The said City tax and county and state tax shall, from the time a warrant
for the collection of each, respectively, is delivered to the City
Treasurer, be and become a lien upon the lands upon which the same,
and each of said tax, is assessed and taxed. Each installment of an
assessment for a local improvement shall likewise become a lien upon
the lands upon which the assessment is made from the time when such
installment becomes due and payable. The lien of any such tax upon any
real property shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances
thereon.
B. If any such tax is not paid within three months after it is due, it may be
enforced and collected by action against the person against whom
assessed or the lien thereof foreclosed the same as in a mortgage
foreclosure case. Any such action or proceeding shall be instituted in
the name of the City of Auburn.
§ C-42 AUBURN CODE § C-46
C:30
§ C-46. Presumption of regularity of warrant or resolution.
Any warrant delivered for the collection of a tax or local assessment, or
any resolution determining the cost of any improvement, benefit, removal
or remedying of a dangerous condition, shall be presumptive evidence in
all actions and proceedings that all the previous proceedings, including the
assessing, extending and levying of the tax, notice of the improvement and
of the determination of the amount thereof, were regular and according to
law.
§ C-47. Irregularities not to invalidate assessment.
No error or mistake in the name of the owner of any lands assessed upon
any general tax roll, or upon any roll for a local improvement, or the fact
that the name appearing upon such roll as the owner of any lands is not
the owner thereof, nor any irregularity in advertising or certifying any
resolution or notice, nor any omission of any officer, agent or contractor to
carry out any detail of any resolution, provision of ordinance or of contract,
shall invalidate such assessment, or such assessment roll, excepting only
where fraud is shown.
§ C-48. Correction of errors.
At any time after the completion of any assessment or tax roll, whether the
same is for a general tax or local improvement, the Council may direct the
correction of any error made in any name, or in copying, or in levying or
extending any tax; provided, however, that five days' previous notice thereof
shall be given to the party or person interested or affected.
§ C-49. Correction of illegal assessments.
At any time the Council may order and cause to be stricken from any
assessment roll any property which is illegally assessed and wrongfully
thereon, or the assessment of which is for any reason illegal and wrongful,
and may cancel and annul any tax extended and apportioned thereon and
may order repayment of any such tax which has been paid. In case any
tax or assessment of any kind shall be void, or fail for want of jurisdiction,
or because of any omission or irregularity in any respect in the levying or
assessment thereof, or in the sale or proceedings taken for the sale of real
estate upon which it was assessed, the Council shall have power, and it shall
be its duty, to cause the reassessment of such property, or of the proper
amount of such tax or assessment thereon, or may order the Assessor to
reassess the cost of a local improvement thereon, or may direct a resale
of such property. Any such reassessment shall for all the purposes of this
Charter be deemed and taken to be an original assessment, and such resale
an original sale.
§ C-50. Omitted property.
The Council of the City shall have power to prescribe by ordinance for the
assessment of any property which has been omitted from any assessment
§ C-46 CHARTER § C-50
C:31
roll and to order and direct that a just and equitable amount be assessed,
levied and extended against such property for the periods for which taxes or
improvements are so omitted and to order and direct that such amount so
ordered assessed be added to the next City tax against such property. The
fact that title to such property has changed since such omission occurred
shall not prevent the Council from making such a just and equitable
assessment to cover such omission.
§ C-51. Due dates; interest charges and penalties. [Amended
5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
Every tax levied, assessed or extended upon any roll shall become
delinquent if not paid within one month after the same becomes due and
payable, and thereafter there shall be added to such tax 1% per month or
part thereof, to be collected by the City Treasurer at the time such tax is
paid. Such interest charges shall belong to the City.
§ C-52. Publication of notice of collection; advance statement.
Upon receiving the tax or assessment rolls for the City, county and state
taxes, or any of them, the City Treasurer shall cause a notice to be published
in reference to the collection thereof in a daily paper published in the City
of Auburn twice a week for four weeks, beginning respectively as follows:
City tax beginning the first week in July; county and state taxes beginning
the first week in March. Such notice shall be to the effect that he (or she)
has received rolls for such taxes and such taxes shall be collected as follows:
City taxes shall be payable in installments of 1/2 during the month of July,
the second half during the month of January, and county and state taxes
shall be paid during the month of March; that the City Treasurer will, during
such periods, receive payment of such taxes without percentage, and that
thereafter 1% per month will be charged and collected for each delinquent
installment of the City and county and state taxes. Such notice, when so
published, shall be deemed a personal demand upon each and every person
upon such roll for the payment of the tax assessed against him or her. In
addition, the City Treasurer shall mail to each owner whose name appears
upon any tax or assessment roll a statement pursuant to Real Property Tax
Law § 922.
§ C-53. Record of payments; receipts.
A. Upon receiving payment of any tax or rent, the City Treasurer shall
enter, in a column on the assessment roll, opposite the description of
the property, the fact of payment and the amount and date thereof, or,
with the approval of the Council, the City Treasurer may install a tax
and rent card system for the recording of payment of taxes and rents.
Such card system shall contain at least one card for each parcel subject
to taxes or rents and shall contain a description of each parcel of
property in the same manner as required on the assessment rolls of the
City. On each card the amount of taxes levied or charges made shall be
entered and the fact of payment, the amount of payment and the date of
§ C-50 AUBURN CODE § C-53
C:32
§ C-54. Advance payment of tax or assessment.
The City Treasurer is authorized to receive payment of any tax or
assessment for local improvement in advance of the time when the same
becomes due and payable as herein provided and to give a proper receipt
therefor, provided the amount of such tax or assessment is ascertainable.
§ C-55. Power of Council to extend collection periods or change due
dates.
The Council shall have the power to extend the time for the collection of
any tax or assessment for local improvement, for such period as it may
deem advisable, and to postpone or regulate the time for the collection of
penalties or additions for delinquent taxes. It may also postpone and change
the date when either the City tax or county and state tax shall become due
and payable if in its judgment such postponement is desirable or warranted
by reason of any unusual delays in the preparation of assessment rolls or
budgets, extension of taxes or the giving of any notices to property owners
directed by the Council.9
§ C-56. Payment of county and state taxes by City Treasurer.
[Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
On the first day of April of each year, the City Treasurer shall pay over
to the County Treasurer the amount of the collected county and state
tax. Thereafter, the City, unless otherwise directed by the Council, shall
be indebted to the county for the amount of the uncollected county and
state tax, and said tax, together with the lien thereof, and all additions and
penalties, shall be and become the property of the City. Payment over of
the indebtedness presented by the uncollected state and county tax shall
be made by the City to the county on the 10th day of each month as said
tax is actually collected through payment thereof or enforcement of the
collection thereof by tax sale and the foreclosure of the tax lien either by
procedure under this Charter or pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law,
such payment in any event to be completed not later than October 31 of the
next succeeding year after the levy of the tax, pursuant to Subsection C of
§ C-42 of the Charter.
payment shall be recorded thereon. In the event of the installation of a
card recording system, the entries thereon shall constitute a record of
the payment of taxes or rents, and thereafter no entries relating to the
payment of taxes or rents shall be required on the assessment rolls.
B. Upon the payment of taxes or rents, the City Treasurer shall give the
person paying such tax or rent a receipt as provided by § 986 of the Real
Property Tax Law.
9. Editor's Note: Original § 58, which immediately followed this section and provided for the
deposit of school taxes, was deleted as obsolete. See L. 1953, c. 878.
§ C-53 CHARTER § C-57
C:33
§ C-57. Uncollectible county and state taxes.
If any tax or assessment appearing upon the county and state tax roll, the
money for which tax the City has paid or credited to the County Treasurer,
is for any reason uncollectible, because of error, illegality or other cause,
a record of the amount of such uncollectible taxes or assessments so paid
or credited by the City shall be kept by the City Treasurer and reported
each year to the Council. The Council may direct that such amount of
uncollectible tax be added to the amount of the next county and state tax
budget, when reported to it, and be levied, extended and collected with such
budget amount. When collected such amount shall be credited to the City.
§ C-58. City Treasurer to prepare statement of unpaid taxes.
On May 1 of each year, the City Treasurer shall prepare a statement of
all taxes outstanding and unpaid on the City and county and state tax
rolls and combine and assemble the same to show the total outstanding
against each piece of property; thereafter such statement shall be known
as the "total tax" unpaid. Upon payment of any tax in such statement, and
before advertisement of sale, as herein provided, the same additions shall
be charged for penalties as if each such tax were separate.
§ C-59. Special warrant for unpaid taxes and assessment.
Upon completion of such total tax statement, the City Treasurer shall file
it with the City Manager, who shall report the same to the Council with
his (or her) recommendations. The Council may thereupon by ordinance
direct that constables of the City be employed to make such collections and
may authorize the City Manager to issue a special warrant to each such
constable he or she may designate commanding such constable to levy the
amount of any unpaid tax or assessment named in said warrant, and 5%
thereon for his or her fees, by distress and sale of the goods and chattels
of the person upon whose real or personal property such unpaid tax or
assessment is levied, or of any goods or chattels in his or her possession,
wherever the same may be found in said City, and further directing that
such officer pay the same over to the City Treasurer forthwith, and to
make return of such warrant not later than the date therein stated. Such
ordinance shall provide that such constable shall give at least five days'
public notice previous to the sale, by notice to be posted in at least three
public places in said City, and that no claim of property made to such goods
and chattels so found in the possession of such person shall be available to
prevent a sale, and may contain such other provisions in reference to such
collections and sale and the enforcement of the collection for such unpaid
taxes or assessment as the Council may direct.
§ C-60. Sale of property for unpaid taxes. [Amended 5-27-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. On or about the first day of June in each year the City Treasurer shall
cause to be published at least once a week for two weeks in a
§ C-57 AUBURN CODE § C-60
C:34
newspaper published in the City of Auburn a notice of sale of real
property for unpaid taxes, specifying a day (no earlier than five days
after the second notice is published) and the time at which the sale
will commence and the location of such sale. Such notice shall contain
a list of the real property to be sold giving a brief description of each
parcel by street, tax map or other map number, or other appropriate
designation, the name of the owner or occupant as the same appears
on the tax roll and the aggregate amount due on each parcel as of
the time of sale, such amount to include the unpaid taxes for the year
advertised, including all interest (at the rate and for the periods set
forth in § C-51 above), penalties and all other expenses chargeable
against the parcel (including but not limited to such parcel's share of
the expense of publication and notice). The notice shall state that if the
aggregate amount stated in the notice is not paid prior to the date and
time set forth in the notice for the sale, the City Treasurer shall sell
the real property on which or in respect to which such taxes have been
imposed or levied at the sale in accordance with this Article IV to pay
such taxes, interest, penalties and charges. No error with respect to a
parcel in any list shall render the sale void or in any manner affect the
validity thereof except as to the effect, if any, on the particular parcel in
respect to which such error occurred.
B. Proof of the publication of the notice shall be filed in the office of the
City Treasurer.
C. The City Treasurer shall also, prior to the commencement of publication
required by Subsection A of this section, cause notice of such tax sale to
be sent by first class mail to the name and address of the owner or
occupant, as shown on the tax roll, of each parcel to be sold. Such
notice shall contain a brief description of such parcel, the aggregate
amount due on such parcel at the time of sale, and a statement that
unless such amount is paid prior to the commencement of the tax sale
proceedings the real property will be sold. The expense of mailing such
notice shall be an additional expense chargeable against the parcel.
D. On the day and at the hour specified in such notice, the City Treasurer,
or such other person as may be directed by the City Manager as
provided below, shall commence such sale and continue the same from
day to day until all such real property shall be sold. If in case of
sickness, absence, inability or other cause the City Treasurer is unable
to conduct such sale, the City Manager may name some other officer to
conduct such sale by filing in the office of the City Clerk a written
designation. Such person shall have the same powers as herein given to
the City Treasurer in reference to such sale. The City Treasurer may in
his/her discretion decline to receive a bid on any parcel if in his/her
opinion the bid is made by or for any person not acting in good faith. In
such event, the parcel may be sold the same as if such bid had not been
made. The factors which the City Treasurer may consider in
determining whether a person is acting in good faith include, but are
not limited to, the history of such person or any affiliate of such person
§ C-60 CHARTER § C-60
C:35
§ C-61. Surplus moneys; payment into Court. [Amended 5-27-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
In case such property shall be sold for an amount in excess of the unpaid
taxes, interest, penalties, additions and expenses, the surplus shall be paid
by the City Treasurer into the County Court of Cayuga County by delivering
the same to the Clerk thereof, accompanied by a statement of the facts
connected therewith, and such Court shall ascertain and determine, upon
application made to it for that purpose by any person interested, who is
of timely paying taxes and maintaining its property in good condition
and repair.
E. The purchaser of each parcel, immediately upon the conclusion of the
sale of such real property, shall pay the amount of such sale to the City
Treasurer. Upon payment of such amount, the City Treasurer shall
furnish the purchaser with a written certificate describing the real
property purchased and the amount paid thereon and dating the
certificate as of the date of the sale; provided, however, if payment shall
be made by check, the certificate shall not be delivered to the
purchaser until payment on such check is received by the City, but the
certificate shall, when delivered, be dated as of the date of the sale.
Such certificate shall also contain a statement to the effect that if the
real property described thereon is not redeemed, the purchaser may
complete the purchase and take a conveyance of the real property. Such
certificate shall also state that if a conveyance is not taken within five
years of the date of the certificate, the certificate shall become void and
no claim may thereafter be made on such certificate, unless such
certificate was originally purchased by and still held by the state, the
County of Cayuga or the City of Auburn.
F. If a purchaser fails to pay the amount of the bid as required under
Subsection E above, the City Treasurer may set aside the sale to such
purchaser and all rights of the purchaser thereunder shall be
extinguished. A certificate of sale may thereafter be issued to any
person paying the amount of such bid. If after the expiration of 30 days
no one has paid such amount, the City of Auburn shall become the
purchaser, the same as if the City had been the successful bidder for the
entire parcel at the sale. Notwithstanding the setting aside of such sale
or the issuance of a certificate to the City, such bidder shall remain
liable to the City for the amount bid, plus interest thereon at the rate of
10% per year computed from the date of the bid.
G. Each such certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the sale and all
proceedings prior thereto were regular and according to the provisions
of this Charter and all laws in any manner relating thereto.
H. Each such certificate shall be executed in the same manner as a deed,
acknowledged or proved before any officer by law authorized to take
the proof and acknowledgment of a deed.
§ C-60 AUBURN CODE § C-61
C:36
entitled to such money and shall make such order and decree of distribution
and payment as may be just and proper.
§ C-62. Purchase by City. [Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993;
7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. If upon such sale, with respect to any parcel of real property, no bid
shall be made, or if the highest bid shall be less than the aggregate
amount stated in the notice of sale, the City Treasurer may declare the
same sold to the City of Auburn for the aggregate amount stated in the
notice of sale for such real property, and the City Treasurer shall issue
the City a certificate of sale describing the property and stating the
amount set forth in the notice of sale. The City Treasurer may
subsequently issue and deliver a certificate of sale to any person who
shall pay the amount chargeable thereon. Within 40 days after the last
day of the sale conducted under § C-60, the City Treasurer shall report
to the Council the total amount and the accounting of such real
property sold to the City.
B. In the event the City shall be the purchaser at the sale, or by
declaration, the City shall, for all purposes of this Article IV, be deemed
the purchaser, and, except as otherwise specifically stated herein, such
purchases by the City shall be subject to the same right of redemption
as purchases by any other person. If a parcel sold to the City is not
redeemed, the deed therefor shall have the same effect and become
absolute in the same time and upon the same conditions as in the case
of a conveyance to any other person.
C. The City Treasurer shall reject all bids made on any parcel of real
property in which the City has an interest and shall bid on such parcels
for the City for the amount stated in the notice of sale.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision, the Council may, by resolution,
authorize and direct the City Treasurer to purchase real property at the
tax sale, without competitive bidding, for the aggregate amount stated
in the notice of sale.
E. Installment payments of delinquent taxes.
(1) When delinquent taxes may be paid in installments.
(a) When any taxes, including any assessments for local
improvements, upon any real property in the City of Auburn
shall have remained delinquent and unpaid and such real
property has been sold for such unpaid taxes or assessments
and a certificate or certificates have been taken therefor by the
City of Auburn and such certificate or certificates has (have)
not been assigned or sold by the City of Auburn, the City
Treasurer may, but shall not be obligated to, permit payment of
such delinquent taxes and assessments and the fees, interest
charges, penalties and other charges thereon in such monthly
§ C-61 CHARTER § C-62
C:37
installments as may be necessary to ensure full payment
thereof within a period not to exceed the total number of
months for which there are such delinquent and unpaid taxes
and assessments, or 48 months, whichever is shorter. No
property shall be eligible for the method of payment of
delinquent taxes and assessments authorized under this
Subsection E(1)(a) unless it shall be improved by a one-, twoor
three-family residential (or residential/mixed-use) dwelling
and the owner of the property shall be and, during the term of
the agreement, shall continue to be domiciled in such dwelling.
The City Treasurer in his sole discretion shall determine
whether an owner is domiciled or continues to be domiciled in
such a dwelling and whether a domicile has been created or
acquired artificially or in bad faith.
(b) When any taxes, including any assessments for local
improvements, shall remain delinquent and unpaid upon any
real property in the City of Auburn, which real property does
not meet the requirements of Subsection E(1)(a) above (i.e.,
such real property is commercial, industrial, four-or-morefamily
residential, the owner is not domiciled therein, etc.) and
a certificate or certificates has or have been taken therefor by
the City of Auburn and such certificate or certificates has or
have not been assigned or sold by the City of Auburn, the City
Manager may, but shall not be obligated to, permit payment of
such delinquent taxes, assessments, fees, interest charges,
penalties and other charges in such monthly installments as
may be necessary to ensure full payment thereof within a
period not to exceed the total number of months for which
there are such delinquent and unpaid taxes and assessments,
or 48 months, whichever is shorter.
(2) Agreement and installment payments.
(a) No person shall be entitled or permitted to pay such delinquent
taxes and assessments in installments as provided in
Subsection E(1) above until he shall first have applied for and
executed an agreement in writing with the City Treasurer or
City Manager, as the case may be, upon a form to be furnished
by the City Treasurer (or City Manager), which form shall be
approved by the office of the Corporation Counsel for the City
of Auburn, wherein the applicant shall agree to:
[1] Pay all taxes and assessments and unpaid interest,
penalties and other charges upon such real property which
are delinquent and unpaid as of the date of such
agreement, together with interest on all such amounts at
the rate of 10% per year from the date of such agreement;
[2] Make such monthly payments regularly in the amounts
and at the times therein provided;
§ C-62 AUBURN CODE § C-62
C:38
[3] Pay, on all real property within the City of Auburn owned
by such applicant, all installments on current taxes and
assessments and any fees and penalties thereon promptly
as they respectively become due and payable and in any
event prior to any sale thereof; and
[4] Comply with the domicile requirements [if the agreement
is being entered into under Subsection E(1)(a) above] and
other requirements of this section and any other
requirements of the City Treasurer or City Manager, as the
case may be.
(b) The City Treasurer (and City Manager, as the case may be) is
authorized to provide in such agreement that so long as the
provisions of § C-52E and the agreement are fully and timely
complied with, the City and its officers will not take a tax deed
for or bring any action to foreclose the lien of the taxes or
assessments on such real property which are delinquent and
are covered by the agreement during the period covered by
such agreement; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prohibit the City Treasurer from proceeding with the
procedures set forth in §§ C-61, C-62, C-63, C-64, C-65, C-66
and C-67 of this Charter, or enforce any judgments obtained
against such person in any action brought by the City to
recover such delinquent taxes. Any agreement entered into by
the City Manager pursuant to the above authority shall provide
that the payments made thereunder shall be made to the City
Treasurer, and a copy of such agreement shall be furnished to
the City Treasurer.
(3) Application of installment payments. The City Treasurer shall enter
in a special account the amounts of payments made under each
such agreement, to the credit of the respective taxpayers. Each
such payment shall be applied first to the interest at the rate
provided in the agreement, and the balance shall be then applied to
the items of interest, penalties, charges, taxes and assessments, in
that order, and such amount shall be applied to the year of the
oldest delinquency. To the extent that the amount of such payments
entered in such account is sufficient to pay, in full, the interest,
penalties, charges, taxes and assessments for a given year, the City
Treasurer shall so apply such payments and issue to the taxpayer a
satisfaction and discharge therefor.
(4) Taxpayer's default.
(a) In the event of a failure to comply with the agreement or with
the terms of this Subsection E, such agreement shall, without
further notice, terminate and be void and of no effect, and in
such event the City Treasurer shall retain the sums, if any,
which have been paid under the agreement and the same shall
§ C-62 CHARTER § C-62
C:39
§ C-63. Redemption. [Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993;
7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The owner, or any person interested in any real property sold for taxes, may
redeem such property at any time before the issuance of a deed to such
purchaser by paying to the City Treasurer, for the use of such purchaser or
those claiming under him, or the City, as the case may be, the sum equal to:
be applied to the items of unpaid taxes, assessments, interest,
fees, penalties, and charges as provided above.
(b) No such installment payment or payments, and no discharge as
to any portion of taxes and assessments to which such
payments have been applied, shall prejudice or prevent the
City or its officers in any way, in case of default under the
agreement, from taking tax deeds or instituting foreclosure
proceedings or resuming tax collection procedures without
further notice, as though no such agreement had been made,
or from enforcing any terms or conditions of the agreement or
from commencing an action for breach of the agreement.
(5) Installment payment with Council approval. Notwithstanding
anything provided to the contrary in this Subsection E, in the event
the City Treasurer has refused to enter into an agreement, under
the authority granted in Subsection E(1)(a) above, with the owner
of property which meets the requirements of Subsection E(1)(a) or
the City Manager has refused to enter an agreement under the
authority granted in Subsection E(1)(b), then in either such event
the owner of such property may make a written request for the
Council to authorize the City of Auburn to enter into an agreement
with said property owner for the installment payment of tax
arrears. After the receipt of such written request, the Council may,
but shall not be obligated to, enter an agreement with the property
owner for installment payments for the delinquent taxes, which
agreement, if authorized by the Council, shall contain such terms
and conditions as may be satisfactory to the Council.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided herein, no
property shall be eligible for any of the installment methods of
payment authorized by this Subsection E unless the City is then the
owner of the certificate of sale for the year(s) for which the
payment of taxes is delinquent.
A. The sum for which the property was sold, together with interest thereon
at the rate of 10% per year computed from the date of such certificate;
and
B. Provided the City Treasurer has been notified, in writing, of such
amounts prior to the redemption, the amount of any tax, special ad
valorem levy or special assessment, including penalties and interest
thereon prescribed by law, on such real property which the purchaser
§ C-62 AUBURN CODE § C-63
C:40
§ C-64. Redemption by lienholder or purchaser at prior tax sale.
[Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
If such real property is redeemed, or the amount of such unpaid taxes,
penalties, interest and other charges is paid at any time after sale, by the
holder of any lien or purchaser at any prior tax sale, then such amount so
paid may be added to the lien of such lienor or the amount of the claim of
such prior purchaser at the prior tax sale.
§ C-65. Furnishing of abstract of title; additional expenses.
[Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
The purchaser at any sale may, at the purchaser's expense, have an abstract
of title or certified search prepared on such real property, and such expense
(not to exceed $750), together with any expense of mailing, service or
publication, if certified (with receipt for payment attached) by the purchaser
to the City Treasurer before such property is redeemed, shall be added to
the charges against such property and to the amount required to redeem.
§ C-66. Despoliation of lands sold. [Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
has paid after the sale and prior to the date of redemption, plus such
amounts as may have been paid by the purchaser to redeem such
property from prior or subsequent tax sales, plus the amounts referred
to in § C-65 below, with interest on all such amounts referred to in this
Subsection B at the rate of 10% per year from the date of payment
thereof.
A. Neither the owner, occupant nor any other person shall have the right
to despoil any lands sold at the tax sale by removing buildings or other
improvements or cutting, removing or destroying timber or other
valuable products growing, existing or being thereon at or after the
time of sale.
B. The purchaser at any such sale, or those claiming under him, shall not
enter upon or exercise acts of ownership on such real property until
after the expiration of the redemption period and the delivery of a deed
under this Article IV. Any such purchaser whose bid therefor has been
fully paid, his assigns or representatives may at any time before
obtaining his deed cause to be served a notice on any person despoiling
such real property or interested in making such despoliation, either
personally or by leaving the same at the residence of such person or
with any member of his family of suitable age and discretion. The notice
shall describe the real property sold, shall state that the real property
was sold for taxes by the City Treasurer and that an action to recover
the value of the buildings, timber or other products destroyed or
§ C-63 CHARTER § C-66
C:41
§ C-67. Notice of redemption. [Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
removed therefrom after the date of sale will be instituted against all
persons concerned in such despoliation.
C. If such real property is not redeemed, every person despoiling such
lands or interested in making such despoliation upon whom service of
the notice has been made shall be liable to pay to the holder of the tax
sale certificate thereon the full value of any buildings, improvements,
timber or other products cut or destroyed or removed therefrom from
the date of the tax sale to the termination of such action and may be
restrained by injunction from committing any waste thereon.
A. To whom, by whom and when sent. The purchaser at the sale or any
person claiming under such purchaser, no earlier than nine months
after the date of the sale, shall serve a notice of redemption upon the
following persons, as such persons may exist on the date such notice is
sent: the owner of the real property (as such owner and at such address
as may be shown on the then-current assessment roll); the holder of any
mortgage, judgment or other lien appearing of record in the County
Clerk's office (at the address of such person as shown in such mortgage,
judgment or lien); the purchaser of any prior tax sale (according to the
records of the City Treasurer); any occupant of such real property (to
the address of such real property); and upon any other person shown, in
records on file in the Cayuga County Clerk's office, to have an interest
in or lien on such real property (to the address of such person as shown
in the instrument creating such interest or lien). No other, further or
different notice of the expiration of the time to redeem shall be required
to be served or given.
B. Contents. The notice of redemption shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Briefly describe the real property to which the notice of redemption
applies;
(3) Identify the owner against whom the property was assessed at the
time of the sale under which the purchaser acquired its interest in
the real property;
(4) State the amount paid by the purchaser at the sale;
(5) State the amounts the purchaser is entitled to be paid under § C-63
above, including, without limitation, interest, the amounts paid by
the purchaser after the purchase for taxes, interest, penalties,
charges and to redeem the property from prior or subsequent tax
sales;
§ C-66 AUBURN CODE § C-67
C:42
§ C-68. Delivery of deed for unredeemed property. [Amended
5-27-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(6) State the last day upon which the real property may be redeemed
(which date shall be at least 90 days from the date such notice of
redemption is served);
(7) Contain a concise statement of the aggregate amount required to
be paid to redeem, as of the date of the notice, together with a per
diem interest amount;
(8) State that unless the amounts required to be paid to redeem, with
interest, are paid to the City Treasurer for the benefit of the
purchaser or those claiming under the purchaser by the last day to
redeem, the real property will be conveyed to the purchaser and
the conveyance shall be absolute and the party to whom the notice
is addressed shall be forever barred from redeeming such real
property; and
(9) State that no other or further notice to redeem is required to be
given.
C. Service.
(1) The notice of redemption shall be made as follows:
(a) By personal delivery to the person to whom it is addressed; or
(b) By mailing the notice, enclosed in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, directed to such person at the address specified in
Subsection A above, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, with a copy sent by ordinary mail.
(2) Service on one joint tenant or tenant in common shall be service on
all the joint tenants or tenants in common. Service on a landlord
shall be service on his tenant.
D. Affidavit. Within one month after the giving of such notice of
redemption the purchaser shall file with the City Treasurer and with the
Cayuga County Clerk's office a copy of the notice served and an
affidavit stating that the notice was served in accordance with this
section and specifying the person(s) served and the mode of service in
each instance.
E. "Occupant." The term "occupant" as used in this section means a person
who has lawfully entered and is in possession of the real property to the
exclusion of others.
F. Certificate of redemption. Upon the redemption of a parcel of real
property, the City Treasurer shall deliver to the person redeeming such
real property a certificate of redemption which shall refer to the
certificate of sale, briefly describe the real property and state that the
real property has been redeemed.
§ C-67 CHARTER § C-68
C:43
A. If the real property sold for taxes is not redeemed by the date specified
in the notice of redemption (which date shall be no earlier than 90 days
after the notice of redemption is served), upon the written application
of the purchaser to the City Treasurer to convert the purchaser's tax
sale certificate into a quitclaim deed, and upon the City Treasurer being
satisfied that the notice of redemption has been served in accordance
with this Article IV and the necessary affidavit filed with the City
Treasurer, the City Treasurer shall execute and deliver to the purchaser
a quitclaim deed to the real property so sold and unredeemed, which
quitclaim deed shall rest in the grantee an absolute estate in fee, free
from all liens, claims, demands and encumbrances, subject, however,
to:
(1) All claims of the county, City and state for taxes, liens or other
encumbrances (except for those taxes which formed the basis for
the sale of the unredeemed certificate);
(2) All easements and rights-of-way which were in existence at the time
of the levy of the tax the nonpayment of which resulted in the tax
sale; and
(3) The rights, if any, of the purchaser of a tax sale certificate issued
subsequent to the tax sale certificate then being converted.
B. Every such conveyance shall be executed by the City Treasurer under
his/her hand and the Seal of the City of Auburn, and the execution
thereof shall be acknowledged before a proper officer the same as other
conveyances of real estate are acknowledged under the laws of New
York and shall recite the fact of such assessment and tax, the failure to
pay the same, the sale and that such real property has not been
redeemed.
C. The City Treasurer shall receive $100 for preparing such conveyance.
D. If application for a conveyance which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this Article V is not made within five years from the
date of the certificate of sale (except where such certificate was
purchased at the sale by and is still held by the state, the County of
Cayuga or the City of Auburn), the certificate of sale shall become void
and no claim may be thereafter made on such certificate; provided,
however, that any such certificate issued prior to January 1, 1993, shall
not become void as provided above until January 1, 1998.
E. In the event the City of Auburn is the purchaser, no written application
under Subsection A above shall be required, and the conveyance shall
run to and name the City of Auburn as grantee and the title thus
acquired by the City may be disposed of at such time and upon such
terms or shall be determined by the Council at any meeting thereof.
F. Such deed shall be presumptive evidence that the sale and all
proceedings prior thereto, from and including the assessment of the
real property sold, and all notices required by law to be given previous
§ C-68 AUBURN CODE § C-68
C:44
§ C-69. Cancellation of sales. [Amended 5-27-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The City Treasurer shall not convey any real estate sold for taxes if he/she
discovers before such conveyance that the sale was for any cause invalid or
ineffectual to give title to the real property sold. In such event he/she shall
cancel the sale and cause the purchase price (less any surplus moneys paid
into Court under § C-61) to be refunded to the purchaser and at the same
time issue, for recording in the Cayuga County Clerk's office, a certificate of
cancellation of the sale.10
§ C-70. Setting aside cancellation of sale. [Amended 5-27-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993; 7-7-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
to the expiration of the time allowed by law for the redemption thereof
were regular and in accordance with all the provisions of law relating
thereto; provided, however, that if application is made to a court of
competent jurisdiction within two years from the recording of such
conveyance, such conveyance shall be subject to cancellation by reason
of the prior payment of the taxes, the nonpayment of which resulted
in the sale; the illegal levy thereof by the City; or any defect in the
proceedings affecting jurisdiction upon constitutional grounds. After
two years from the date of the recording of such conveyance, such
presumption shall be conclusive, and all occupants, mortgagees and
other persons interested in such real property shall thereupon be
forever barred from all liens upon, claims against, interest in or right or
title thereto.
G. Every certificate of sale, certificate of redemption, certificate of
cancellation of sale, certificate of termination of cancellation or deed
executed in pursuance of this Article IV may be recorded in the same
manner and as a deed acknowledged or proved before any officer
authorized by law to take the proof and acknowledgment of deeds.
H. Upon the receipt and recording of such a conveyance, the grantee may
possess and enjoy for his/her own use the real property described
therein and may cause the occupant(s) of such real property to be
removed therefrom and the possession to be delivered to him/her in the
same manner and by the same proceedings as in the case of a tenant
holding over after the expiration of the term without the permission of
the landlord.
A. The City Treasurer may, and shall upon the application of any person
aggrieved thereby made within one year of the date of such cancellation
of sale, set aside any cancellation of sale made by him/her, or any
predecessors in office, in any of the following cases:
(1) When cancellation was procured by fraud or misrepresentation;
10.Editor's Note: Original §§ 73 and 74, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed by L. 1943, c. 712.
§ C-68 CHARTER § C-70
C:45
§ C-71. Collection of unpaid taxes; other remedies; definitions.
(2) When cancellation was procured by the suppression of any material
fact bearing on the case;
(3) When cancellation was made under a mistake of fact; or
(4) When cancellation was made upon an application which the City
Treasurer or any predecessors in office had no jurisdiction or legal
right to entertain at the time of such cancellation.
B. Eight days' written notice of an application made pursuant to this
section shall be served upon the person upon whose application such
sale was canceled or his/her heirs or grantees.
C. In the event that any of the parties to be served are not residents of the
state or cannot after reasonable diligence be found within the state,
such notice may be served by the publication thereof in a newspaper
published in the City once each week for three weeks immediately
preceding the day upon which such application is to be made and also
by mailing a copy of such notice, first class mail, postage prepaid, to
each of such parties at his last known place of residence. On or before
the day of the first publication, all papers upon which such application
is to be made shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
D. The City Treasurer shall in all cases specify the grounds upon which
such cancellation is set aside. Every such cancellation set aside by him/
her shall in all respects have the same force and effect as though no
cancellation had ever been made, except that the five-year period
referred to in §§ C-60E and C-68D shall be tolled during the period
between the issuance of the certificate of cancellation of sale and the
issuance of the certificate of termination of cancellation. Upon setting
aside such cancellation, the City Treasurer shall file a certificate of
termination of cancellation in the Cayuga County Clerk's office.
A. In personam actions to collect taxes or assessments. Whenever any tax
or assessment levied or assessed upon any person or property in the
City of Auburn with the fees, interest, penalties, charges and expenses
which may by law be added thereto shall remain unpaid for six months
after the warrant for its collection has been placed in the hands of the
City Treasurer, the City Treasurer may maintain an action in the name
of his office for and on behalf of the City of Auburn to recover the
amount of such tax, interest, fees, penalties, charges and expenses
remaining unpaid and uncollected against any person liable for such tax
or the personal representatives or successor in interest respectively of
such person, together with the attorney fees incurred or to be incurred
by the City of Auburn in such action, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, and the amount collected by any such suit shall be used
and applied by the City Treasurer in the same manner as though the
same had been collected by the sale of real estate. Nothing in this
section contained shall be construed in any way to restrict, limit, or
§ C-70 AUBURN CODE § C-71
C:46
§ C-72. Exemption of capital improvements from taxation on oneand
two-family residential properties. [Added 12-12-1993 by L.L.
No. 4-1993]
abridge any power otherwise possessed by any officer for the collection
of taxes in the City of Auburn.
B. Other remedies to collect taxes not effected. The methods, actions and
procedures set forth in this Article IV are in addition to all other
remedies and procedures available at law or in equity for the collection
of taxes.
C. Definitions. As used in this Article IV, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, company,
association, municipality or any other entity.
PURCHASER — The original purchaser and the heirs, successors and
assigns of the original purchaser.
A. Residential buildings reconstructed, altered, or improved shall be
exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies to the extent
provided hereinafter.
B. Period and extent of exemption.
(1) Such buildings shall be exempt for a period of one year to the
extent of 100% of the increase in assessed value thereof
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement and
for an additional period of seven years; provided, however, that the
extent of such exemption shall be decreased by 121/2% of the
initial exemption in each year during such additional period;
provided, further, that such exemption shall be limited to $80,000
in increased market value, or such other sum less than $80,000 but
not less than $3,000 of the property attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement, and any increase in
market value greater than such amount shall not be eligible for the
exemption pursuant to this section. For the purposes of this
section, the market value of the reconstruction, alteration or
improvement shall be equal to the increased assessed value
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
divided by the Class I ratio in a special assessing unit or the most
recently established state equalization rate or special equalization
rate in the remainder of the state, except that where the state
equalization rate or special equalization rate equals or exceeds
95%, then the increase in assessed value attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall equal the market
value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement.
(2) The exemption shall be applicable to the reconstruction, alterations
or improvements of residential dwellings or limit exemption to one
§ C-71 CHARTER § C-72
C:47
or more of such categories; provided, further, that the term
"improvements" shall include only that which would otherwise
result in an increase in the assessed valuation of the real property
and which consists of addition, remodeling or modernization to an
existing residential structure to prevent physical deterioration of
the structure or to comply with applicable building, sanitary, health
and/or fire codes.
(3) No such exemption shall be granted for reconstruction, alterations
or improvements unless:
(a) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was
commenced subsequent to the date the local law is enacted;11
(b) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds $3,000; and
(c) The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the
building reconstructed, altered or improved is at least five
years old.
(4) For purposes of this section the terms "reconstruction," "alteration"
and "improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance and
repairs.
C. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such building on a form prescribed by the State Board.12 The original of
such application shall be filed with the Assessor of the city, town, village
or county having the power to assess property for taxation on or before
the appropriate taxable status date of such city, town, village or county.
A copy thereof shall be filed with the State Board.
D. If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this section, he shall approve the application and such
building shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as herein provided commencing with the assessment roll
prepared after the taxable status date referred to in Subsection C of
this section. The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to
this section shall be entered by the Assessor on the portion of the
assessment roll provided for property exempt from taxation.
E. For the purposes of this section, "residential building" shall mean any
building or structure designed and occupied exclusively for residential
purposes by not more than two families.
F. In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this
section ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title
thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the
owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this section shall cease.
11.Editor's Note: This section was added by L.L. No. 4-1993, adopted 12-12-1993.
12.Editor's Note: "State Board" refers to the State Board of Real Property Services.
§ C-72 AUBURN CODE § C-72
C:48
ARTICLE V
Bonds
§ C-73. Authorization for bond issuance.
The authorization of the issuance of bonds shall be by ordinance.
§ C-73 CHARTER § C-73
C:49

ARTICLE VI
Public Works and Parks
§ C-74. Department of Public Works and Parks.
The Department of Public Works and Parks shall include all streets,
highways, bridges, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, sewers, disposal plants,
subways, parks, playgrounds, and all public lands, buildings and works.
§ C-75. City Manager to supervise Department.
In addition to other powers and duties prescribed herein and by ordinance
of the Council, the City Manager, as the administrative head of the City,
shall have charge and supervision of the Department of Public Works and
Parks and may, from the budget appropriation made therefor, improve,
repair, alter, grade, regrade, pave, repave, surface, resurface, sprinkle,
flush, oil, cover with some dust-allaying substance and clean streets,
highways, squares and public places; repair, examine and keep in safe and
suitable condition all bridges, public works and buildings; repair, protect,
clean and keep in operative condition public sewers, drains, sewer laterals
and sewage disposal plants; improve, repair and direct the upkeep of all
parks, playgrounds, trees and grass plats in the highways; regulate and
direct the placing of poles, wires and all overhead construction in streets;
direct the maintenance, repair, protection and use of subways and their
appurtenances; and generally, subject to the ordinances of the Council, have
charge of the expenditure and disbursement of all budget appropriations,
not otherwise limited or designated, for the purpose of carrying out and
giving effect to the purposes of such appropriations. Any work, repair or
improvement which the City Manager is authorized herein to do or make
may be done by City employees, equipment and agencies or by contract.
§ C-76. General supervisory powers of City Manager.
The City Manager shall cause all public works, buildings, bridges, streets
and improvements, both local and general, to be inspected with sufficient
frequency to ascertain their condition and shall cause the same to be kept
in good condition and repair, reasonably safe for public use, and free from
dangerous obstructions so far as may be. He or she shall have power to
prescribe rules and regulations controlling and governing all public works
of every kind and the upkeep, maintenance and use of all parks. He or she
shall have general supervision and control of all work being performed for
the City under any contract, and it shall be his or her duty to see that the
terms and provisions of all such contracts are complied with on behalf of
the City.
§ C-77. Notice to perform works on streets to be improved.
A. After the Council or the City Manager has determined upon any
pavement, repavement, surfacing or resurfacing of any street, the City
Manager shall cause notice thereof to be published at least three times
§ C-74 CHARTER § C-77
C:51
§ C-78. Removal of dangerous obstructions and conditions, snow
and ice from streets and sidewalks.
in a daily newspaper published in the City, specifying the street or
streets, or parts thereof, to be paved, or otherwise improved, and
requiring all persons, corporations and companies within the time
stated therein, which shall not be less than 30 days, to do such
excavation and lay such mains and pipes in such streets and make
such repairs of, and connections with, existing gas, water mains, sewers
and pipes as may be needed or required within the next two years,
and also, within five days of such first publication, the City Manager
shall cause such notice to be mailed to any corporations, companies
and departments owning or having charge of mains and pipes in such
streets, or franchise rights therein.
B. After such improvement is completed, no person or company shall
excavate therein for a period of two years, unless by permission of the
Council to repair defects that may arise to mains, sewers, pipes or
conduits, upon such terms and conditions as the Council may prescribe.
A. In case of the failure of any owner or occupant of any premises to
comply with the provisions of any City ordinance pertaining to the care
of such premises or trees and other appurtenances thereon and the
sidewalks and streets appurtenant thereto, or requiring the cutting of
weeds, the removal of rubbish, the maintenance of any private sewer or
the removal or abatement of any prohibited or dangerous obstruction or
condition in any sidewalk or danger or detriment to any person thereon,
or private sewer or in the street, public highway, lane or alley in front of
said premises allowed, caused or contributed to by such owner or
occupant, or to keep such sidewalk free and clear of snow, ice, dirt or
other matter which is or may become dangerous, or to keep the sewer
lateral or laterals from said premises to the trunk sewer in said street,
public highway, lane or alley free from any obstruction, the City
Manager or any officer or employee of the City may forthwith remedy or
remove such obstruction, prohibited or unsanitary condition, snow, ice,
dirt or other matter and may for that purpose enter upon private lands
and premises.
B. The City Manager, whether the work to remedy or remove such
obstruction, condition, danger or detriment is done by the City at its
own instance or at the request of the owner or occupant of said
premises, shall report the cost thereof and order such cost be collected
and paid. The Superintendent of Public Works shall mail a statement to
such owner or occupant to pay the cost, which shall become due and
payable within 30 days from the mailing thereof. If not paid within such
time, all costs which have become due and payable on or before April 30
of each year shall be added to the City tax and thereafter become a part
thereof, to be collected in the same manner as any unpaid City tax. The
Council may, however, appoint days on which certain designated
materials will be collected at the curb without charge.
§ C-77 AUBURN CODE § C-78
C:52
ARTICLE VII
Street, Sidewalk and Sewer Improvements
§ C-79. Paving streets; apportionment of costs.
The Council shall have power to pave, repave, surface and resurface streets,
highways and public places. It may determine and provide that the entire
cost of any such improvement shall be a general City charge or it may
determine and provide that only a part thereof, which part, however, shall in
no event be less than 50% of the entire cost, shall be a general City charge
and that the balance be raised by assessment upon the abutting property or
owners.
§ C-80. Scope of work in paving streets.
Unless otherwise provided by the Council, any such improvement shall
include street intersections, the furnishing, laying and setting of curbs,
relaying of sidewalks to required grade, grading the space between the
sidewalk and curb and doing such other work as is incidental or essential to
the completed improvement.
§ C-81. Designation of projects.
§ C-82. Improvement may be done by contract or City; procedure
for award of contracts.
Such improvement may be done by contract or by the City under the
direction of the City Manager, as the Council shall prescribe. If it is ordered
done by contract, the City Manager shall provide uniform terms and
conditions for bidding, fix the security to be given, advertise for sealed
proposals, receive, open at the time fixed, and tabulate such proposals and
A. Council to make determination. The Council may at any time designate
any street, highway or public place, or any part thereof, as one to be
paved, repaved, surfaced or resurfaced, and if it proposes that such
improvement be made partly as a general City charge and partly as a
charge or expense upon the abutting property, as herein provided, it
shall direct that plans and specifications for such proposed
improvement be made.
B. Hearing; apportionment of costs. After such plans and specifications
have been prepared and presented to the Council it shall order a
hearing thereon and, after such hearing, may determine to make such
improvement. It shall then fix the percentage of the entire cost to be
paid as a general City charge and the percentage to be paid by
assessment upon the abutting property or owner.
C. Conclusiveness of determination. The determination by the Council
whether an improvement to a street, highway or public place is a
paving, repaving, surfacing or resurfacing within the contemplation of
this article shall be conclusive.
§ C-79 CHARTER § C-82
C:53
report them to the Council, with such recommendation as he may have
to make. The Council shall designate the kind of improvement and the
material to be used and, if a satisfactory proposal is received, may direct the
execution of a contract for such improvement, in substantial accord with the
plans and specifications for the particular kind of improvement designated.
§ C-83. Determination of cost.
After completion of such work, upon the certificate of the City Manager, the
Council shall determine the entire cost of such improvement.
§ C-84. Payment by City and abutting owners.
After determining such entire cost, the Council may direct that the part
of such cost which is a general City charge be paid from any budget
appropriation for street improvement or such part of the cost may be
financed pursuant to the Local Finance Law. The Council may also provide
that any abutting owner liable for assessment on account of such
improvement be given an opportunity to pay his or her proper share of such
cost in advance of any issue of obligations and thereby be relieved from
subsequent assessment.13
§ C-85. Assessment and payment in installments by abutting owners
and City.
If obligations are sold to defray all or part of the expense of such
improvement, the Council shall ascertain the total amount of such bonds
and interest until the last bond matures and the amount thereof to be paid:
§ C-86. Other street improvements.
A. By the owner. By the abutting property, excluding, however, any
property which may have paid its proper part in advance, and order
that such amount be assessed as a local improvement upon such
abutting property, according to linear foot frontage, as herein provided
for local improvements, and be paid in substantially equal installments
corresponding to the duration of the bonds;
B. By the City. By the City, in case any part of the City's share of such
entire cost has been included in such bond issue, and shall direct that
such share be paid in the same number of substantially equal
installments, by including one such installment in each year's tax
budget thereafter until such issue is paid.
A. Authority of Council. The Council shall have the power to open, extend,
widen and straighten streets, highways and public lanes and to acquire
necessary lands and rights therefor and to fix and determine what
percentage of the total cost thereof shall be a general City charge and
13.Editor's Note: Original § 87, Bond issue reserved, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed by L. 1943, c. 710.
§ C-82 AUBURN CODE § C-86
C:54
§ C-87. New sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
what percentage shall be assessed as a local improvement upon real
property benefited by such improvement.
B. Apportionment of costs; hearing. When it is proposed to make such
improvement, the Council shall direct the preparation of plans therefor.
After the completion of such plans, if the cost of such improvement, as
determined, is to be paid in whole or in part by local improvement
assessment upon real property, it shall order a hearing thereon. After
such hearing, it may determine to make such improvement and provide
for the acquisition of necessary lands and rights and for the
performance of any necessary work in connection therewith and shall
fix and determine the percentage of cost to be paid as a general City
charge and the percentage to be paid by assessment as for a local
improvement upon real property according to the benefits received.
C. Determination of costs; financing; local assessments. Upon the
completion of such improvement, it shall determine the cost, which cost
may be financed pursuant to the Local Finance Law. The Council shall
direct the Assessor to assess the percentage of such cost (which cost
shall include the interest on any obligations issued to finance such
improvement) to be paid by assessment as for a local improvement
upon the real property benefited by such improvement as near as may
be in proportion to the benefits received and shall make suitable
provisions in the annual tax budgets for the payment of that part of such
cost as a general City charge.
A. Authority of Council. The Council may at any time it deems it advisable
direct that new sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or any of them, be laid on
any street or part thereof pursuant to plans and specifications therefor
prepared and adopted, so as to make a uniform improvement in said
street.
B. Public hearing; award of contract. Before determining to make such
improvement, the Council shall direct that a public hearing be given
upon such proposed improvement. After such public hearing, it may
determine to make such improvement either by contract or by the City
under the direction of the City Manager; if by contract, the City
Manager shall advertise for proposals and report, as herein provided.
After receipt of such proposals the Council may direct the execution of a
contract therefor.
C. Determination of cost; financing; local assessment. Upon the
completion of such work, it shall, upon the report of the City Manager,
determine the cost thereof, which cost may be financed pursuant to the
Local Finance Law. The Council shall certify to the Assessor the total
cost of such improvement (which cost shall include the interest on any
obligations issued to finance such improvement) and direct that the
same be assessed as a local improvement upon the abutting or
adjoining property which has not paid its share of such cost.
§ C-86 CHARTER § C-87
C:55
§ C-88. Requiring abutting owner or occupant to lay or repair
sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter.
§ C-89. Collection of cost from owner.
D. Exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Subsection D, or any
provisions of the Auburn Municipal Code, where no continuous
sidewalks exist on a street, any property owner desirous of installing a
driveway on to their premises shall be exempt from installing a
concrete sidewalk on a portion of the driveway as it would exist in the
event that sidewalks were present on said street. The property owner
desirous of installing said driveway shall obtain a permit from the City
of Auburn Code Enforcement Office, and shall be responsible for the
payment of any fee imposed thereon. [Added 6-26-2008 by Ord. No.
9-2008]
A. Authority of Council; performance of work by City where owner fails to
perform the same. The Council may require the making, laying and
grading of any sidewalk, street driveway between the sidewalk and
gutter, curb, or curb and gutter, and the relaying, repairing and
regrading of any unsightly, irregular, defective or poorly drained
sidewalk, street driveway, curb or gutter, by the owner and occupant, or
either, of any land in front of which it is desired to make such
improvement or repair and fix, determine and prescribe the width and
other dimensions thereof, the kind and quality of materials to be used,
and the width and length of the several pieces to compose the same and
provide that such improvement or repair be done within a fixed time of
not less than two weeks. In case such work or improvement is not done
within such time, it may cause the same to be done by the City Manager.
B. Determination of cost; hearing. Upon the completion of such work the
City Manager shall report the total cost thereof, including the expense
of serving any notices, advertising and all other expenses connected
therewith, and the Council, after notice of hearing to the owner or
occupant of such property on the matter of such cost, shall determine
such cost.
A. Adding to tax roll. Upon the determination of the cost of such
improvement, the Council may direct that the total cost be paid by the
owner and, if not paid within 30 days, that it, with 1% per month
additional, be added to the next installment of City tax, and thereafter
the same shall be, and be known as, tax, and shall be collected in the
same manner as any unpaid City tax.
B. Alternative procedure; assessing as local improvement. The Council
may also provide that such cost be paid by assessment as a local
improvement, by directing that it be included with the costs of like or
similar improvements to other parcels of property, and the City
Treasurer may be reimbursed for such costs from the proceeds of
obligations issued pursuant to the Local Finance Law for such
§ C-87 AUBURN CODE § C-89
C:56
§ C-90. Improvements of sidewalks, curbs and gutters at request of
owners.
The Council may by ordinance prescribe the manner and method in which
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or any of them, may be built, improved and
repaired for abutting owners who desire any such improvement done with
the aid of the City and may provide, by ordinance, for the determination of
the cost upon completion, for payment thereof and for the assessment of
such cost and its proportionate share of interest in any obligations issued
and of any other expense in connection therewith.
§ C-91. Sewerage system.
§ C-92. Assessment of costs for local improvements to sewerage
system.
If the improvement is not entirely for the benefit of the City at large, the
Council shall fix the amount to be raised by special assessment upon the
property benefited and the amount, if any, to be borne by the City and
direct such assessment by the Assessor as a local improvement according
to benefits received.
§ C-93. Assessment of cost to property owners. [Added 10-30-1997
by L.L. No. 2-1997]
At the request of the property owner to build, construct, reconstruct sewer
laterals in need of repair from the main to inside the structure situate
thereon, to have such work or improvement done by the City or by contract,
to pay for the same from City funds and assess such total costs against the
improvements. The Council shall determine the total amount of such
obligations with interest to final maturity and other expenses and by
resolution direct the Assessor to assess such amount upon such various
parcels as a local improvement proportionately according to the cost of
each improvement, as determined by the Council.
A. The sewerage system of the City, as now laid out and constituted,
whether by law, ordinance or resolution, is continued, with power in the
Council to change, alter and amend any sewerage improvement at any
time.
B. If the Council proposes to construct, build or rebuild any sewer, drain or
sewage treatment facility, or other improvements, it shall cause plans
and specifications therefor to be prepared and filed in the office of the
City Clerk. After such filing, and after a public hearing thereon, it may
determine to construct, build or rebuild such sewer, drain or sewage
treatment facility, or other improvement, and cause the work to be done
either by contract as herein provided or by the City under the direction
of the City Manager. Upon the completion thereof, it shall, upon the
certificate of the City Manager, determine the cost, which may be
financed pursuant to the Local Finance Law.
§ C-89 CHARTER § C-93
C:57
property benefited and to further provide that the cost of any such work or
improvement be paid at once or in annual installments as an assessment
upon the real property of said owner.
§ C-93 AUBURN CODE § C-93
C:58
ARTICLE VIII
Local Improvement Assessments
§ C-94. Definition.
The term "local improvement" shall mean any improvement, work or
benefit, whether done by the City under the direction of the City Manager or
by contract, the cost of which, or part thereof, by this Charter, by ordinance
of the Council, or otherwise by law, is to be borne by the abutting property,
or the property benefited, or its owner.
§ C-95. Certification of cost to be assessed.
If not otherwise provided by ordinance, after the completion of any local
improvement, the Council shall by resolution certify to the Assessor the part
of the total cost of such improvement to be assessed against the abutting
property, or the property benefited, with the exception of the property
which may already have paid its proper share of such improvement, which
such property shall be briefly described by name or number.
§ C-96. Assessment procedure.
§ C-97. Corrections; completion of assessment roll; warrant.
A. Preparation of assessment roll. Upon receipt of such resolution, the
Assessor shall forthwith proceed to assess the amount directed upon
the real property adjoining or abutting upon such improvement, or the
property benefited, as the case may be, including all real property
otherwise exempt from taxation, whether owned by charitable,
benevolent, religious or educational corporations, boards or societies,
or persons, but excluding any property which the Council, or the City
Manager, shall certify has paid its proper share, and shall make and
subscribe an assessment roll thereof.
B. Public hearing; notice. Upon completion of such assessment roll, the
Assessor shall fix a time of hearing thereon and shall cause notice
thereof to be published at least twice in a daily paper of the City, such
first publication being not less than five days before the day of hearing,
and shall, so far as practicable, cause notice thereof to be mailed to
each person appearing on such tentative roll at the time of the first
publication.
A. Conduct of hearing; corrections or changes; filing; rehearing. Upon
such hearing, the Assessor shall hear the objections of interested
parties and may adjourn from time to time to complete such hearing.
After such hearing he or she shall make such corrections, changes and
additions as appear to him or her fair and correct and complete and
verify such roll and file the same with the City Manager for his or her
approval. If the City Manager does not approve, he or she may return it
to the Assessor for a rehearing or for correction.
§ C-94 CHARTER § C-97
C:59
§ C-98. Payment in installments.
If by reason of this Charter, or by ordinance of the Council, or otherwise,
such assessment is payable in installments, such roll shall show the total
amount as well as the amount of each installment with the date it becomes
due and payable. If bonds are issued, unless otherwise directed, the number
of installments in which any local improvement assessment is payable shall
correspond to the number of years in the bond issue for such improvement.
§ C-99. Due dates for installments; lien; enforcement.
If bonds are issued, the first installment shall become due and payable two
months prior to the maturity of the first bond and each installment annually
thereafter. At the time each installment becomes due and payable it shall
become a lien upon the property upon or against which it is assessed,
enforceable and collectible by foreclosure, as a mortgage in default, by
action or by sale. If not paid within 30 days after the same becomes payable,
then 1% per month thereafter shall be added. If not paid at the time the next
City tax becomes payable, it, with all fees and additions, shall be added to
such tax against such property and become a part thereof and its payment
enforced by sale or other proceeding the same as any unpaid City tax.14
§ C-100. Determination of share of improvement to be borne by
benefited properties.
In paving, repaving, surfacing and resurfacing, the share of the abutting
property or the assessment against such property shall be determined
according to the linear or foot frontage; in sidewalk, curb and gutter
assessment, proportionately according to the cost of each improvement,
entering into the total of such bond issue; in all other matters, according
to the benefits received, unless otherwise directed by the Council. The
Council shall have the right and power to direct the principle to govern in
completing such assessments for local improvements.
§ C-101. Other improvements not specifically provided for.
In the case of any local improvement or benefit not herein specifically
provided for which is ordered and made or furnished by the City under any
power given herein or otherwise by law, the Council shall have power to
determine the cost thereof, the part to be paid as a general City charge
and the part to be paid by local assessment and to prescribe how, when
and against what property the same shall be assessed and to direct the
completion by the Assessor of an assessment thereof.
B. Warrant for collection. If the City Manager approves, he or she shall
sign such roll, together with a warrant to the City Treasurer, or officer
performing like duties, to collect the several amounts in such roll.
14.Editor's Note: Original § 102, Sewer district improvements in districts, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted since the City has only a Citywide sewerage system.
§ C-97 AUBURN CODE § C-102
C:60
§ C-102. Payment of assessment in one sum.
The Council may prescribe by ordinance so far as is practicable that at any
time after the completion of a local improvement any property owner who
desires to pay his or her proper or proportionate share of such improvement
in one sum may do so and that such property owner will thereby be relieved
from any local assessment therefor, anything in this Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding, and may direct the City Manager in reporting the cost of
such improvement to make a tentative return of the share of, or charge
against, each parcel of abutting property, excepting where the amount of
such share or charge is ultimately to be determined upon the principle
of benefit received, the purpose of this provision being to allow property
owners chargeable with a part of such cost to meet and pay such part in
a lump sum without the additional charge for interest arising from a bond
issue. If bonds are issued for such local improvement prior to the date of the
payment of such lump sum, such property owner shall, in addition thereto,
be charged with interest on such proportionate share at the rate payable on
the bonds issued therefor and up to and including the next succeeding date
on which interest on such bond issue becomes due and payable after the
payment of such lump sum.
§ C-102 CHARTER § C-102
C:61

ARTICLE IX
Police and Fire Departments
§ C-103. Departments established; administrative head; personnel.
There shall be a Police Department and a Fire Department. The City
Manager shall be the administrative head of each. The Council shall by
ordinance designate the number of persons, with their rank and salaries,
to be appointed to serve in each said Department. All appointed to serve in
the Police Department shall be known as police officers, and all appointed
to serve in the Fire Department as fire fighters.
§ C-104. Rules for management.
Subject to the ordinances of the Council, the City Manager shall make such
rules and regulations for the management of each department as he deems
advisable or necessary.
§ C-105. Records.
Records of all proceedings, appointments, removals and other activities
shall be kept for each department.
§ C-106. Disciplinary proceedings.
§ C-107. Powers of police officers.
Sworn officers of the Police Department shall possess the powers, perform
the duties and be subject to the liabilities of police officers pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Law and any other applicable laws of the State of New
York.
§ C-108. Police authority in City-owned property outside corporate
limits.
The City Manager may arrange to police and to preserve order in any park,
cemetery or other property owned, possessed or controlled by the City
A. Any member of either department may be reprimanded or suspended
with or without pay for a period not exceeding one month pursuant to
the Civil Service Law, by either the City Manager or the Chief of the
respective department under the City Manager. In case of suspension
by the Chief, such fact shall be immediately reported by him or her to
the City Manager, who shall have power to confirm, modify or revoke
such suspension.
B. The City Manager, pursuant to the Civil Service Law, shall have power
to remove or dismiss any member of either department at any time, but
no order of dismissal from service shall be made until an opportunity is
given to such member to be heard, upon a notice of six days after
charges preferred.
§ C-103 CHARTER § C-108
C:63
outside of the corporate limits of the City, and any such officer may make
arrest for any violation of law committed in or near any such park, cemetery
or other property.
§ C-109. Authority of Fire Chief and subordinates.
The Chief of the Fire Department and any of the members thereof acting
under him or her or by his or her direction, or that of the City Manager
or Fire Marshal, or person performing the duties corresponding to those of
the Fire Marshal, shall have the power in case of a fire or other emergency
to enter any building within said City for the purpose of examining the
same to ascertain the construction thereof, fire risk, exits, and other matters
concerning public safety and to extinguish any fire therein or in any
adjoining building. At any other time, they or any of them may do so with
the consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a warrant issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ C-110. Places of public assembly.
The City Manager shall have the power to compel the owner or lessee of
any theater, hotel, place of amusement or place where people congregate to
make such changes by way of additional means of exit, fire escapes, or both,
as may be required by law or state regulations and to provide and order
that until such changes shall be completed the same be closed to the public.
Action may be maintained in the name of the City to restrain, by injunction,
any violation of such order or regulation.
§ C-111. Police and fire pension funds.
A. The relief and pension funds of the Police and Fire Departments, with
their respective rules and regulations, are continued. The Council shall
have power to make annual appropriations to each such fund in the City
budget; to provide by ordinance for the management and control of
such funds by trustees or directors; to amend, alter and change existing
rules and regulations and to prescribe, adopt, and establish new rules
and regulations; and to provide for contributions thereto and
distributions therefrom.
B. All fines imposed on members of the respective departments, and gifts
in recognition of service, shall be paid to the credit of the respective
fund. The tax required to be paid by foreign fire insurance companies,
associations, individuals, and agents to the treasuries of fire
departments of cities and all similar taxes now or hereafter required by
any statute shall within the City of Auburn be paid to the City Treasurer
thereof, who shall place the same to the credit of the fire fighters' relief
and pension fund, except that he or she shall pay to the Treasurer of the
Fire Fighters Association of the State of New York 10% of such amount
so received for the support and maintenance of the Volunteer Fire
Fighters Home at Hudson, New York.
§ C-108 AUBURN CODE § C-112
C:64
§ C-112. Destruction of buildings deemed hazardous at fires;
reimbursement.
The City Manager, or Chief in charge of the Fire Department at any fire, may
order and direct the pulling down or destruction of any buildings which may
be deemed hazardous or likely to communicate fire to any other building or
buildings. No action shall be maintained either against the City of Auburn or
any person therefor, but the owner or any person interested in any building
so pulled down or destroyed or in any personal property therein may, within
three months, but not thereafter, apply to the Council by petition for relief
or reimbursement therefor, stating the interest of the petitioner in said
building or the personal property therein destroyed, with the particular
description of the property destroyed and its value.
§ C-113. Determination of just compensation to be paid.
The Council may agree with such petitioner as to the amount of just
compensation to be paid for any building or personal property so destroyed,
but in case the Council is unable to agree with any petitioner as to the
amount of just compensation, then said petitioner or the Council may make
application to the Supreme Court to ascertain the just compensation to be
paid to the said petitioner or owner of said building or personal property
therein destroyed in the same manner and to the same court as is provided
in Article 5 of the Eminent Domain Procedure Law.15
§ C-114. Payment of compensation or judgment; financing;
assessment as local improvement.
Upon the entry of the judgment of the Supreme Court, or upon an
agreement with any petitioner for compensation, the amount due the
petitioner may be financed pursuant to the Local Finance Law, and the
Council may determine how such award, and any interest to grow due
thereon, and other expenses connected therewith, shall be paid, whether
the same shall be a general City charge or a charge to be assessed entirely
by the property benefited as a local improvement, or in part a general
City charge and in part a local improvement charge, and, if in part a local
improvement, it may direct that the same be assessed and collected as
such upon the property benefited in the manner herein prescribed for local
improvement assessments or in any other manner it may deem just and
equitable. If a general City charge, it shall provide for the payment of the
same by annual installments thereof in the annual tax budget.
15.Editor's Note: Original § 117, relating to powers of commissioners under the
Condemnation Law of the State of New York, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted since this law was superseded by the Eminent Domain Procedure Law.
§ C-112 CHARTER § C-114
C:65

ARTICLE X
Health
§ C-115. Abolition of Department of Health.
The City of Auburn, having elected to become a part of the Cayuga County
Health District, hereby abolishes the City Department of Health as a local
health district, and all powers of such local board of health shall devolve
upon the Board of Health of the Cayuga County Health District, and all
powers of the local health officer of the City health district shall devolve
upon the County Health Commissioner.16
16.Editor's Note: Original §§ 120 and 121, which immediately followed this section, were
deleted as no longer applicable to the city.
§ C-115 CHARTER § C-115
C:67

ARTICLE XI
Water
§ C-116. Council to have supervision of water system.17
The Council shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to take over,
arrange and provide for the management, control and operation of the
entire water system and plant of the City of Auburn to furnish and supply,
and to continue to furnish and supply, a sufficient quantity of good and
wholesome water to the City of Auburn and the people thereof, except that
it shall not enact or enforce any local law or ordinance or resolution for
any purpose pertaining in any manner to the fluoridation of the water under
the control of the City or of the Water Department of the City government.
For this purpose the Council shall have power to adopt ordinances, rules
and regulations for the protection and preservation of such waterworks,
system, property, watershed, and the sources from which such water is
furnished and to acquire such additional lands and rights as it may deem
essential, to purchase, install and operate machinery, pumps, mains and
all other equipment and property necessary or essential in its judgment
to furnish and supply such water and to perform and discharge the duties
herein imposed and to exercise the powers herein conferred. It may also
furnish and supply water to owners and occupants of property lying outside
of, but adjacent to, the City of Auburn.
§ C-117. Water Department; powers and duties of City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the Water
Department. He or she shall appoint such officers and employees as the
Council decides are needful or essential in the conduct and management
of such Department, at salaries to be fixed by the Council, and may from
time to time change or remove any such appointees or employees. The Civil
Service Law, rules and regulations shall apply so far as practicable to all
positions in this Department.
§ C-118. Water Department budget.
A. On or before the first day of June in each year, the City Manager shall
prepare and submit to the Council of said City an estimate or proposed
budget for the Water Department of said City for the fiscal year
beginning the following year July 1, it being the intention of this section
to make the fiscal year of said Water Department the same as the City's
fiscal year as provided in this Charter. Such estimate or proposed
budget shall show, so far as ascertainable:
(1) The probable revenue to the Water Department from all sources.
(2) An itemized statement of the amount needed for all operating
expenses of said Department, including a sum for contingent
17.Editor's Note: Original § 124, which immediately preceded this section, was deleted since
the provision relating to a Water Board expired 1-1-1921.
§ C-116 CHARTER § C-118
C:69
§ C-119. Rules, regulations and ordinances.
The Council shall adopt such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be
necessary or appropriate in the management and operation of the Water
Department.
§ C-120. Water rates, rents and charges.
§ C-121. Acquisition of water system by City.
All property and rights acquired by the Water Board in the management and
operation of such water system under Chapter 479 of the Laws of 1892, as
revised and supplemented by Chapter 36 of the Laws of 1894, as amended,
shall be, and continue to be, the property of the City of Auburn in whatever
name such property or rights were or may be acquired, and the City of
expenses and a sum for the payment of principal and interest on its
bonded indebtedness.
B. The Council shall thereupon order public hearings thereon and direct
that notice thereof shall be published at least twice in a daily
newspaper published in said City not more than four days before the
date of such hearing. After hearing any taxpayer at said hearing in
reference thereto, the Council may adopt such estimates as submitted
or increase, diminish, reject or otherwise modify or amend the same
and adopt the estimates as so modified or amended. When such
estimates as presented or amended shall have been adopted, the same
shall be entered in full in the minutes of the Council and published in its
proceedings, and the several sums in such final estimates so adopted
shall be and become appropriated for the several purposes named in
such estimates. Such estimates shall be known as the "Water
Department budget."
A. Council to establish water rates. The Council shall determine and fix the
rates, rents and charges and change or amend the same, from time to
time, and shall have power to arrange and direct, by ordinance, that all
delinquent water rates, rentals and charges may be added to the annual
City tax on the property to or for which such water was furnished or
service rendered, after a hearing thereon to the owner of such property.
The Council shall have power to provide for such hearing and to adopt
rules and make provisions to govern and control the same.
B. Use of income. The income from water rates, rents and charges and the
proceeds from the sale of water bonds shall be kept separate and apart
from other City funds and revenues and shall be used only for the
upkeep, maintenance, extension and benefit of the water system,
including the sinking fund for the retirement of water bonds, and the
payment of bonds, and for the payment of earnings to which the City of
Auburn may be entitled under and by virtue of § 94 of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York, from and of the operation of
the Water Department of said City.
§ C-118 AUBURN CODE § C-121
C:70
Auburn shall succeed to all property and rights owned or possessed by the
said Water Board and be and become the owner thereof. The Council shall
provide for the payment of all obligations of the said Water Board owing
on January 1, 1921, including water bonds, and for the maintenance of the
sinking fund for the retirement of water bonds, as required by said repealed
water acts.
§ C-122. Assessment of cost to property owners. [Added 10-30-1997
by L.L. No. 3-1997]
At the request of the property owner to construct, build, reconstruct water
service pipes in need of repair from the main to the meter, to have such
work or improvement done by the City or by contract, to pay for the same
from City funds and assess such total costs against the property benefited
and to further provide that the cost of any such work or improvement
be paid at once or in annual installment as an assessment upon the real
property of said owner.
§ C-121 CHARTER § C-122
C:71

ARTICLE XII
The Soule Cemetery
§ C-123. Cemetery continued; authority of City.
The cemetery of the City of Auburn constituted under Chapter 57 of the
Laws of 1880 and known as "The Soule Cemetery" is hereby continued, and
the City is hereby authorized and empowered to hold and to continue to
hold all the lands, rights and property acquired by it in connection with such
cemetery and generally to manage and provide for such cemetery. All lands
and rights acquired by the City, and all sales and conveyances of lots in such
cemetery for burial purposes, pursuant to the provisions of such Act are
hereby recognized, ratified and confirmed.
§ C-124. Cemetery lands part of City territory.
§ C-125. Cemetery lands exempt from taxation.
All such cemetery lands and property shall be exempt from all taxation,
including school, highway and local improvement assessments.
§ C-126. Management and regulations.
A. All the lands and rights included within such cemetery, whether
acquired under or pursuant to said Chapter 57 of the Laws of 1880 or
otherwise, shall continue to be deemed and held as a part of the
territory of such City, in addition to any other lands herein described as
constituting the City of Auburn. All of such land shall continue to be
under the jurisdiction of the City and be subject to the jurisdiction of its
courts and officers as fully to all intents and purposes as any part of said
City, and all the provisions of this Charter shall apply thereto, so far as
practicable or available.
B. Any additional land contiguous to such cemetery hereafter acquired for
the purposes of such cemetery and used in connection therewith may
be annexed to the City of Auburn pursuant to Article 17 of the General
Municipal Law.
A. Council to provide for management. The Council shall provide for the
erection, construction and maintenance of all necessary or desirable
buildings, vaults, roadways, paths, and fences and for the planting of
shrubs, trees and grass and for other ornamentation; provide for
surveys, maps, and plots and make division into lots and parcels; sell
lots and plots for burial purposes and fix the price thereof; permit burial
without charge where means to pay are not available; make
appropriation in the annual tax budget for its support and upkeep and
needed repairs to grounds, buildings and approaches and give effect to
any of the powers or duties herein specified; provide for an accurate
system of accounting covering all financial transactions of the
cemetery; accept and receive money, funds and property for such
cemetery, in trust or otherwise, and hold and administer the same;
§ C-123 CHARTER § C-126
C:73
§ C-127. Law repealed in part.
Chapter 57 of the Laws of 1880, excepting § 1 and the last sentence of § 7, is
hereby repealed, but such repeal shall in no manner affect, abridge, alter or
impair any right of the City therein or any right or interest acquired by any
person in or to said cemetery, or to any lot therein, or in or to any structure
or property erected thereon.18
regulate the use of such cemetery, interments, disinterments, and the
erection of structures, monuments, fences and markers; generally
provide for the protection of such cemetery and its property and the
property and rights of individual lot owners; regulate and control the
uses thereof; and prohibit the use thereof for anything other than for
cemetery purposes.
B. Ordinances, rules and regulations. The Council shall have power to
exercise any of the foregoing powers, rights and duties by ordinance,
rules and regulations and to provide for the violation thereof by fine or
imprisonment, or both. All provisions of this Charter in reference to
ordinances shall apply to any such cemetery ordinance.
18.Editor's Note: Original Art. XIV, City Court, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted as superseded by L. 1972, c. 543 and the Uniform City Court Act.
§ C-126 AUBURN CODE § C-127
C:74
ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous
§ C-128. Officer prevailing in action entitled to double the costs.
Every person elected or appointed to any office under this Charter who shall
be sued for any act done or commenced by him or her by virtue of his or
her office and who shall have final judgment rendered in his or her favor,
whereby he or she shall be entitled to costs, shall recover twice the amount
of his or her taxed costs.
§ C-129. Prior written notice of defects.
A. Legislative declaration. Where claims for bodily injury or damage to
property are asserted against the City arising out of alleged defective
conditions of property owned or constructed by or in the care, custody
or control of the City, adequate prior notice to the City of any such
conditions is of substantial importance to allow the City the opportunity
to investigate and correct such conditions, if found to exist. Whether
the City has received actual or constructive notice of such alleged
defective conditions is often a question of fact which can lead to
uncertainty and possible unwarranted finding of liability against the
City. To assure that the City receives actual prior notice of an alleged
unsafe or defective condition and is able to respond in a prompt and
reasonable manner, such prior notice shall be in writing. It is the
purpose of this section to require that notice of unsafe or defective
conditions of City property be given to the City by prior written notice
actually received by the City.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words,
phrases and terms and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
CITY HIGHWAY — A highway, street, road, cul-de-sac, drive or other
roadway maintained by the City, whether or not such highway has been
formally dedicated to the City. This definition shall include bridges,
shoulders, curbs, gutters, culverts, signs and other traffic control
devices and all other things appurtenant to a highway.
CITY PROPERTY — All City highways, bridges, culverts, sidewalks,
parking areas, playgrounds, parks and all other real property owned,
leased, used, occupied or maintained by the City or over or through
which the City has an easement or right-of-way and all buildings,
structures, fixtures, personal property and appurtenances thereto
owned, leased, used, occupied or maintained by the City.
UNSAFE CONDITION — Any defective, hazardous, dangerous or
obstructed condition, including such conditions as may have been
created by an act or omission of any employee or officer of the City, and
including such conditions as may result from inadequate or improper
design, maintenance or repair or from the existence of snow or ice.
§ C-128 CHARTER § C-129
C:75
C. Written notice of defective condition required for injuries on highways
and City property. No civil action shall be maintained against the City of
Auburn for damages or injuries to person or property sustained by
reason of any highway, bridge, culvert or any other property owned by
the City of Auburn being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed unless written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous
or obstructed condition of such highway, bridge, culvert or any other
property owned by the City of Auburn was actually given to the City
Manager and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time
after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or
obstruction complained of, and no such action shall be maintained for
damages or injuries to persons or property sustained solely in
consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any highway, bridge,
culvert or any other property owned by the City of Auburn unless
written notice thereof, specifying the particular place, was actually
given to the City Manager and there was a failure or neglect to cause
such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice.
D. Prior written notice required. No civil action shall be maintained
against the City or against the City's officers or employees for personal
injury, including death or damage to property, related to, caused by,
resulting from or arising out of any property owned or constructed by
the City, or involving property in the care, custody or control of the City,
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous, obstructed or
improperly maintained unless, prior to the occurrence of the injury or
damage, the City shall have been given actual written notice of the
alleged condition complained of and shall have failed or neglected
within a reasonable time after such written notice to repair or remove
the condition.
E. Notice; contents. The notice required by this section shall contain the
following:
(1) The full name and address of the claimant;
(2) The particular property of the City and its location claimed to be
defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed;
(3) The time such condition was first observed or made known to the
claimant;
(4) A statement of the particulars in which the property is defective,
out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed.
F. Service of notice. The written notice provided for by this section shall
be served by personal service within the City of Auburn upon the City
Manager or his (or her) designated representative.
G. Record of notice; presentation to the Council.
§ C-129 AUBURN CODE § C-129
C:76
§ C-130. Inhabitants not disqualified from acting as judge in
actions involving City.
No person shall be an incompetent judge by reason of his or her being an
inhabitant or freeholder in the City of Auburn in any action or proceeding in
which said City is an interested party.
§ C-131. City considered town for certain purposes.
(1) The City Manager shall keep and maintain a record of all written
notices received pursuant to this section, which record shall state
the date of the receipt of the notice, the nature and location of the
conditions stated to exist and the name and address of the person
from whom the notice is received. The record of each notice shall
be preserved for a period of at least three years after the date it is
received.
(2) The City Manager shall cause all written notices received by him
(or her) pursuant to this section to be presented to the Council
within five days of the receipt thereof or at the next Council
meeting, whichever shall be sooner.
H. Repeal of existing requirements not intended. Nothing contained in this
section shall be held to repeal or modify or waive any existing
requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to these
classes of actions, but, on the contrary, this section shall be held to be
additional requirements to the right to maintain such action, nor shall
anything herein contained be held to modify any existing rule of law
relative to the question of contributory negligence or to impose upon
the City any greater duty or obligation than otherwise imposed by law.
A. The said City, except as is otherwise in this Charter provided, shall be
considered one of the towns of Cayuga County. The fees and expenses
of apprehending, examining, trying and committing offenders against
any law of the state in said City, and of their confinement, properly
chargeable against the County of Cayuga shall be audited, allowed and
paid by the County Legislature of said county in the same manner as if
such expenses had been incurred in any town in said County of Cayuga.
B. To facilitate the presentation of the claim of the City against the County
of Cayuga for such fees and expenses, the City Judges shall keep an
accurate record of all felony and other cases which are properly
chargeable against the County of Cayuga and of the fees and expenses
of examining, trying and committing persons under such charges, and
the head of the Police Department shall keep a like record of the fees
and expenses of apprehending all persons so charged.19
19.Editor's Note: The original last paragraph of this section, pertaining to the selection of
jurors, was deleted as covered by the Judiciary Law.
§ C-129 CHARTER § C-132
C:77
§ C-132. Service of notice on corporations, associations, copartners,
joint tenants or tenants in common.
When corporations, associations, copartners, joint tenants or tenants in
common are to be served with a notice under any provisions of this Charter
or under the direction of the Council, it shall be deemed a sufficient, valid
and legal service of such notice to serve a copy thereof upon the president,
cashier, treasurer, one of the directors or the managing agent of such
corporation or association or upon any one of such copartners, joint tenants
or tenants in common.
§ C-133. Affidavits of service or publication of notice.
When filed in the office of the City Clerk, an affidavit of service of any notice,
either personally or by mail, as required, or the affidavit of publication made
by the publisher, his or her clerk, editor or foreman, showing the required
publication, shall be presumptive evidence of such service or publication, as
the case may be, in all courts and places. A certified copy of such affidavit
made by the City Clerk may be read in evidence with like force and effect as
the original on file in his office.
§ C-134. Manner of reading acts of Council in evidence.
Every act, ordinance, bylaw, public regulation, resolution or proceeding of
the Council of the City of Auburn may be read in evidence in all courts and
places in this state either:
§ C-135. Present officers and employees continued.
All elective officers of the City in office at the time this Charter takes
effect shall be continued for the balance of the terms for which elected,
respectively, except as herein specially provided. All other officers and
employees in the service of the City at the time of the adoption of this
Charter shall be continued the same as though originally appointed
hereunder.
§ C-136. Ordinances, regulations and bylaws continued.
All ordinances, regulations and bylaws of the City, including those
established and adopted by the Water Board of the City, in force at the time
of the adoption of this Charter and not inconsistent herewith are continued
in full force and effect. Any ordinance, regulation or rule inconsistent with
the provisions of this Charter is hereby repealed.
A. From the record of the proceedings of the Council;
B. From a copy of such act, ordinance, bylaw, public regulation, resolution
or proceeding certified by the Mayor or City Clerk, with the Seal of the
City affixed; or
C. From the printed volume of ordinances, bylaws and public regulations
printed by authority of the Council.
§ C-132 AUBURN CODE § C-137
C:78
§ C-137. Acts to be done by officer not provided for.
Wherever in this Charter it is provided that any act or thing shall be done
by or any powers are conferred or duties imposed upon any officer for
whom specific provision is not made either in this Charter or in the Optional
City Government Law, then such act or thing shall be done by and such
powers shall be conferred and duties imposed upon such officer as may be
appointed pursuant to ordinance, or otherwise, to perform like or similar
duties. Wherever in any ordinance, regulation, resolution or bylaw or in any
statute it is provided that any act or thing may be done or performed or
any license, permit or permission granted by any body, officer or head of
a department, the same may be done, performed or granted by such body,
department or officer if continued under this Charter or any ordinance, and,
if not so continued, then by the body, department or officer exercising and
discharging like powers, functions or duties.
§ C-138. Exercise of powers pertaining to franchises, bonds,
contracts or agreements.
§ C-139. Charter to supplement Optional City Government Law.
The qualified voters of the City of Auburn having heretofore adopted the
simplified form of government defined as Plan C under the Optional City
Government Law, known as "Chapter 444 of the Laws of 1914," this Charter
is intended, besides consolidating and revising the special acts relating
to the City of Auburn and constituting its Charter as there defined, to
supplement the provisions of such Optional City Government Law,
particularly in reference to the plan therein named and defined as Plan C,
and is to be considered and construed in connection therewith, in extension
thereof and as supplemental thereto, and the provisions of such general law
shall be applicable to the City as far as may be.
A. Wherever it is provided in any franchise given by the City, or in any
bond, contract or other agreement in favor of the City, that any act or
thing shall be done or demand or notice made or given by any officer of
the City therein named, such act may be done or demand or notice
made or given by the officer, body or department named, if there is
such, and, if not, by the officer, board or body possessing or discharging
like powers, functions or duties.
B. Such franchise, bond, contract or agreement shall not in any manner be
impaired by the passage of this Charter but shall continue in full force,
and the duties imposed and the powers conferred in and by any such
franchise, bond, contract or agreement may thereafter be exercised
and discharged by the officer, body or department upon whom or which
is conferred like powers, functions or duties under the provisions of this
Charter or any ordinance, without regard to the official name or
designation of such officer, body or department.
§ C-137 CHARTER § C-140
C:79
§ C-140. When effective.20
This Charter shall take effect immediately.21
20.Editor's Note: The Charter became law 5-3-1920 with the approval of the Governor.
21.Editor's Note: The Charter Addendum, containing portions of the Optional City
Government Law, is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ C-140 AUBURN CODE § C-140
C:80
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C-140
1:81

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-8-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the 1991 Municipal Code of the City of Auburn, as adopted 3-28-1991 by
Local Law No. 2-1991, and subsequent local laws and ordinances of the City
of Auburn, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of the Charter and Chapters 1 through 305, together with an Appendix,
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the City of Auburn," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws and
ordinances contained in the Code of the City of Auburn to any other local
law or ordinance appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed
to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number where such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local law or
ordinance had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the 1991 Municipal Code and subsequent local laws and ordinances
in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this local law,
are intended as a continuation of such local laws and ordinances and not
as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior local law or ordinance. All such provisions
are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as
to their adoption by the City Council of the City of Auburn, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Auburn in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Auburn prior to the effective date of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:83
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Auburn or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Auburn.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Auburn.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Auburn providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Auburn or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Auburn appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of Auburn
or other instruments or evidence of the City's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for City employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the City.
N. Any local law or ordinance establishing an economic development zone.
O. Any local law or ordinance establishing a drug-free school zone.
P. Any local law or ordinance providing for a retirement incentive
program.
Q. Any local law or ordinance establishing personnel policies and
regulations, including the Management Ordinance and all amendments
thereto.
§ 1-4 AUBURN CODE § 1-4
1:84
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Auburn and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local
law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk of the
City of Auburn by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Auburn, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local
law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Auburn" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code of the City of Auburn required to be filed in
R. Ordinance No. 25-1995, establishing a sales and use tax, and all
amendments thereto.
S. Any local law adopted subsequent to 4-1-2001.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:85
the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the
intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes,
local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Auburn or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Auburn to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws and ordinances for
publication as the Code of the City of Auburn, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws or ordinances have been made,
except as provided in Subsection B. Certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the City Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws and
ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following amendments are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this local law:
(1) Throughout the Code, references to the "City Engineer" are
amended to read "Superintendent of Engineering Services."22
(2) In Chapter 1, § 1-14, the definition of "Superintendent of Water and
Sewage Treatment" is amended to read as follows:
22.Editor's Note: In accordance with Subsection B(1), any references in the Code to the "City
Engineer" will be revised to read "Superintendent of Engineering Services" during routine
supplementation.
§ 1-8 AUBURN CODE § 1-11
1:86
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Code of the City of Auburn, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES — The City officer in charge
of the water supply system, sewage treatment, solid waste and
hydropower.
(3) In Chapter 1, § 1-14, the definition of "City Engineer" is amended to
read as follows:
SUPERINTENDENT OF ENGINEERING SERVICES — The head
of the Engineering Department which oversees contract services
for survey, design and construction management; building
maintenance; and streetlighting.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:87

ARTICLE II
Use and Construction
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as §§ 1.2, 1.3 and 1.8
through 1.15 of the 1991 Code]
§ 1-14. Definitions and word usage.
A. Specific terms. As used in this Code, unless the context or subject
matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSESSOR OR CITY ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the City of Auburn.
CHARTER — The Auburn City Charter.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Auburn.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Auburn.
CITY COMPTROLLER — The City Comptroller of the City of Auburn and
serves as the Chief Fiscal Officer.
CITY JUDGE — The Administrative City Judge, the Associate City Judge
or Acting City Judge while presiding over the City Court of Auburn.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Auburn.
CITY, THIS CITY OR CITY OF AUBURN — The City of Auburn in the
County of Cayuga and State of New York.
CITY TREASURER — The City Treasurer of the City of Auburn and
serves as the custodian of all City funds.
CODE, THIS CODE OR MUNICIPAL CODE — The City of Auburn
Municipal Code.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The legal officer of the City of Auburn.
COUNCILOR — A duly elected member of the Council, except the
Mayor.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL — The elective legislative and governing
body of the City of Auburn.
COUNTY — The County of Cayuga in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Cayuga in the
State of New York.
COUNTY LEGISLATURE — The duly constituted legislative body of the
County of Cayuga in the State of New York.
DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES — The City officer in charge
of the water supply system, sewage treatment, solid waste and
hydropower.[Amended 2-28-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION — The Director of Parks and
Recreation of the City of Auburn.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:89
DIRECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURE — The Director of Weights
and Measure of the County of Cayuga.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of a local law, ordinance, code or
regulations or parts thereof, for which he or she is so designated.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief for the City of Auburn.
LAW — A state statute, charter, local law, ordinance, or resolution.
LOCAL LAW — A law adopted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule
Law or to other authorization of a state statute or the Charter by
the Council, or proposed by a Charter Commission or by petition, and
ratified by a popular vote, as provided in Article 4 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law or as provided in a state statute, the Charter or local
law, but shall not mean or include an ordinance, resolution or other
similar act of the Council or of any other board or body of this City.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Auburn.
MUNICIPAL CODE — See "Code."
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Auburn.
ORDINANCE — A legislative act of the Council which is permanent in
nature, unless specifically self-limiting, general in its application and
may or may not contain penal provisions for its violation as enacted in
accordance with the provisions of the Auburn City Charter or state law.
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being used.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot,
bathing beach, public park or such other public place as defined by
§ 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
RESOLUTION — A legislative act of the Council which is limited in
its application or of a temporary nature, or both, and shall include all
orders, rules, motions, and all other legislative acts except local laws
and ordinances.
STATE — The State of New York.
SUPERINTENDENT OF ENGINEERING SERVICES — The head of the
Engineering Department which oversees contract services for survey,
design and construction management; building maintenance; and
streetlighting.[Amended 2-28-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of
Public Works of the City of Auburn.
§ 1-14 AUBURN CODE § 1-14
1:90
§ 1-15. Rules of construction.
§ 1-16. Annotations and material contained in brackets.
Any material contained in brackets shall not be deemed to be a part of this
Code. Such material contained therein is intended to show the adoption
date, effective date and comments on any changes. Likewise, any
commentaries, footnotes, cross-references, citations of authority or other
annotations shall not be deemed a part of this Code but are inserted
editorially solely to assist in the use and interpretation of this Code.
§ 1-17. Conflicting provisions.
Wherever the requirements of any chapter or portion thereof are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule,
regulation, chapter or other enactment, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standards shall govern unless a contrary intent is
expressly stated.
§ 1-18. General penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the violation of any chapter, rule or
regulation or any specific provision or provisions thereof adopted by the
Council as a part of this Code shall be deemed a violation against such
B. Applicability of the General Construction Law. Words not otherwise
above described and defined in the General Construction Law shall
have the same meanings as defined therein.
C. Names of officers, boards, departments, commissions and other
agencies. The names of officers, boards, departments, commissions and
other agencies used in this Code shall be construed as though the
words "of the City of Auburn, New York" were added unless the context
or subject matter otherwise requires.
D. Other words. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise
specifically defined shall be construed in the manner that they are
normally used unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise,
but words that have acquired a technical meaning in law and are so
used shall be construed and understood in accordance with such
meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires
it.
D. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:91
chapter, rule, regulation, or provisions of this Code punishable by a fine not
to exceed $250 or imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment; provided, however, that for the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, such violation shall
be deemed a misdemeanor and for such purpose only all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violation, except the right to
a jury trial. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate violation.
§ 1-19. Failure of officers or employees to perform duties.
The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official
act imposed by this Code shall not be an offense and shall not subject such
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision
of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided therefor.
§ 1-20. Deputies, assistants and representatives.
Wherever any officer of the City is granted certain powers or duties or
is designated as the enforcement officer of a specific chapter or portion
thereof, it shall also be construed to include the deputies, assistants and
representatives of such officer as may be designated, delegated or
authorized by such officer to exercise such powers or duties. While acting
within the scope of their employment, it shall be presumed that all acts
performed by such deputies, assistants and representatives were duly
delegated and authorized.
§ 1-21. Supplementation.
§ 1-22. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate
the purposes for which this Code and the ordinances contained herein are
enacted.
A. It is intended that appropriate and compatible titles, chapter and
section numbers, and catch lines shall be used in enacting any new
ordinances or local laws of a general nature by the Council and which
are to be a part of this Code. However, in case of the failure to provide
the same in any ordinance or local law adopted by the Council, they may
be provided editorially and read before any court, except that the catch
lines shall not be used in interpreting the meaning of any section or part
thereof but shall be considered only for the purpose of facilitating the
use of this Code.
B. In case of amendments to existing provisions in this Code which do not
conform to the format contained in this Code, they may be reworded
editorially to conform to the format contained therein, provided that no
change in the meaning or intent of such amendment shall be made.
§ 1-18 AUBURN CODE § 1-22
1:92
Chapter 5
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 5-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Appearance Tickets
Law of the City of Auburn."
§ 5-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize certain public servants of the
City of Auburn to issue appearance tickets pursuant to § 150.20 of the
Criminal Procedure Law and Paragraph (a) of Subdivision 4 of § 10 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law in order to more effectively administer and
enforce certain provisions of the City of Auburn Municipal Code and state
statutes.
§ 5-3. Authority to issue appearance tickets.
The following public servants are hereby authorized and empowered to
issue and serve appearance tickets, provided that the issuance thereof is
made pursuant to any state statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation
relating to parking, licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention
and safety, health and sanitation, and building, zoning, and planning:
A. Superintendent of Engineering Services.
B. Building Inspector.
C. Housing Code Inspector.
D. Plumbing Inspector.
E. Electrical Inspector.
F. Fire Inspector.
G. Dog Control Officer.
H. Parking meter enforcement personnel.
I. Landfill Supervisor. [Amended 10-16-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
J. Refuse collection enforcement personnel. [Added 10-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 8-201423]
K. Assistant of any of the above officers.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection J
as Subsection K.
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:93
§ 5-4. Issuance of appearance tickets.
Any of the above public servants in the performance of his or her duties may
issue and serve an appearance ticket when he or she has reasonable cause
to believe that a person has committed a misdemeanor or has committed
a petty offense, as defined in the Criminal Procedure Law, in his or her
presence relating to any of the following subjects:
§ 5-5. Form of appearance ticket.
Every appearance ticket that is issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall include the following:
Chapter 11
A. Nonmoving traffic regulations.
B. Chapter 104 titled "Animals."
C. Chapter 125 titled "Building Construction and Fire Prevention" and the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. Chapter 153 titled "Electricians."
E. Chapter 169 titled "Flood Damage Prevention."
F. Chapter 182 titled "Housing Standards."
G. Chapter 225, Part 2 titled "Subdivision of Land."
H. Chapter 242 titled "Sanitary Sewers."
I. Chapter 254 titled "Solid Waste."
J. Chapter 259 titled "Streets and Public Places."
K. Chapter 297 titled "Water Service."
L. Chapter 305 titled "Zoning."
M. Any other state statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation the
public servant is required or authorized to enforce.
A. Name and address of party to whom the appearance ticket is issued,
when known.
B. Citation of law and appropriate section or sections allegedly violated.
C. Place and date of alleged violation.
D. Place, date and time that the party is to appear in court and name of
court.
E. Date of issuance of appearance ticket.
F. Title and signature of issuing officer.
§ 5-4 AUBURN CODE § 5-5
1:94
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 33.
Records — See Ch. 75.
Planning Board — See Ch. 225.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:95

ARTICLE I
Parks and Recreation Commission
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as § 2.3 of the 1991 Code]
§ 11-1. Membership; appointment; terms of office. [Amended
3-16-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000]
The Parks and Recreation Commission, consisting of 15 members, shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of City Council. The respective terms
of the members first appointed shall be one, two and three years from and
after appointment, and their successors shall be appointed for a term of
three years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors
in office, except in the case of a vacancy, other than expiration of term
of office, where the appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired
term.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1
1:97

ARTICLE II
Merit Award Board
[Adopted 5-16-1991]
§ 11-2. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 88-a, a Merit Award
Board is hereby established in and for the City.
§ 11-3. Membership; appointment; vacancies.
§ 11-4. Powers and duties.
The Merit Award Board shall perform all the duties and shall have all of
the powers prescribed by General Municipal Law § 88-a and such other and
further powers as may be conferred upon the Board by this article or by
such amendments to this article as may from time to time be enacted by the
City Council.
§ 11-5. Rules and regulations.
The Merit Award Board shall adopt rules and regulations to provide for the
rewarding of employees of the City of Auburn.
§ 11-6. Majority vote required to reward employee.
The determination of the Merit Award Board to reward an employee shall
be by a majority vote, and all three members shall constitute a quorum.
A. The Merit Award Board shall consist of three members consisting of the
Mayor, Corporation Counsel and one Councilor who shall be appointed
by the City Council. The term of the Councilor so appointed shall be for
two years.
B. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the
Councilor whose term becomes vacant. Such appointment to fill said
vacancy shall be made in the same manner as the original appointment.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:99

ARTICLE III
Attendance Requirements
[Adopted 2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]
§ 11-7. Office to be deemed vacant upon failure to attend meetings.
The office of any member of a City board, commission, committee or
authority, holding said office by appointment of the City Council, Mayor
or City Manager, who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings
of such board, commission, committee, or authority, or who misses four
meetings within a twelve-month period, unless such absence is for good
cause and is excused by the Chairman or other presiding officer prior to
said meeting thereof, may be deemed vacant at such time for purposes
of the nomination and appointment of a successor. Boards, commissions,
committees and/or authorities which have their own bylaws may adopt more
stringent standards, should they desire.
§ 11-8. Notification of City Clerk.
It shall be the responsibility of the Chairperson of a City board, commission,
committee or authority to notify the City Clerk if a member of his or her
body has failed to comply with the attendance requirements contained
herein.
§ 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8
1:101

ARTICLE IV
Historic Sites Commission
[Adopted 1-16-2000 by Ord. No. 1-2000]
§ 11-9. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Historic
Sites Commission Ordinance."
§ 11-10. Conflicts with state law.
In the event of conflict of any provisions in this article and Articles 31,
33, 35 and 37 of the New York State Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law, the provisions of the New York State Parks, Recreation
and Historic Preservation Law shall control. It is intended by the enactment
of this article that the procedures sat forth herein shall be in addition to
and complementary to the New York State Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law.
§ 11-11. Findings; policy.
The City of Auburn is rich in cultural and natural resources. These
resources offer educational, inspirational and recreational benefits for
present and future generations. It is hereby declared the policy of the
City of Auburn to preserve these resources through their identification,
interpretation, development and use. The City Council created the Historic
Park Task Force by Resolution No. 116 of 1998. This organization met and
made a presentation to the Auburn City Council on April 29, 1999, and
recommended that a permanent commission be created to carry on the
work of this group. The City of Auburn became a White House Millennium
Community in 1999.
§ 11-12. Establishment; appointment.
There shall be an Historic Sites Commission appointed by the Mayor with
approval of the majority of City Council.
§ 11-13. Purpose and goals.
The Historic Sites Commission shall have as its purpose and goals, including
but not limited to, the development of a tourism strategy for the City of
Auburn; development of a plan to link all historic sites in the City of Auburn
for marketing and promotional purposes; endeavoring towards becoming
a New York State Heritage Area; developing a Visitors' Center; review
and revision of all promotional literature and signage; and development of
special historical-related events.
§ 11-14. Membership; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
§ 11-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-14
1:103
A. Membership. The Commission shall consist of not more than 15
members. The members of the Commission shall be comprised as
follows:
(1) A designated representative from the Willard Memorial Chapel; a
designated representative from the William H. Seward House
Museum; a designated representative from the Harriet Tubman
Home; a designated representative from the Cayuga Museum -
Case Research Lab; a designated representative from the Auburn
Public Theater; and a designated representative from the
Schweinfurth Memorial Art Center. [Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 2-2001; 8-25-2011 by Ord. No. 6-2011]
(2) The Executive Director or designated representative from the
Cayuga County Tourism Office. [Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 2-2001]
(3) A designated representative of the City Council of the City of
Auburn.
(4) Up to seven appointments at large, to be appointed by the Mayor
with approval of the majority of City Council. [Amended
1-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001]
(5) The Cayuga County Historian and Auburn City Manager shall be ex
officio members.
B. Terms. The respective terms of the members shall be as follows: the
designated officials from the Willard Memorial Chapel, William H.
Seward House Museum, Harriet Tubman Home, the Cayuga Museum -
Case Research Lab, the Schine Theater and the Schweinfurth Memorial
Art Center shall serve without term, and the term of the one
representative from the City Council of the City of Auburn shall be for
that Councilor's term of office; in order to stagger the terms, the initial
term of one of the at-large appointment positions shall be for one year,
three of the at-large appointment positions shall serve two years, and
the final three at-large appointment positions shall serve for three
years. At the expiration of such initial terms, all terms shall be for threeyear
periods. Appointments made upon the retirement of the initial
terms shall be for three years each. Each Commission member shall
continue to serve until a successor is appointed. [Amended 1-18-2001
by Ord. No. 2-2001]
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Any member may
be removed by the appointing authority for cause and after a public
hearing.
D. Compensation. The members of the Historic Sites Commission shall
receive no payment for their services as members thereof.
§ 11-14 AUBURN CODE § 11-15
1:104
§ 11-15. Rights of members who are municipal officials.
The municipal officials on the Historic Sites Commission shall not, by reason
of membership thereon, forfeit their right to exercise the powers, perform
the duties or receive the compensation of the municipal office held by them
during such membership.
§ 11-16. Chairperson.
At an annual meeting at the beginning of each calendar year, the
Commission membership shall elect a Chairperson of the Historic Sites
Commission by a simple majority for a one-year term. Upon the failure
of the Commission to so elect a Chairperson, said Chairperson shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of City Council.
§ 11-17. Employment of personnel.
The City Manager shall have the power and authority to employ experts and
a staff upon the request of the Historic Sites Commission and to approve
such other expenses of the Commission as may be necessary and proper, not
exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made for such Commission
by the City Council.
§ 11-18. Rules and regulations. [Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord. No.
2-2001]
The Historic Sites Commission may adopt rules and regulations in respect
to procedures before the Commission and in respect to any subject matter
over which it has jurisdiction under this article or any other statute,
ordinance or law, after public hearing by the Commission and approval of
the City Council.
§ 11-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-18
1:105

ARTICLE V
Youth Commission
[Adopted 7-13-2000 by Ord. No. 12-2000]
§ 11-19. Establishment; purpose.
A Youth Commission is established for the purpose of studying the issues
and concerns facing the youth and families of the City of Auburn and to plan
and develop programs to address, minimalize and/or resolve the problems.
§ 11-20. Membership; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
§ 11-21. Chairperson.
The Chairperson of the Youth Commission shall be designated by the Mayor
at the beginning of each calendar year for a one-year term, but upon her or
his failure to do so the Commission members shall elect the Chairperson.
§ 11-22. Duties.
Among the duties of the Youth Commission shall be improving the quality of
life for the youth of the community. The Commission will pursue the quality
of life issues by, among other means:
A. Membership. The Youth Commission shall consist of not more than 15
members nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
Additionally, there will be three ex officio members consisting of
residents from the Auburn School District.
B. Terms. The terms of office shall be for three years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified, except that the initial terms of
members or the terms of the persons appointed to fill vacancies shall
vary in such a manner that thereafter the term of at least one member
shall expire annually. The terms of office of the ex officio members shall
be for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Compensation. The members of the Youth Commission shall not receive
compensation for their services as members thereof.
A. Development of effective policies and programs for the prevention and
control of juvenile delinquency and youth crime.
B. Coordination of the activities of public and private agencies devoted to
the prevention of delinquency and youth crime.
C. Assistance in facilitating the development and coordination of youth
services within the City of Auburn and coordination of the same with
concurrent activities by the county.
§ 11-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-22
1:107
§ 11-23. Employment of personnel.
The City Manager shall have the power and authority to employ experts
and a staff upon request of the Youth Commission and to approve such
other expenses of the Commission as may be necessary and proper, not
exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made for such Commission
by the Council.
§ 11-24. Annual report.
The Youth Commission shall make an annual report to the City Council and
the City Manager, as well as such other reports as may be requested.
§ 11-25. Rules and regulations.
The Youth Commission may adopt rules and regulations in respect to
procedures before it and with respect to any subject matter for which it has
jurisdiction under this article or any other statute, ordinance or law, after
public hearing by the Youth Commission and subject to the approval of the
Council.
D. Submission to the City Council of the City of Auburn and to the City
Manager of such reports, data and other information as may be
required or as may otherwise be appropriate, from time to time,
regarding youth policies, programs and services throughout the City.
§ 11-22 AUBURN CODE § 11-25
1:108
ARTICLE VI
Neighborhood and Housing Commission
[Adopted 10-26-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
§ 11-26. Establishment; purpose.
A Neighborhood and Housing Commission is established for the purpose
of studying the housing and neighborhood issues and concerns facing the
City of Auburn and to recommend programs to address, minimalize and/or
resolve the problems.
§ 11-27. Membership; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
§ 11-28. Rights of members who are municipal officials.
The municipal officials on the Neighborhood and Housing Commission shall
not, by reason of membership thereon, forfeit their right to exercise the
powers, perform the duties or receive the compensation of the municipal
office held by them during such membership.
§ 11-29. Chairperson.
The Chairperson of the Neighborhood and Housing Commission shall be
designated by the Mayor at the beginning of each calendar year for a oneyear
term, but upon her or his failure to do so said Commission members
shall elect the Chairperson.
§ 11-30. Duties.
The Commission will pursue the issues by, among other means:
A. Membership. The Neighborhood and Housing Commission shall consist
of not more than nine members nominated by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council. The Director of the Office of Planning and
Economic Development, Corporation Counsel, Building Inspector, and
the Chief of Police or their designees shall serve as ex officio members.
B. Terms. The terms of office shall be for three years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified, except that the initial terms of
members or the terms of the persons appointed to fill vacancies shall
vary in such a manner that thereafter the term of at least one member
shall expire annually.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Compensation. The members of the Neighborhood and Housing
Commission shall not receive compensation for their services as
members thereof.
A. Examining the problem of vacant housing and recommending solutions;
§ 11-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-30
1:109
§ 11-31. Employment of personnel.
The City Manager shall have the power and authority to employ experts and
a staff upon request of the Neighborhood and Housing Commission and to
approve such other expenses of the Commission as may be necessary and
proper, not exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made for such
Commission by the Council.
§ 11-32. Annual report.
The Neighborhood and Housing Commission shall make an annual report to
the City Council and the City Manager, as well as such other reports as may
be requested.
§ 11-33. Rules and regulations.
The Neighborhood and Housing Commission may adopt rules and
regulations in respect to procedures before it and in respect to any subject
matter for which it has jurisdiction under this article or any other statute,
ordinance or law, after public hearing by the Neighborhood and Housing
Commission and subject to the approval of the Council.
B. Examining specific neighborhood problems that may be related to
criminal activity and recommending solutions;
C. Examining and recommending ordinances and codes relating to
neighborhood and housing issues;
D. Examining the establishment of neighborhood committees;
E. Examining housing stock; and
F. Examining the conditions of neighborhoods and recommending
improvements.
§ 11-30 AUBURN CODE § 11-33
1:110
Chapter 16
CITY COUNCIL
§ 11-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-33
1:111

ARTICLE I
Meetings
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as § 2.4 of the 1991 Code;
amended in its entirety 3-22-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
§ 16-1. Location and day of meetings. [Amended 6-7-2012 by L.L.
No. 2-2012]
The Council shall meet at the Council Chambers or other location at
Memorial City Hall, Auburn, New York, on a designated day each week each
month at such time as established by Council, unless the day is a holiday.
In a week where the meeting day is a holiday, the meeting shall be held on
such day of the week as the Council may determine.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:113
Chapter 19
CLAIMS, SETTLEMENT OF
§ 19-1. Authority to settle claims.
Chapter 22
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 22-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Continuity of
Government Law of the City of Auburn."
§ 22-2. Statutory authority; intent.
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in § 29-a thereof, authorizes
political subdivisions of the state to provide for the continuity of their
governments in the event of an actual or imminent attack upon the United
States by an enemy or foreign nation. The Executive Law, in § 27 thereof,
authorizes political subdivisions to provide for the continuity of their
governments in the event of other public disasters, catastrophes or
emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such laws this chapter is
adopted so that on such occasions the government of the City of Auburn,
New York, may continue to function properly and efficiently under
emergency circumstances.
§ 22-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean and include:
ATTACK — Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy
or foreign nation upon the United States causing, or which may cause,
substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the United
States in any manner, by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shell fire, or
nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological, or biological means or other
weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is vacant or at
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
A. The City Manager and Corporation Counsel, whenever they consider
the interests of the City of Auburn will be served thereby, shall have the
authority to settle and compromise any claim against the City of Auburn
not exceeding the sum of $5,000.
B. The compromise and settlement of any and all claims exceeding the
sum of $5,000 shall require the approval of City Council.
§ 16-1 AUBURN CODE § 22-3
19:114
of the incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to
the provisions of any general, special, or local law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but
not the office, of a City officer in the event that neither such officer nor any
duly authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the City, or other
physical, mental, or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the
office.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that a substantial number
of the residents of the City of Auburn either sustain injury, become ill, are
infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the
result of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a substantial number
of such residents is imperiled, damaged, or destroyed, and it is necessary
and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that the
continuity of the government of the City of Auburn be assured in order that
it be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential
powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such disasters, catastrophes and
emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to, conflagrations,
explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal waves,
pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power
or essential transportation services, or any incident or occurrence which
causes or threatens to cause danger to life, health or property from
exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
§ 22-4. Designation of emergency interim successors.
A. Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this
chapter and thereafter within 30 days after first entering upon the
duties of his or her office, each elective officer shall, in addition to any
duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim
successors to the powers and duties of his or her office and specify their
rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that
there will be not fewer than three duly authorized deputies or
emergency interim successors, or combination thereof, to perform the
powers and duties of the office.
B. City Manager. In the event that the City Manager is unavailable at the
time of an attack or public disaster, the following persons shall succeed
to his or her office in the order in which they are listed: [Amended
1-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
(1) Acting City Manager.
(2) Corporation Counsel.
(3) Fire or Police Chief (pursuant to Section 3.1 of the Emergency
Response Plan).
(4) Most senior Public Works Department head.
§ 22-3 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 22-4
22:115
§ 22-5. Assumption of powers and duties by emergency interim
successor.
(5) The Mayor.
(6) The City Councilmember who has served the longest number of
years on the Council.
C. Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law
to appoint officers shall, within the time specified in Subsection A of this
section, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for each
such appointive officer such number of emergency interim successors
to such officer and specify their rank in order of succession after any
duly authorized deputy so that there will be not fewer than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination
thereof, for each such officer. Each such body of officers shall review
and, as necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency
interim successors by such body of officers within 30 days after a new
member elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon
the duties of his or her office as a member of such body of officers.
D. Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective
officers specified in Subsection A of this section, and the appointing
officer or body of officers specified in Subsection B of this section, shall
from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to insure that at all times
there are at least three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim
successors, or combination thereof, for each elective and appointive
officer of the City.
E. Qualifications. No person shall be designated to or serve as an
emergency interim successor unless he or she is legally qualified to
hold the office of the person to whose powers and duties he or she is
designated to succeed.
F. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
G. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. He or she shall,
however, be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily
incurred in the performance of his or her powers and duties.
A. If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in
Subsection A or Subsection B of § 22-4 of this chapter or his or her duly
authorized deputy, if any, is unable, due to death, absence from the City,
or other physical, mental, or legal reasons, to perform the powers and
duties of the office, the emergency interim successor of such officer
highest in rank in order of succession who is able to perform the powers
§ 22-4 AUBURN CODE § 22-5
22:116
§ 22-6. Information to be filed with City Clerk; notice to designees.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the City Clerk,
and each designation, replacement, or change in order of succession of any
emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order
of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such data
regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors, and
the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify in writing
each designated person of the filing of his or her name as an emergency
interim successor and his or her rank in order of succession and also shall
notify in writing any person previously designated who is replaced or whose
place in order of succession is changed.
§ 22-7. Qualifications for taking office.
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible,
emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other
things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and
duties of the office to which they may succeed.
§ 22-8. Suspension of quorum requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Mayor, or his or her duly
authorized deputy or emergency interim successor performing his or her
powers and duties, may suspend quorum requirements for the City Council.
If quorum requirements are suspended, any local law, ordinance, resolution,
or other action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative
vote of a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or
approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting
thereon.
Chapter 30
and duties of the office shall, except for the power and duty to discharge
or replace duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors
of such officer, perform the powers and duties of such officer.
B. An emergency interim successor shall perform such powers and duties
only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or his or her duly
authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office or undertakes the
performance of the powers and duties of the office, as the case may be,
or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or
appointed to fill such vacancy and qualifies as provided by law.
C. The removal of a disability or the termination of an absence from the
City of an officer higher on a list or order of succession provided therein
to an office shall not terminate the service in such office of an individual
lower on such list or order of succession who is temporarily filling such
office.
§ 22-5 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 22-8
30:117
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
§ 30-1. Employment discrimination prohibited.
No City agency or department shall discriminate against any person with
respect to age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual
orientation, disability or marital status in any matter pertaining to
employment by such City agency or department, including but not limited
to hiring, appointment, promotion, tenure, recruitment or compensation,
except where otherwise permitted by law.
§ 30-2. Discrimination prohibited in benefits or services.
No City agency or department shall discriminate against any person with
respect to age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual
orientation, disability or marital status in the provision of any benefits,
programs or services by such City agency or department, except where
otherwise permitted by law.
§ 30-3. Guidelines.
The City Manager or his or her designee shall prepare and issue guidelines
to be followed by City agencies and departments to assist them in
maintaining an environment where only job-related criteria are used to
assess employees or prospective employees of the City of Auburn.
§ 30-4. Investigation.
The City Manager or his or her designee shall investigate any complaint of
discrimination based upon age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender,
sexual orientation, disability or marital status and shall conduct such
investigation with due regard for confidentiality and privacy.
Chapter 33
ETHICS
§ 22-8 AUBURN CODE § 30-4
30:118
ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
§ 33-1. Purpose.
Officers and employees of the City of Auburn, New York, hold their positions
to serve and benefit the public and not for obtaining unwarranted personal
or private gain in the exercise and performance of their official powers
and duties. The Auburn City Council recognizes that, in furtherance of this
fundamental principle, there is a need for clear and reasonable standards of
ethical conduct. This Code of Ethics establishes those standards.
§ 33-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The governing board of a municipality and any municipal
administrative board (e.g., planning board, zoning of board of appeals),
commission, or other agency or body comprised of two or more municipal
officers or employees.
CODE — This Code of Ethics.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect financial or material benefit, but does not
include any benefit arising from the provision or receipt of any services
generally available to the residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an
area of the municipality, or a lawful class of such residents or taxpayers. A
municipal officer or employee is deemed to have an interest in any private
organization when he or she, his or her spouse, or a member of his or
her household is an owner, partner, member, director, officer, employee, or
directly or indirectly owns or controls more than 5% of the organization's
outstanding stock.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Auburn, New York. The word "municipal"
refers to the municipality.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — A paid or unpaid officer or
employee of the City of Auburn, New York, including but not limited to the
members of any municipal board.
RELATIVE — A spouse, parent, step-parent, sibling, step-sibling, sibling's
spouse, child, step-child, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, or
household member of a municipal officer or employee, and individuals
having any of these relationships to the spouse of the officer or employee.
§ 33-3. Applicability.
This Code of Ethics applies to the officers and employees of the City of
Auburn, New York, and shall supersede any prior municipal code of ethics.
The provisions of this Code of Ethics shall apply in addition to all applicable
state and local laws relating to conflicts of interest and ethics, including
§ 33-1 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-3
30:119
but not limited to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law, and all rules,
regulations, policies and procedures of the City of Auburn, New York.
§ 33-4. Prohibition on use of municipal position for personal or
private gain.
No municipal officer or employee shall use his or her municipal position
or official powers and duties to secure a financial or material benefit for
himself or herself, a relative, or any private organization in which he or she
is deemed to have an interest.
§ 33-5. Disclosure of interest in legislation and other matters.
§ 33-6. Recusal and abstention.
A. Whenever a matter requiring the exercise of discretion comes before a
municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of a
board, and disposition of the matter could result in a direct or indirect
financial or material benefit to himself or herself, a relative, or any
private organization in which he or she is deemed to have an interest,
the municipal officer or employee shall disclose in writing the nature of
the interest.
B. The disclosure shall be made when the matter requiring disclosure first
comes before the municipal officer or employee, or when the municipal
officer or employee first acquires knowledge of the interest requiring
disclosure, whichever is earlier.
C. In the case of a person serving in an elective office, the disclosure shall
be filed with the governing board of the municipality. In all other cases,
the disclosure shall be filed with the person's supervisor or, if the
person does not have a supervisor, the disclosure shall be filed with the
municipal officer, employee or board having the power to appoint to the
person's position. In addition, in the case of a person serving on a
municipal board, a copy of the disclosure shall be filed with the board.
Any disclosure made to a board shall be made publicly at a meeting of
the board and must be included in the minutes of the meeting.
A. No municipal officer or employee may participate in any decision or
take any official action with respect to any matter requiring the
exercise of discretion, including discussing the matter and voting on it,
when he or she knows or has reason to know that the action could
confer a direct or indirect financial or material benefit on himself or
herself, a relative, or any private organization in which he or she is
deemed to have an interest.
B. In the event that this section prohibits a municipal officer or employee
from exercising or performing a power or duty:
§ 33-3 AUBURN CODE § 33-6
30:120
§ 33-7. Prohibition inapplicable; disclosure, recusal and abstention
not required.
§ 33-8. Investments in conflict with official duties.
(1) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal officer as a member of
a board, then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by
the other members of the board;
(2) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal officer individually,
then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by his or
her deputy or, if the officer does not have a deputy, the power or
duty shall be performed by another person to whom the officer may
lawfully delegate the function; or
(3) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal employee, he or she
must refer the matter to his or her immediate supervisor, and the
immediate supervisor shall designate another person to exercise or
perform the power or duty.
A. This code's prohibition on use of a municipal position (§ 33-4),
disclosure requirements (§ 33-5), and requirements relating to recusal
and abstention (§ 33-6) shall not apply with respect to the following
matters:
(1) Adoption of the municipality's annual budget;
(2) Any matter requiring the exercise of discretion that directly affects
any of the following groups of people or a lawful class of such
groups:
(a) All municipal officers or employees;
(b) All residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an area of the
municipality; or
(c) The general public; or
(3) Any matter that does not require the exercise of discretion.
B. Recusal and abstention shall not be required with respect to any
matter:
(1) Which comes before a board when a majority of the board's total
membership would otherwise be prohibited from acting by § 33-6 of
this code;
(2) Which comes before a municipal officer when the officer would be
prohibited from acting by § 33-6 of this code and the matter cannot
be lawfully delegated to another person.
A. No municipal officer or employee may acquire the following
investments:
§ 33-6 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-8
30:121
§ 33-9. Private employment in conflict with official duties.
No municipal officer or employee, during his or her tenure as a municipal
officer or employee, may engage in any private employment, including
the rendition of any business, commercial, professional or other types of
services, when the employment:
§ 33-10. Future employment.
(1) Investments that can be reasonably expected to require more than
sporadic recusal and abstention under § 33-6 of this code; or
(2) Investments that would otherwise impair the person's
independence of judgment in the exercise or performance of his or
her official powers and duties.
B. This section does not prohibit a municipal officer or employee from
acquiring any other investments or the following assets:
(1) Real property located within the municipality and used as his or her
personal residence;
(2) Less than 5% of the stock of a publicly traded corporation; or
(3) Bonds or notes issued by the municipality and acquired more than
one year after the date on which the bonds or notes were originally
issued.
A. Can be reasonably expected to require more than sporadic recusal and
abstention pursuant to § 33-6 of this code;
B. Can be reasonably expected to require disclosure or use of confidential
information gained by reason of serving as a municipal officer or
employee;
C. Violates § 805-a(1)(c) or (d) of the General Municipal Law; or
D. Requires representation of a person or organization other than the
municipality in connection with litigation, negotiations or any other
matter to which the municipality is a party.
A. No municipal officer or employee may ask for, pursue or accept a
private post-government employment opportunity with any person or
organization that has a matter requiring the exercise of discretion
pending before the municipal officer or employee, either individually or
as a member of a board, while the matter is pending or within the 30
days following final disposition of the matter.
B. No municipal officer or employee, for the two-year period after serving
as a municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to
a private person or organization in connection with any matter
involving the exercise of discretion before the municipal office, board,
§ 33-8 AUBURN CODE § 33-10
30:122
§ 33-11. Personal representations and claims permitted.
This code shall not be construed as prohibiting a municipal officer or
employee from:
§ 33-12. Use of municipal resources.
§ 33-13. Interest in contracts.
department or comparable organizational unit for which he or she
serves.
C. No municipal officer or employee, at any time after serving as a
municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to a
private person or organization in connection with any particular
transaction in which he or she personally and substantially participated
while serving as a municipal officer or employee.
A. Representing himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children,
before the municipality; or
B. Asserting a claim against the municipality on his or her own behalf, or
on behalf of his or her spouse or minor children.
A. Municipal resources shall be used for lawful municipal purposes.
Municipal resources include but are not limited to municipal personnel
and the municipality's money, vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies
or other property.
B. No municipal officer or employee may use or permit the use of
municipal resources for personal or private purposes, but this provision
shall not be construed as prohibiting:
(1) Any use of municipal resources authorized by law or municipal
policy;
(2) The use of municipal resources for personal or private purposes
when provided to a municipal officer or employee as part of his or
her compensation; or
(3) The occasional and incidental use during the business day of
municipal telephones and computers for necessary personal
matters such as family care and changes in work schedule.
C. No municipal officer or employee shall cause the municipality to spend
more than is reasonably necessary for transportation, meals or lodging
in connection with official travel.
A. No municipal officer or employee may have an interest in a contract
that is prohibited by § 801 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 33-10 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-13
30:123
§ 33-14. Nepotism.
Except as otherwise required by law:
§ 33-15. Political solicitations.
§ 33-16. Confidential Information.
No municipal officer or employee who acquires confidential information
in the course of exercising or performing his or her official powers or
duties may disclose or use such information unless the disclosure or use
is required by law or in the course of exercising or performing his or her
official powers and duties.
§ 33-17. Gifts.
B. Every municipal officer and employee shall disclose interest in
contracts with the municipality at the time and in the manner required
by § 803 of the General Municipal Law.
A. No municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of
a board, may participate in any decision specifically to appoint, hire,
promote, discipline or discharge a relative for any position at, for or
within the municipality or a municipal board.
B. No municipal officer or employee may supervise a relative in the
performance of the relative's official powers or duties.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall directly or indirectly compel or
induce a subordinate municipal officer or employee to make, or promise
to make, any political contribution, whether by gift of money, service or
other thing of value.
B. No municipal officer or employee may act or decline to act in relation to
appointing, hiring or promoting, discharging, disciplining, or in any
manner changing the official rank, status or compensation of any
municipal officer or employee, or an applicant for a position as a
municipal officer or employee, on the basis of the giving or withholding
or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service or any other
valuable thing for any political purpose.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall solicit, accept or receive a gift in
violation of § 805-a(1)(a) of the General Municipal Law, as interpreted
in this section.
B. No municipal officer or employee may directly or indirectly solicit any
gift.
C. No municipal officer or employee may accept or receive any gift, or
multiple gifts from the same donor, having an annual aggregate value of
$10 or more when:
§ 33-13 AUBURN CODE § 33-17
30:124
(1) The gift reasonably appears to be intended to influence the officer
or employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties;
(2) The gift could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or
employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties; or
(3) The gift is intended as a reward for any official action on the part of
the officer or employee.
D. For purposes of this section, a "gift" includes anything of value, whether
in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise, or in any other form. The value of a gift is the gift's
fair market value, determined by the retail cost of the item or a
comparable item. The fair market value of a ticket entitling the holder
to food, refreshments, entertainment, or any other benefit is the face
value of the ticket, or the actual cost to the donor, whichever is greater.
Determination of whether multiple gifts from a single donor exceed $10
must be made by adding together the value of all gifts received from the
donor by an officer or employee during the twelve-month period
preceding the receipt of the most-recent gift.
E. Intention.
(1) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
to influence the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties when the gift is from a private person or
organization that seeks municipal action involving the exercise of
discretion by or with the participation of the officer or employee.
(2) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
as a reward for official action when the gift is from a private person
or organization that has obtained municipal action involving the
exercise of discretion by or with the participation of the officer or
employee during the preceding 12 months.
F. This section does not prohibit any other gift, including:
(1) Gifts made to the municipality;
(2) Gifts from a person with a family or personal relationship with the
officer or employee when the circumstances make it clear that the
personal relationship, rather than the recipient's status as a
municipal officer or employee, is the primary motivating factor for
the gift;
(3) Gifts given on special occasions, such as marriage, illness, or
retirement, which are modest, reasonable and customary;
(4) Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of little intrinsic
value, such as pens, pencils, notepads, and calendars;
§ 33-17 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-17
30:125
(5) Awards and plaques having a value of $75 or less which are publicly
presented in recognition of service as a municipal officer or
employee or other service to the community; or
(6) Meals and refreshments provided when a municipal officer or
employee is a speaker or participant at a job-related professional or
educational conference or program and the meals and
refreshments are made available to all participants.
G. This prohibition shall not apply to political contributions made to an
individual who is seeking municipal office.
§ 33-17 AUBURN CODE § 33-17
30:126
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 33-18. Board of Ethics.
§ 33-19. Posting and distribution of copies.
§ 33-20. Filing of annual statement of financial disclosure.
A. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics for the municipality. The
Board of Ethics shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the City of Auburn, a majority of whom shall not be officers
or employees of the municipality, but at least one of whom must be a
municipal officer or employee. The members of such Board of Ethics
shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council, serve at the pleasure
of the appointing authority, and receive no salary or compensation for
their services as members of the Board of Ethics.
B. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions to the officers and
employees of the City of Auburn with respect to Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law and this code. Such advisory opinions must be
rendered pursuant to the written request of any such officer or
employee under such rules and regulations as the Board of Ethics may
prescribe. The Board of Ethics shall have the advice of legal counsel
employed by the Board or, if none, the municipality's legal counsel. In
addition, the Board of Ethics may make recommendations with respect
to the drafting and adoption of a Code of Ethics, or amendments
thereto, upon the request of the City of Auburn, New York.
A. The City Manager must promptly cause a copy of this code, and a copy
of any amendment to this code, to be posted publicly and conspicuously
in each building under the municipality's control. The code must be
posted within 10 days following the date on which the code takes effect.
An amendment to the code must be posted within 10 days following the
date on which the amendment takes effect.
B. The City Manager must promptly cause a copy of this code, including
any amendments to the code, to be distributed to every person who is or
becomes an officer and employee of the City of Auburn, New York.
C. Every municipal officer or employee who receives a copy of this code or
an amendment to the code must acknowledge such receipt in writing.
Such acknowledgments must be filed with the City Clerk, who must
maintain such acknowledgments as a public record.
D. The failure to post this code or an amendment to the code does not
affect either the applicability or enforceability of the code or the
amendment. The failure of a municipal officer or employee to receive a
copy of this Code of Ethics or an amendment to the code, or to
acknowledge receipt thereof in writing, does not affect either the
applicability or enforceability of the code or amendment to the code.
§ 33-18 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-20
30:127
A. The City Manager shall promulgate and distribute to those persons
required to file the annual financial disclosure statement, a financial
disclosure statement form.
B. Those officers and employees who are required to file an annual
statement of financial disclosure shall complete and file said annual
statement on or before the 15th day of February following the year in
which the disclosure is required.
§ 33-20 AUBURN CODE § 33-20
30:128
ARTICLE III
Whistleblower Protection
§ 33-21. Whistleblower protection.
A. It is the purpose of the whistleblower protection provision to encourage
City employees to report information that they reasonably and in good
faith believe to be a violation of law, rules, or regulations by another
City employee or which evidences growth mismanagement or a gross
waste of funds.
B. It is further the purpose of this article to protect employees who report
such information from reprisal in the form of adverse personnel action.
C. No City official or employee shall retaliate against any City officer or
employee or other persons for submitting a complaint to the Ethics
Board for acting, or refusing to act, as required by Chapter 33 of the
Auburn City Code, entitled "Ethics," and Article XVIII of the General
Municipal Law.
D. Any City officer or employee who violates Subsection C has committed
an ethics violation.
E. In resolving a complaint that a City officer or employee therein has
violated this section, the Ethics Board may recommend that a
retaliatory personnel action be reversed.
§ 33-21 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-21
30:129

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; When Effective
§ 33-22. Enforcement.
Any municipal officer or employee who violates this code may be censured,
fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner
provided by law.
§ 33-23. When effective.
This Code of Ethics shall become effective upon publication.
§ 33-22 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY § 33-23
30:131
Chapter 52
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 52-1. Public hearing required.
Before voting upon any proposed enactment of a local law, the Council shall
fix a time for a public hearing thereon and shall cause public notice of the
time and place of such hearing to be given.
§ 52-2. Notice of hearing.
Such notice shall be given by the City Clerk by causing the same to be
published once in a daily newspaper published in the City of Auburn at least
three days prior to the day fixed for such hearing. Such notice shall contain
the title of the local law and shall briefly refer to the subject matter thereof.
§ 52-3. Conduct of hearing.
The Council shall attend at the time and place appointed for such hearing
and shall afford an opportunity for a public hearing concerning such law.
§ 52-4. Filing proof of publication of notice.
Proof of the publication of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk.
Chapter 62
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 27. Ethics — See Ch. 33.
§ 33-23 AUBURN CODE § 52-4
52:132
ARTICLE I
Commissioners of Deeds
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991as § 2.2 of the 1991 Code]
§ 62-1. Appointment; terms of office; number.
Commissioners of Deeds shall be appointed by the City and shall hold office
for the term of two years from the date of their appointment and until others
are appointed in their places. A vacancy occurring during the term for
which any Commissioner shall be appointed shall be filled by the Council.
The Council shall, at the end of every even-numbered year, by resolution,
determine the number of Commissioners of Deeds to be appointed for the
City of Auburn.
§ 62-2. Powers and duties.
Such Commissioners of Deeds shall possess the powers and perform the
duties of Commissioners of Deeds as provided by § 139 of the Executive Law
of the State of New York.
§ 62-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-2
62:133

ARTICLE II
Attendance at Conferences
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 4, Art. V of the 1991
Code]
§ 62-3. Authorization by City Manager.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 77-b, Subdivision 2, the City Manager
is hereby delegated the power to authorize attendance at a conference, as
defined in General Municipal Law § 77-b, Subdivision 1(c), of any officer or
employee of the City or any person who has been elected to public office of
the City for which the term of office has not commenced; provided, however,
that there remain sufficient funds in the budget account established for that
purpose.
§ 62-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-3
62:135
Chapter 68
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 62-3 AUBURN CODE § 62-3
68:136
ARTICLE I
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 2, Art. III of the 1991
Code]
§ 68-1. Residency within certain area required; exception.
[Amended 10-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-1998]
Members of the police force constituting the Police Department of the City
of Auburn shall reside within the corporate limits of the County of Cayuga
and within a radius of 10 miles from the corporate limits of the City of
Auburn. This requirement shall not apply to members specified in Public
Officers Law § 30, Subdivision 4, Paragraphs (1) and (2).
§ 68-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 68-1
68:137
Chapter 75
RECORDS
§ 68-1 AUBURN CODE § 68-1
68:138
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 2, Art. II of the 1991
Code]
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of the examination
of public records in compliance with and subject to the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Law (Public Officers Law, Article 6 and 21 NYCRR
Part 1401) and to insure the efficient operation of governmental offices.
§ 75-2. Records Access Officer.
The City Clerk is hereby designated as the Records Access Officer of the
City of Auburn.
§ 75-3. Subject matter list.
The City Clerk is responsible for maintaining a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in the possession of the City of Auburn
and shall require all departments and/or offices of the City of Auburn to
provide to the City Clerk a current list by subject matter of all records in
the possession of each department and/or office, said list to be updated on
a biannual basis.
§ 75-4. Availability of records.
The City Clerk shall make available for public inspection and copying all
records, except that the City Clerk may deny access to those records or
portions thereof enumerated in Public Officers Law § 87, Subdivision 2, as
presently in effect and any and all subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 75-5. Procedure for handling requests for records.
A. The City Clerk shall, upon receiving a request for records and upon
locating said records, take one of the following actions:
(1) Make the record available for inspection or deny access to the
record in whole or in part and explain in writing the reasons
therefor.
(2) Upon request for copies, make copies available upon payment of
established fees.
(3) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(4) Upon failure to locate records, certify that the agency is not the
custodian for such records or that the records of which the agency
is a custodian cannot be found after diligent search.
B. Response to request.
§ 75-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 75-5
68:139
§ 75-6. Copying of records; fees.
The City Clerk is authorized to copy any records requested to be copied
that are releasable under the Public Officers Law and to charge $0.25 per
page for size 81/2 x 11 inches, 81/2 x 14 inches, or 11 x 17 inches, or the
actual cost of reproducing any other records, except when a different fee is
otherwise prescribed by statute.
§ 75-7. Exceptions; referral to Corporation Counsel.
In the event a question arises as to whether a requested record or a portion
thereof falls within one of the exceptions enumerated in Public Officers Law
§ 87, Subdivision 2, the City Clerk shall refer the request to the Corporation
Counsel's office for review.
§ 75-8. Requests for records; requirements.
All requests for records shall be in writing filed with the City Clerk except
as follows:
§ 75-9. Additional regulations.
(1) The City Clerk shall respond to any request reasonably describing
the record or records sought within five business days of receipt of
the request or sooner if feasibly possible.
(2) A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
(3) If the City Clerk does not provide or deny access to the record
sought within five business days of receipt of a request, the City
Clerk shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the
request and a statement of the approximate date when the request
will be granted or denied.
A. Records maintained in bound volumes.
B. Such records as designated by the City Clerk after consultation with the
various departments and offices of the City.
(1) A list of records so designated shall be prepared by the City Clerk
and posted in a conspicuous place in City Hall.
(2) Said list shall be updated by the City Clerk on a biannual basis.
A. Records not to be removed. No record shall be removed from the lawful
custody of any public office charged with the duty of maintaining such
records, except that records may be forwarded to the City Clerk
pursuant to these regulations.
B. Hours for processing requests. In the event a request for records
interferes with the operation of the office of the City Clerk or any other
office or department of the City of Auburn that makes it difficult for
members of the public to receive regular services of said offices or
§ 75-5 AUBURN CODE § 75-9
68:140
interferes with the day-to-day operation of said offices, the City Clerk
is hereby authorized to establish hours during each day when requests
for records shall be processed, including the times when such requests
shall be made, in order to enable the City Clerk to find the records for
review and copying.
C. Nonavailability of records. In the event any request cannot be met
because records are being used for current working purposes, the
applicant shall be advised of such fact and every effort shall be made to
arrange a specific time when such records shall be available.
D. Coordination with departments and offices. The City Clerk is
responsible for assuring that all departments and offices comply with
these regulations.
E. Denial; appeal. In the event a request for a record is denied, the person
denied access to a record may appeal such denial to the records appeals
officer, who is hereby designated as the Mayor. Said appeal shall be in
writing and set forth the records requested and the reason for denial
and shall be filed with the Mayor within 30 days of the date of the
denial.
§ 75-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 75-9
68:141

ARTICLE II
Records Management Program
[Adopted 9-23-1993 by Ord. No. 31-1993]
§ 75-10. Designation of Records Management Officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the
auspices of the City Clerk, who shall be referred to as the "Records
Management Officer (RMO)." The RMO shall be responsible for
administering the noncurrent and archival public records and storage areas
for the City of Auburn in accordance with local, state and federal laws and
guidelines.
§ 75-11. Powers and duties of Records Management Officer.
The Records Management Officer shall have all the necessary powers to
carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival public
records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of the City of
Auburn.
A. The Records Management Officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for maintaining, storing and servicing
of archival material. These classifications are:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York State
Records and Retention Schedule MU-1 thereby subject to
disposition;
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research and
historical records of educational value which warrant their
permanent retention; or
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
B. The RMO shall establish guidelines for proper records management in
any department or agency of the City of Auburn in accordance with
local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The RMO shall report annually to City Council on the progress and
functions of the records management program.
D. The RMO shall operate a Records Management Center for the storage,
processing and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for the
City of Auburn agencies and departments.
E. The RMO shall establish a City of Auburn Archives and perform the
following functions:
(1) Advise and assist City departments in reviewing and selecting
material to be transferred to the City Archives for preservation.
§ 75-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 75-11
68:143
§ 75-12. Records Advisory Board. [Amended 3-18-2010 by Ord. No.
2-2010]
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with,
and provide advice to, the Records Management Officer (RMO). The Board
shall consist of the Records Management Officer, Office Systems and
Training Coordinator, and the Chief Fiscal Officer of the City or their
designated representatives; a member of the City Historic Resources
Review Board, as well as the City Historian, shall also be members. The
Board shall meet periodically and have the following duties:
§ 75-13. Custody of records.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for creating, maintaining, storing
and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to use of records in the
Archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided that such policy does not conflict with any
state or federal statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other City offices.
(7) Collect archival materials which are not official City records but
have associational value to City government or a close relationship
to the existing archival collection. Such collecting shall be subject
to archival space, staff and cost limitations and to the potential
endangerment of such materials if they are not collected by the
Archives.
(8) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
A. To provide advice to the Records Management Officer on the
development of records management policy.
B. To review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. To review retention periods proposed by the RMO for records not
covered by state archives schedules.
D. To provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and be
the final sign-off entity as to what is not archival.
A. A City department is the legal custodian of its records and shall retain
custody of records deposited in the Records Center. Records
§ 75-11 AUBURN CODE § 75-13
68:144
§ 75-14. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department
of the City unless approval has been obtained from the RMO. No records
shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the RMO without the written
consent of the department head having authority over such records.
§ 75-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
RMO and Advisory Board to have sufficient historical or other value to
warrant their continued preservation by the local government.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microforms or other materials, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in
connection with the transaction of official City business.
RECORDS CENTER — The attic of City Hall is designated as the Records
Center. This area shall be maintained by and under the exclusive control of
the RMO and his or her staff, primarily for the storage, servicing, security
and processing of records which must be preserved for varying periods of
time and need not be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
transferred to or acquired by the Archives shall be under the custody
and control of the Archives rather than the department which created
or held them immediately prior to their being transferred to the
Archives.
B. Records shall be transferred to the Archives upon recommendation of
the RMO, with the approval of the head of the department which has
custody of the records and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
C. Records may be permanently removed from the Archives at the request
of the RMO, with approval of the head of the department which had
custody of the records immediately prior to the transfer of those
records to the Archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
The removal by the City, in accordance with approved records control
schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct of business
by such agency through removal methods which may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or
The transfer of records to the Records Center/Archives for
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of
records determined to have historical or other sufficient value
warranting continued preservation.
(2)
A.
§ 75-13 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 75-15
68:145
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial use and records
disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records
centers or other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any City agency
or department for official use or to the public where allowed.
The transfer of records from one City agency or department to another
City agency or department.
B.
§ 75-15 AUBURN CODE § 75-15
68:146
Chapter 82
SMOKING POLICY
§ 75-15 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 75-15
68:147

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 82-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as "Smoking Policy of the City of
Auburn."
§ 82-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of the New York State
Clean Air Act, Public Health Law Chapter 244, approved July 5, 1985.
§ 82-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter requires
otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling of, exhaling of, or carrying of a lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed or plant, electronic cigarette or "e-cigarette," or
any other device intended for inhalation, which emits tobacco, smoke, tar,
vape or vapor or any other chemical substance into the air.
§ 82-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the harmful effects of involuntary
secondary smoke on nonsmokers. The right of nonsmokers to breathe clean
air shall be protected.
§ 82-5. Compliance with state law; conflicts with other laws.
A. It shall be the policy of the City of Auburn to be in compliance with the
Clean Air Act enacted into law by the New York State Legislature, and
to establish restrictions prohibiting smoking on property owned,
operated or maintained by the City of Auburn.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to supplement federal,
state, and local laws and ordinances, codes and regulations. Nothing in
this chapter shall be deemed to abolish, impair, supersede or replace
existing remedies of the City, county, or state, or existing requirements
of any other provision of local laws or ordinances of the City or county
or state laws, and regulations. In case of any conflict between any
provisions of this chapter and any applicable state or local law,
ordinance, code or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
control.
§ 82-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 82-5
68:149

ARTICLE II
Restrictions
§ 82-6. Restricted locations.
Smoking is prohibited and no person shall smoke:
§ 82-7. Exemptions.
Smoking may be permitted designated areas located more than 50 feet from
entrances, exits or outdoor areas of any building or facility owned, operated
or maintained by the City of Auburn.
§ 82-8. Signs.
Where smoking is regulated or prohibited by this chapter, the City of
Auburn shall prominently post and properly maintain "Smoking" or "No
Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, which consists of
a pictorial representations of a burning cigarette enclosed in a circle with a
bar across it.
A. Inside any building, facility, or vehicle owned, operated or maintained
by the City of Auburn;
B. Within 50 feet of the entrances, exits, or outdoor areas of any building
or facility owned, operated or maintained by the City of Auburn; or
C. Within and 50 feet from the property lines of all parks and playgrounds
owned by the City of Auburn.
§ 82-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 82-8
68:151

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 82-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 82-10. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by any law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction to act in the City of Auburn.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking
is prohibited or restricted under this chapter.
B. Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of $250.
C. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this chapter twice
within a twelve-month period shall be guilty of a violation and subject to
a fine of $500.
D. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this chapter three
times within a twelve-month period shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $750 and a sentence of up to
three months in jail.
§ 82-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 82-10
68:153
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 100
AMUSEMENT CENTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 200.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following words shall have the following respective meanings:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any indoor place or enclosure in which there
is maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of
the public any coin-controlled amusement device of any description, such
as but not limited to bagatelle games, baseball, football, pinball amusement
games, electronic games and video games, is hereby designated an
amusement center and subject to all the provisions of this chapter.
AMUSEMENT CENTER GAME — Any coin-operated amusement device of
any description, and particularly, but not by way of limitation, the types
commonly known as bagatelle, baseball, football, pinball amusement
games, electronic games and video games. The above enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive. Said definition, however, shall exclude any
device, the possession or use of which is prohibited by law.
OWNER OR OPERATOR OF AN AMUSEMENT CENTER GAME — Any
person who owns, places, distributes or locates an amusement center game
in any place in which it is operated for the amusement, patronage, or
recreation of the public.
§ 100-2. Compliance with laws and ordinances required.
No person shall maintain or operate in any amusement center in the City
any amusement center game or device in violation of the laws of the State
of New York or the laws or ordinances of the City.
§ 100-3. License for amusement center.
A. License required. No person shall maintain or operate an amusement
center without first having obtained a license to do to, and the licensee
shall be of good moral character and shall maintain good order therein.
B. Issuance and revocation. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a
license for the maintenance and operation of amusement centers, and
said license may be revoked by said City Clerk for the violation of any
§ 82-10 AUBURN CODE § 100-3
100:154
§ 100-4. License for owner or operator of amusement center games.
provision of this chapter as provided in Chapter 200, Licensing, of this
Code. The license shall be countersigned by the Chief of Police.
C. Fee; expiration. The fee for the license of an amusement center shall be
$50 per year or fraction thereof, and the license shall expire the 31st
day of December next succeeding the date of issuance thereof.
A. Required. Every owner or operator of an amusement center game shall
be required to obtain a license before placing the same in an
amusement center. The licensee shall be of good moral character.
B. Issuance and revocation. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a
license for owners or operators of amusement center games upon
payment of the license fee as provided herein, and such license may be
revoked by the City Clerk for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter as provided in Chapter 200, Licensing, of this Code. The license
shall be countersigned by the Chief of Police.
C. Fee; tax. [Amended 2-20-1992]
(1) The license fee for owners or operators of amusement center
games shall be $25 per year or fraction thereof, for each such
machine placed in an amusement center, payable in advance.
(2) The privilege tax as authorized by §§ 1201 and 1203 of the Tax Law
of the State of New York shall $10 for each such machine placed in
an amusement center, payable in advance.
D. Expiration. Licenses for owners or operators of amusement center
games shall expire on the 31st day of December next succeeding the
date of issuance thereof.
E. Replacement and substitution.
(1) Authority. When any owner or operator has obtained and paid for a
license on any amusement center game required by this section
and the same is in force, the owner or operator is authorized during
the period covered by such license to substitute an amusement
center game in the same location without the payment of the
additional fee required by this section. Such substituted game may
likewise be substituted from time to time during such period, but in
no event may the number of games at any one time exceed the
number licensed.
(2) The owner or operator shall file with the City Clerk a list of all
games to be placed in any location in the City of Auburn with
proper identification as to manufacturer, serial number, type of
game and ownership. No substitute game shall be placed in any
location in the City of Auburn until this information has been filed.
F. Application.
§ 100-3 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 100-4
100:155
§ 100-5. Restriction upon issuance of license.
No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who is not of
good moral character or has been convicted of a crime or of any gambling
offense against the laws of New York State or any other jurisdiction, and in
the event of any such conviction subsequent to the issuance of said license,
said license shall be revoked, subject, however, to the provisions of Article
23-A of the Correction Law.
§ 100-6. Information required upon placement of game.
Every owner or operator of an amusement center game shall, within 24
hours of the placement of any such game in the City, notify the City Clerk
of such placement and shall give the serial number and name of the game
and the name of the holder of the license for the amusement center in which
such game is placed.
§ 100-7. Location of amusement centers near schools restricted.
No license shall be granted for any such amusement center if located within
200 feet of the lot lines of a public or private school.
§ 100-8. Cash or other awards prohibited.
No cash award or awards of merchandise, credit or other thing of value
shall be made in any contest, tournament, league or individual play on any
(1) Contents. Application for a license for an amusement center game
shall be made in the first instance to the City Clerk, who may
require from the applicant information, in writing and verified upon
blanks to be furnished by him or her, as to the name and address of
the applicant, name and address of the manufacturer of the device,
a detailed description of the mechanical features of the device, the
method of its operation, the premises upon which the device is
proposed to be located for use and the location of said premises by
street and number and such other information as the City Clerk
shall deem reasonably necessary.
(2) Investigation. The City Clerk shall then have a reasonable time in
which to make inquiry and investigation in regard to the character
of the applicant and the availability of the proposed device for a
license hereunder prior to the issuing of any license hereunder.
G. Identification of games. Amusement center games so licensed shall be
required to bear a serial number and the owner's or operator's name
and license number on each game. The serial number, type of game and
ownership shall be filed in the City Clerk's office for any substituted
game as hereinafter provided.
H. Transfer of license. No license shall be transferred from one location to
another. A new license shall be required.
§ 100-4 AUBURN CODE § 100-8
100:156
game maintained or operated in any amusement center, and no device shall
be permitted to operate if said device delivers to the player coins, slugs or
tokens on certain scores or if said device may be readily converted to deliver
to the player such coins, slugs or tokens.
§ 100-9. Seizure of devices.
Any coin-controlled amusement device operated or maintained in violation
of the terms of this chapter may be seized in compliance with the terms and
provisions of the statutes of the State of New York.
§ 100-10. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 104
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 210. Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
§ 100-8 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 100-10
100:157

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Animal
and Fowl Ordinance."
§ 104-2. Running at large prohibited.
§ 104-3. Birds and squirrels.
§ 104-4. Hitching of horses and similar animals.
No person shall leave any horse or similar animal in any public place unless
it is securely hitched or tied or kept under the control of a suitable person.
§ 104-5. Keeping of dangerous animals and farm animals
prohibited. [Amended 10-31-1996 by Ord. No. 37-1996; 6-24-1999
by Ord. No. 13-1999]
A. No person shall permit or cause any animals, domestic or wild, under
his or her ownership or control to run at large upon any public street,
place or park nor on any private property within the City of Auburn,
except cats.
B. Exception. Dogs shall be restrained as provided in Article II of this
chapter.
A. No person shall injure, annoy, unnecessarily disturb or harm any bird or
squirrel in any place in the City.
B. Exceptions. Pigeons, Starlings and English Sparrows may be trapped
and humanely disposed of. Additionally, when it is declared in the best
interest of the City, the City is free to conduct programs which utilize
nonlethal methods to remove and/or disperse certain birds from various
areas throughout the City. [Amended 12-8-2005 by Ord. No.
18-2005]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, permit to be kept, to exhibit,
to temporarily hold or to breed any dangerous, wild, poisonous or
venomous or vicious animal of any kind in the City of Auburn, including
but not limited to alligators, bears, boa constrictors, vicious animals of
the cat and dog family, coyotes, crocodiles, falcons, ferrets (with the
exception of domesticated ferrets), foxes, hawks, possums, pythons,
raccoons, reptiles, snakes and wolves.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, permit to be kept, to exhibit,
to temporarily hold or to breed any farm animals, including but not
limited to horses, ponies, livestock, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, mules,
donkeys, chickens and other animals customarily kept on a farm, but
not including common household pets.
§ 104-1 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-6
100:159
§ 104-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
§ 1-18 of the Municipal Code.
§ 104-6 AUBURN CODE § 104-6
100:160
ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Amended 10-24-1991; 6-3-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004; 1-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 1-2006; 3-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008; 12-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 17-201024]
§ 104-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the licensing and identification of
dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection of
persons, property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack and damage
within the City of Auburn, New York.
§ 104-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires:
AT LARGE — Any dog shall be deemed at large when it is off the property of
its owner and not under restraint of a competent person.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the City to assist
in the enforcement of this chapter or any authorized officer, agent or
employee of an incorporated humane society or similar incorporated dog
protective association under contract with the City to assist in the
enforcement of this chapter.
OWNER — Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has the care, custody
or control of a dog. Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the
custody and control of the minor's parents or other head of the household
where the minor resides.
RESTRAINT (LEASH LAW) — A dog must be controlled by a leash having
a maximum length of six feet while off the owner's premises. A dog is
considered under restraint if it is controlled by a leash having a maximum
length of six feet, within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street, or
within the property limit of its owner or keeper with a restraint or fencing,
or upon the premises of another with the consent of such other person and
restrained or confined to a fenced area. A retractable leash may be used as
a restraint provided that the retractable leash is set and locked at six feet
when the dog is in the immediate vicinity of persons or is on a sidewalk
area.
§ 104-9. Dog Control Officer.
A Dog Control Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager for the
purposes and shall have all the powers and duties contained in § 113 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 104-7 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-10
100:161
§ 104-10. Restrictions.
§ 104-11. Licensing and license fees.
A. No owner shall permit or allow a dog to run at large within the City of
Auburn unless such dog shall be restrained as provided in the definition
of "restraint" in § 104-8.
B. No unspayed female dog in season shall be permitted to be outside a
building or a fenced enclosure.
C. No owner shall keep or harbor a dog which howls or barks habitually or
continuously so as to disturb the peace and quiet of other persons.
D. No dwelling unit shall have more than three licensed dogs on the
premises of said dwelling unit, unless such dwelling is a licensed
kennel.
A. Licensing.
(1) Application for original license.
(a) The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application to the City Clerk for a dog
license on a form provided by the City Clerk's office. No license
shall be required for any dog which is under the age of four
months and which is not at large, or any dog that is residing in
a pound or shelter maintained by or under contract or
agreement with the State of New York or any county, city, or
village, duly incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty
to animals, duly incorporated humane society or duly
incorporated dog protective association.
(b) In the case of an unlicensed dog being redeemed by the owner
or a dog being adopted from a shelter or pound, the City Clerk
and the manager of the facility shall establish a licensing
procedure that is agreeable and beneficial to both the City of
Auburn and the shelter or pound.
(2) Rabies vaccination required. All applications for a dog license shall
be accompanied by a valid rabies certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian or, in lieu thereof, a statement certified by a licensed
veterinarian stating that the dog is too young to be vaccinated or,
because of old age or another reason, the life of the dog would be
endangered by the administration of vaccine. A copy of the rabies
certificate or certified statement shall be made and attached to the
Clerk's copy of the application. In the case of an unlicensed dog
being redeemed by the owner or a dog being adopted from a
shelter, copies shall be forwarded to the City Clerk. Such records
shall be kept on file by the City Clerk and be made available upon
request for rabies and other animal disease control efforts.
§ 104-10 AUBURN CODE § 104-11
100:162
(3) Spay/neuter certificates. In the case of a spayed or neutered dog,
every application shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by a
licensed veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner, showing
that the dog has been spayed or neutered. In lieu of the spay or
neuter certificate, an owner may present a statement certified by a
licensed veterinarian stating that he has examined the dog and
found that, because of old age or other reason, the life of the dog
would be endangered by spaying or neutering.
(4) License. Upon receiving a complete application, the required
documents and the fee, the City Clerk shall issue a license and tag.
The City Clerk's copy shall be kept on file in accordance with the
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 issued by the
New York State Archives and Records Administration.
(5) Expiration of license. An original license shall be issued for a period
of one year and shall expire on the last day of the month one year
from the date of issue.
(6) License renewal.
(a) License renewal forms shall be mailed by the City Clerk.
(b) A new rabies certificate shall be required if the one on record
has expired or expires within 30 days of the date of renewal. An
in-lieu-of statement as described in Subsection A(2) of this
section may be substituted for a rabies certificate. New rabies
certificates and statements shall be copied and attached to the
City Clerk's copy of the renewal.
(c) A spay/neuter certificate shall not be required if one is already
on file with the City Clerk. In a case where the dog has been
altered during the preceding year, the certificate shall be
presented to the City Clerk in order to receive the reduced fee
for an altered dog. The City Clerk shall make a copy of the
certificate and attach it to the original license on file.
(d) The renewal shall expire on the last day of the month in the
same month that it was originally issued. (i.e., a license
originally issued in January will always expire in January.)
(e) Renewing early or late does not change the renewal month.
However, owners having more than one dog may request
common renewal dates for their licenses, which may be
granted at the discretion of the City Clerk, provided that all
other licensing and renewal requirements are met. No
licensing fees will be prorated, refunded, or waived when
accommodating such a request.
(f) Upon renewal the City Clerk shall provide a validated license
to the owner. The Clerk's copy shall be kept on file in
accordance with the Records Retention and Disposition
§ 104-11 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-11
100:163
Schedule MU-1 issued by the New York State Archives and
Records Administration.
(7) Identification of dogs.
(a) When a dog is originally licensed, a City of Auburn
identification number will be assigned, and an identification
tag shall be issued, which shall be worn by the dog at all times.
(b) Existing New York State Agriculture and Markets dog licenses
being renewed or transferred from another municipality shall
be assigned a City of Auburn identification number, and an
identification tag shall be issued. The New York State
Agriculture and Markets tag or other municipality's tag shall
be discarded, and the City of Auburn tag shall be worn by the
dog at all times.
(c) A dog participating in a dog show is exempted from wearing an
identification tag only for the duration of the show.
(d) No identification tag shall be affixed to the collar of any dog
other than the one to which it was assigned.
(e) Any guide dog, hearing dog, service dog, war dog, working
search dog, detection dog, police work dog or therapy dog
shall be issued a City of Auburn identification tag and a Cayuga
County Working Dog tag. Both tags shall be worn by the dog at
all times.
(f) Lost tags shall be replaced at the expense of the owner at a fee
set by the Auburn City Council.
(8) Change of address. When there is a change of address for the
owner of record, the owner shall notify the City Clerk's office of
such change. If the change is still within the City of Auburn, the
City Clerk will make the appropriate updates to the dog license
record. If the change is located outside the City of Auburn, the City
Clerk shall make a note in the record and cancel the license. The
Clerk shall forward a copy of the license to the Clerk of the
municipality to which the owner has moved, informing said Clerk
that the dog now resides in their municipality.
(9) Change of ownership. In the event of a change in the ownership of
any dog licensed in the City of Auburn, the new owner shall
immediately make application for a license for such dog.
Additionally, the original owner of record shall notify the City
Clerk's office of the change of ownership. Such original owner of
record shall be liable for any violation under this article until such
filing is made or until the dog is licensed in the name of the new
owner.
§ 104-11 AUBURN CODE § 104-11
100:164
(10) Lost, stolen or deceased dog. If any dog which has been licensed in
the City of Auburn is lost, stolen or deceased, the owner of record
shall notify the City Clerk's office within 10 days of the discovery of
such loss, theft or death.
(11) Lists of licensed dog owners. No dog licensing records,
information, or lists shall be made available to any person or
company for commercial purposes.
(12) Purebred licenses.
(a) Purebred licenses are offered in the City of Auburn as an
alternative to individual licenses for owners actively involved
in the breeding and sale of purebred dogs.
(b) To qualify for a purebred license, a person must own five or
more purebred dogs, and at least five of those dogs must be
unaltered.
(c) At the time of application, the City Clerk shall assign a
purebred license identification number. Application for a
purebred license shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk
and shall include rabies vaccination certification as specified in
Subsection A(2) of this section for every dog listed on the
license, a copy of which shall be kept on file by the City Clerk.
(d) Copies of registry papers for every dog or a comprehensive list
of registry numbers and associations shall be required and
filed with the Clerk's copy of the license.
(e) All dogs over four months of age must be listed and included in
the purebred license.
(f) Purebred licenses shall be issued for one year and renewed
annually.
(g) All applications for and renewals of purebred licenses shall be
accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the City Council.
In addition, an assessment of $3 for each unaltered dog and $1
for each altered dog shall be added for the purpose of carrying
out animal population control efforts as mandated by Article 7
of New York State Agriculture and Markets Law. No fee or
portion thereof shall be refundable once the license is issued.
(h) The City Clerk may request that the Dog Control Officer verify
the number of dogs being claimed on any purebred license.
(i) No purebred license is transferable. Upon change of ownership
of any dog licensed under a purebred license, the new owner
shall immediately make application for a license pursuant to
Subsection A(1) of this section, except when the new owner
holds a valid purebred license and adds the dog to such
purebred license.
§ 104-11 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-11
100:165
B. License fees. Pursuant to the Auburn City Code and Consolidated Fee
Schedule, the license fees for dogs in the City of Auburn shall be:
(1) For spayed and neutered dogs:
(a) One year: $7.50.
(b) Two years: $15.
(c) Three years: $22.50.
(2) For unspayed and unneutered dogs:
(a) One year: $15.50.
(b) Two years: $31.
(c) Three years: $46.50.
(3) All revenue derived from such fees shall be the sole property of the
City of Auburn and shall be used only for controlling dogs and
enforcing this article and Article 7 of New York State Agriculture
and Markets Law. Said revenue may also be used to subsidize the
spaying or neutering of dogs, to subsidize any facility as authorized
under Article 7 of New York State Agriculture and Markets Law,
and to subsidize public humane education programs related to
responsible dog ownership.
(4) In no event shall any money derived from license fees be used to
subsidize the spaying or neutering of cats or animals other than
dogs.
(5) No license fees are refundable in the event that a dog is lost, stolen,
sold, given away, surrendered or deceased before the expiration of
the license.
(6) An additional fee may be established by resolution of the Auburn
City Council should a dog be identified as unlicensed during an
enumeration. Such additional fee shall be the property of the City
of Auburn and shall be used to pay the expenses incurred while
conducting the enumeration. In the event the additional fees
collected exceed the expenses incurred, such excess fees may be
used for enforcing this article and for spaying or neutering dogs.
(7) In addition to the fees set by the City Council, an additional New
York State spay/neuter surcharge shall be assessed for the purpose
of carrying out population control efforts as mandated by Article 7
of New York State Agriculture and Markets Law. Money derived
from such additional assessment may be used to subsidize the
spaying and neutering of cats as well as dogs pursuant to Article 7
of New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 104-11 AUBURN CODE § 104-11
100:166
§ 104-12. Unlicensed dogs.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York and the Auburn City Code, owning, keeping or
harboring a dog within the City of Auburn, unless such dog is licensed as
required by the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law and the
Auburn City Code, shall be an offense punishable as set forth herein.
§ 104-13. Dangerous and vicious dogs.
(8) Any owner who has attained 65 years of age and is required to
obtain a dog license shall be exempt from payment of any license
fee specified in this article.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog which is defined pursuant to Article 7,
§ 108, of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, Paragraph
24(a). Said definition is incorporated herein and reads as follows:
"Dangerous dog means any dog which (i) without justification attacks a
person, companion animal as defined in subdivision five of section three
hundred fifty of this chapter; farm animal as defined in subdivision
four of section three hundred fifty of this chapter or domestic animal
as defined in subdivision seven of this section and causes physical
injury or death, or (ii) behaves in a manner which a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to one or more persons, companion animals,
farm animals or domestic animals or (iii) without justification attacks
a service dog, guide dog or hearing dog and causes physical injury or
death."
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which:
(1) Has caused death or serious injury to a person engaged in a lawful
activity;
(2) Has, on two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, bitten
without provocation a person engaged in a lawful activity;
(3) Has, on two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, while
off the property of its owner and without provocation, killed or
seriously injured another animal; or
(4) Has been trained for dog fighting or is owned or kept for the
purpose of dog fighting.
B. Regulation and adjudication of dangerous dogs. Dangerous dogs shall
be regulated and adjudicated pursuant to Article 7, § 123 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and shall be subject to the conduct
adjudication and findings set forth in said section.
§ 104-11 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-13
100:167
(1) Any dog which has been adjudicated a dangerous dog shall be
subject to restraint on a leash by an adult of at least 21 years of age
whenever the dog is on public premises and shall be muzzled, and
the muzzling of the dog shall occur whenever it is on public
premises in the manner that will prevent it from biting any person
or animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration.
(2) All other provisions of Article 7, § 123, of the Agriculture and
Markets Law shall be applicable in relation to the regulation of
dangerous dogs.
C. General provisions.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the City of Auburn
any vicious dog. Upon a finding that a dog is vicious, a court of
competent jurisdiction may order the dog to be impounded and
destroyed or to be removed from the City of Auburn.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the City of Auburn
any dangerous dog, except in compliance with § 104-20D.
D. Complaints.
(1) Any person may make a verbal or written complaint pursuant to
§ 123 (1 and 2) of the Agriculture and Markets Law, to the City Dog
Control Officer of a dog which the complainant believes to be
dangerous. The complaint shall include sufficient information to
enable the Dog Control Officer to ascertain the location and owner
of the dog and shall also include the reasons why the complainant
believes the dog to be dangerous.
(2) After receipt of the complaint, the Dog Control Officer shall
undertake an investigation to determine whether the dog identified
in the complaint is dangerous. Such investigation shall include an
opportunity for the owner of the dog to present evidence to the Dog
Control Officer pertinent to the dangerousness of the dog, and may
include interviews with the complainant and other persons having
personal knowledge regarding the dog and observations of the dog
in its normal habitat.
(3) Upon completion of the investigation, the Dog Control Officer shall
determine whether there is probable cause that the dog identified
in the complaint is vicious or dangerous. Upon the determination
that such probable cause exists, the Dog Control Officer shall
prepare and file the necessary documents with the Auburn City
Court commencing judicial proceedings in accordance with §§ 122
and 123 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 104-13 AUBURN CODE § 104-13.1
100:168
§ 104-13.1. Guide dogs and service dogs.
There shall be excluded from the provisions of this article any dogs which
are defined pursuant to § 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law as a guide
dog, hearing dog, service dog, working search dog, therapy dog, detection
dog, and any other dogs which are utilized by law enforcement agencies
within the jurisdiction of the City of Auburn and are professionally trained
service animals utilized for people with disabilities in the performance of its
trained duties.
§ 104-14. Appearance tickets.
The Dog Control Officer and any peace officer authorized by the City
to assist in the enforcement of this chapter and Article 7 § 122(2)(c) of
the Agriculture and Markets Law shall have the authority to issue an
appearance ticket, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 104-15. Seizure of dogs; impoundment.
Dogs shall be seized, impounded, redeemed or adopted pursuant to
Agriculture and Markets Law § 117, subject to the provisions of § 104-17.
§ 104-16. Civil penalties.
A. Any person charged with a violation of § 104-10A, B, C or D or § 104-12
shall be issued a civil penalty notice by the Dog Control Officer
requiring payment to the City of Auburn, within seven days of the
receipt of a civil penalty notice, of a civil penalty in accordance with the
below schedule:
(1) For a first offense, a civil penalty in the amount of $25.
(2) For a second offense within the preceding five years, a civil penalty
in the amount of $50.
(3) For a third offense and beyond within the preceding five years, a
civil penalty in the amount of $100.
B. In the event the person so charged fails to pay said civil penalty within
the time prescribed therefor, the Dog Control Officer may issue an
appearance ticket in accordance with Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law requiring the person so charged to appear in Auburn
City Court to answer such violation.
(1) The person so charged may enter a plea as set forth in Agriculture
and Markets Law, § 118, Subdivision 3.
(2) The City Court may, at its discretion, impose such fines as are
allowed by Agriculture and Markets Law § 118, Subdivision 2(a).
C. Civil penalties shall be paid directly to the City Clerk, and any and all
fines imposed by City Court shall be collected by City Court and
thereafter remitted to the City Clerk.
§ 104-13.1 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-17
100:169
§ 104-17. Impoundment fees.
§ 104-18. Removal of feces.
Any owner or person having custody of any dog or any other animal shall
not permit said dog or any other animal to defecate on any school ground,
public street, alley, sidewalk, tree bank, park or other public grounds or on
any private property within the City, other than the premises of the owner
or person having custody of said dog or other animal, unless said defecation
is removed immediately. In no event shall any feces be deposited in sewers
or drains, whether storm or sanitary. A violation of this section shall be
punishable by an imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to § 104-16A of this
chapter.
§ 104-19. Barking.
No person shall keep or harbor a dog which howls or barks in violation of
this section.
A. In addition to the penalties and fines set forth above, upon the seizure
of a dog by the Dog Control Officer for any violation of this article, to
redeem said dog the owner must furnish proof that the dog has been
licensed pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets Law and must pay the
following impoundment fees:
(1) For a first offense, a sum of $25 plus a boarding charge of $11 per
day for each day or part thereof of impoundment.
(2) For a second offense within the preceding five years, a sum of $50
plus a boarding charge of $11 per day or part thereof of
impoundment.
(3) For a third offense within the preceding five years, a sum of $100
plus $11 per day or part thereof of impoundment.
B. All such impoundment fees and the cost of boarding the dog shall be
paid by the owner directly to the City Clerk. If the fees and boarding
costs are not paid within five days of notification by the City Clerk to the
owner, the City may take the necessary steps to cause an owner to
forfeit title to any dog unredeemed at the expiration of the appropriate
redemption period, and the dog shall then be made available for
adoption or euthanized, subject to the provisions of Subdivision 2-a,
2-b, 2-c, 2-d and 2-e of § 374 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
C. The fees set forth herein may be amended at Council's discretion as a
component of the City's budget and shall become effective July 1 of
each fiscal year and shall remain in effect until the end of each
designated fiscal year unless amended by Council during the fiscal year.
A. It shall constitute a violation of this section if the howling or barking
occurs continually and is audible beyond the property line of the
premises on which the dog is located:
§ 104-17 AUBURN CODE § 104-19
100:170
§ 104-20. Dog kennels.
(1) For more than five minutes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.;
(2) For more than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.; or
(3) For a shorter duration than cited above, but on more than five
occasions within a given ten-day period if attested to by
complainants from two or more separate properties.
(4) Howling, barking or other noise made by a dog which is determined
to be unreasonable, taking into account the following factors:
(a) The proximity of the noise to residential property.
(b) The time of the day or night when the noise occurs.
(c) The time duration of the noise.
(d) Whether the noise is repetitive.
(e) The volume of the noise.
(f) The existence of complaints concerning the noise from persons
living or working in the vicinity of the noise and who are
affected by it.
(g) Malicious provocation resulting from such activity as trespass,
vandalism or badgering.
B. It shall be a defense to such violation if the owner of the dog proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that the only reason the dog was
howling or barking was that the dog was being provoked by a person or
was otherwise being incited, or was acting as a guide dog, hearing dog,
service dog or police work dog.
C. A violation of this section shall result in the imposition of a civil penalty
pursuant to § 104-16A of this chapter.
A. No dog kennel as defined in § 305-43 of the City of Auburn Zoning
Ordinance shall be permitted within the City of Auburn except within
the General Industrial District (I) as set forth in § 305-54B(2) of said
Zoning Ordinance.
B. No dog kennel shall be constructed, kept or maintained:
(1) In the front or side yard of any dwelling.
(2) On the premises of any two-family dwelling or multiple dwelling or
apartment house except with the permission of an owner of the
premises who uses such premises as his actual residence and
domicile.
§ 104-19 AMUSEMENT CENTERS § 104-20
100:171
§ 104-21. Incorporation of provisions by reference.
All other enabling and regulatory provisions contained in Article 7 of the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law effective January 1, 2011,
which are not referenced specifically in this article, are incorporated by
reference herein.
C. No resident of any two-family dwelling, multiple dwelling, townhouse or
apartment house shall keep more than one dog in or on such premises.
D. In the event that a tenant resides in a premises not owned by him or her,
it shall be the responsibility of the person or landlord who rents the
premises to the tenant to notify the Auburn City Clerk that the tenant
harbors a dog or dogs, and must supply all contact information for the
tenant, including telephone numbers for home, work and cell phone, if
available.
§ 104-20 AUBURN CODE § 104-21
100:172
Chapter 109
AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 200.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 109-1. License required.
§ 109-2. Issuance of license; fee; application.
A. Generally. No person shall exercise the business or trade of auctioneer,
or sell any property at public auction or outcry within the City, without
first having obtained a license to act as such auctioneer.
B. Exceptions. Nothing in this article shall:
(1) Prevent the Council from issuing a permit to a person who has been
engaged in business in the City for at least one year to sell at public
auction in his or her place of business from his or her own stock
goods not purchased for the purpose of being sold at auction for
such length of time not exceeding 10 days at any one time and
between such hours and upon payment of such fee as the Council
may fix; or
(2) Be deemed to require a license for the sale of property under a
judgment, decree or order of any court, or to close any estate in the
course of administration.
A. City Manager to issue. A license hereunder may be issued by the City
Manager, upon application, for a period of not more than one year, upon
payment of such fee as follows:
(1) For three months or less: $25.
(2) For over three months and not more than six months: $50.
(3) For over six months and not more than one year: $100.
B. Application. Any person who desires to obtain a license under this
article shall make an application which shall include the following
information:
(1) Name, address and age of applicant.
(2) Place of business, if auctions are to be conducted at a specific
location.
§ 104-21 AUCTIONEERS § 109-2
109:173
§ 109-3. Bond required.
Before any license hereunder is issued, each applicant therefor shall
present to the City Manager for filing in the office of the City Clerk a duly
approved bond in the sum of $1,000 to the effect that the applicant will well,
truly and honestly conduct the business of such auctioneer.
§ 109-4. Revocation of license.
The City Manager shall have authority at any time to revoke any license
issued by him or her hereunder if it appears to him or her that the applicant
therefor is not well, truly, honestly and fairly conducting the business of
auctioneer and observing all laws of the State of New York and laws and
ordinances of the City, as provided in Chapter 200, Licensing, of this Code.
§ 109-5. Hours of operation.
No person procuring a license hereunder shall sell any personal property at
public auction at any time except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
§ 109-6. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 115
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
(3) Statement of prior licenses as an auctioneer in this City or any
other jurisdiction.
(4) Experience as an auctioneer, if any.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime or of
any violation in the performance of his or her occupation as
auctioneer.
(6) Such other information as the City Manager may require to
determine the qualifications of the applicant to act as an
auctioneer.
C. Denial of license. For good cause and after a report from the Chief of
Police, the City Manager may refuse to issue a license subject to the
provisions of Chapter 200, Licensing, of this Code.
§ 109-2 AUBURN CODE § 109-6
115:174
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 115-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Bicycle
Ordinance."
§ 115-2. Scope.
§ 115-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any and every device propelled by human power upon which
any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more
than 20 inches in diameter.
§ 115-4. Rental agencies.
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1236.
A. Generally. It shall be a violation for any person to do any act forbidden
or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
B. Responsibility of parent or guardian. The parent of any child and the
guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such
child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Applicability. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway, upon private roads
open to public motor vehicle traffic and upon any public path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
herein.
§ 115-1 BICYCLES § 115-4
115:175

ARTICLE II
Operation of Bicycles
§ 115-5. Applicability of traffic laws.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and the traffic ordinances of this
City applicable to the driver of a vehicle,25 except as to special regulations
in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances
which by their nature can have no application.
§ 115-6. Riding on sidewalks. [Amended 5-12-1994 by Ord. No.
18-1994]
Bicycling is permitted on sidewalks within the City of Auburn, with the
exception of the Auburn downtown area, where bicycling shall be prohibited
during normal business hours. Pedestrians shall always have the right-ofway
in the use of a sidewalk.
§ 115-7. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic, and provided that no person shall park a
bicycle in parking meter spaces set aside for vehicles.
§ 115-7.1. Riding prohibited in designated areas. [Added 3-18-2004
by Ord. No. 2-2004]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the
riding of bicycles is prohibited in the designated area, as defined in
§ 234-16C of this Municipal Code, except as specifically provided by
§ 234-16D.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 115-5 BICYCLES § 115-7.1
115:177

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 115-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
§ 115-8 BICYCLES § 115-8
115:179
Chapter 119
BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 115-8 AUBURN CODE § 115-8
119:180
ARTICLE I
Bingo
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 12 of the 1991 Code]
§ 119-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Bingo Ordinance of the
City of Auburn, New York."
§ 119-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the operation of the game of bingo by
authorized organizations in the City of Auburn pursuant to Article 1, § 9 of
the Constitution of the State of New York and as implemented by the State
Bingo Control Law and the Bingo Licensing Law.26
§ 119-3. Authorization to conduct bingo games.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, upon
obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo within the
territorial limits of the City of Auburn, New York, subject to the provisions
of this article, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article 19-B of the
Executive Law and any amendments to said laws.
§ 119-4. Restrictions upon conduct of bingo games.
The conduct of bingo games authorized by this article shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
26.Editor's Note: See Art. 19-B of the Executive Law and Art. 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, respectively.
§ 119-1 BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE § 119-4
119:181
§ 119-5. Delegation of authority to City Clerk.
The City Clerk is hereby designated to exercise all of the authority granted
to the Council under § 498 of the General Municipal Law in relation to
the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of
investigations and hearings, the supervision of the operation of the games
and the collection and transmission of fees.
§ 119-6. (Reserved)28
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $,1000 in any single game of
bingo. [Amended 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000. [Amended 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provisions of this article shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
J. No person licensed to sell bingo supplies or equipment, or his or her
agents, shall conduct, participate in, or assist in the conduct of bingo.
Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensed distributor from selling,
offering for sale, or explaining a product to an authorized organization,
or installing, or servicing bingo equipment, upon the premises of a
bingo game licensee. [Added 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-200627]
K. Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection J as Subsection K.
28.Editor's Note: Former § 119-6, Sunday games prohibited, was repealed 8-3-2006 by Ord.
No. 13-2006.
§ 119-4 AUBURN CODE § 119-6
119:182
ARTICLE II
Games of Chance
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 14 of the 1991 Code]
§ 119-7. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Games of Chance Ordinance of the City
of Auburn, New York."
§ 119-8. Definitions.
A. Specific terms. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes any bona fide religious or
charitable organization or bona fide educational, fraternal or service
organization or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen
which, by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution, or act of
the legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more
of the lawful purposes as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal
Law, provided that each shall operate without profit to its members,
and provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one
or more of the lawful purposes as defined in § 186 of the General
Municipal Law for a period of three years immediately prior to applying
for a license under this article and Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law. No organization shall be deemed an authorized organization which
is formed primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance
and which does not devote at least 75% of its activities to other than
conducting games of chance. No political party shall be deemed an
authorized organization.
BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
CITY — The City of Auburn in the County of Cayuga in the State of New
York.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Includes only the games known as
"merchandise wheels" and such other specific games as may be
authorized by the Board, in which prizes are awarded on the basis
of a designated winning number or numbers, color or colors, symbol
or symbols determined by chance, but not including games commonly
known as "bingo" or "lotto" which are controlled under Article 14-H
of the General Municipal Law and also not including slot machines,
bookmaking, policy or numbers games and lottery as defined in
§ 225.00 of the Penal Law. No game of chance shall involve wagering of
money by one player against another player.
RAFFLE — Means and includes those games in which a participant pays
money in return for a ticket or other receipt and in which a prize is
awarded on the basis of a winning number or numbers, color or colors,
or symbol or symbols designated on the ticket or receipt, determined
§ 119-7 BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE § 119-8
119:183
§ 119-9. Authorization to conduct games of chance.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the
City Clerk, conduct games of chance within the City of Auburn as provided
in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided further in this
article. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with the
general state law and with the rules and regulations of the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board and this article.
§ 119-10. Restrictions upon conduct of games of chance.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this article shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
by chance as a result of a drawing from among those tickets or receipts
previously sold.[Added 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this article shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
A. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of § 191 of the General Municipal Law,
shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting games of chance premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this article
shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically
designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of chance from
other than a supplier licensed by the Board or from another authorized
organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance shall be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct
the same, and the net proceeds of any rental derived therefrom shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the authorized games of
chance lessor.
E. No single prize awarded by games of chance other than raffle shall
exceed the sum or value of $300, except that for a merchandise wheel,
no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250. No single prize
awarded by raffle shall exceed the sum or value of $50,000, except that
an authorized organization may award by raffle a single prize having a
value of up to and including $100,000 if its application for a license filed
pursuant to § 190 of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law includes a
statement of its intent to award a prize having such value. No single
§ 119-8 AUBURN CODE § 119-10
119:184
wager shall exceed $6 and for bell jars, coin boards, or merchandise
boards, no single prize shall exceed $500; provided, however, that such
limitation shall not apply to the amount of money or value paid by
the participant in a raffle in return for a ticket or other receipt. For
coin boards and merchandise boards, the value of a prize shall be
determined by its costs to the authorized organization or, if donated, its
fair market value. [Amended 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
F. No authorized organization shall award a series of prizes consisting of
cash or of merchandise with an aggregate value in excess of $10,000
during the successive operations of any bell jar, coin board, or
merchandise board. No series of prizes awarded by raffle shall have an
aggregate value in excess of $100,000. For coin boards and
merchandise boards, the value of a prize shall be determined by its cost
to the authorized organization or, if donated, its fair market value.
[Amended 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
G. In addition to merchandise wheels, raffles, and bell jars, no more than
five other single types of games of chance shall be conducted during
any one license period. [Amended 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
H. Except for merchandise wheels and raffles, no series of prizes on any
one occasion shall aggregate more than $400 when the licensed
authorized organization conducts five single types of games of chance
during any one license period. Except for merchandise wheels and bell
jars, no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than
$500 when the licensed authorized organization conducts fewer than
five single types of games of chance, exclusive of merchandise wheels
and bell jars, during any one license period. [Amended 8-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 13-2006]
I. Except for the limitations on the sum or value for single prizes and
series of prizes, no limit shall be imposed on the sum or value of prizes
awarded to any one participant during any occasion or any license
period.
J. No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization shall participate in the management of such games. No
person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization shall participate in
the operation of such game, as set forth in § 195-c of the General
Municipal Law.
K. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
L. No authorized organization shall extend credit to a person to
participate in playing a game of chance.
M. No game of chance shall be conducted on other than the premises of an
authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor.
§ 119-10 BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE § 119-10
119:185
§ 119-11. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
This article shall be deemed to include all of the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law, except as otherwise provided in this article,
and any amendment to the provisions in such article to the extent such
provisions and amending acts are otherwise applicable to games of chance
authorized under this article.
§ 119-12. (Reserved)29
§ 119-13. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall exercise control over and supervision of all
games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such
Department shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of
the General Municipal Law.
N. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
29.Editor's Note: Former § 119-12, Sunday games prohibited, was repealed 8-3-2006 by Ord.
No. 13-2006.
§ 119-10 AUBURN CODE § 119-13
119:186
Chapter 125
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electricians — See Ch. 153.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 178.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Water service — See Ch. 297.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 119-13 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 119-13
125:187

Part 1
[AdopBteudild3i-n2g8 -C1o9n9s1trBuycLti.oLn. ;N Foi.r e2 -P1r9e9v1enAtsio Cnh; .U 2n6s aOffe T Bhuei l1d9in9g1s Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 125-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Code
Enforcement Ordinance of the City of Auburn."
§ 125-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to provide for enforcement procedures in the
City of Auburn for the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, hereinafter called "Uniform Code."
§ 125-3. Area of responsibility.
§ 125-4. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this Part 1 shall have the same meaning as
those contained in Executive Law Article 18 as added by Chapter 707 of the
Laws of 1981, unless the context may otherwise require.
§ 125-5. Installation of smoke alarms.
A. The City is responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code for all private buildings, premises and equipment located
within the City of Auburn.
B. The City is also responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the Uniform Code with respect to buildings, premises and equipment in
the custody of, or activities related thereto undertaken by, the City of
Auburn or any special purpose unit created by or for its benefit,
although no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
required. The City shall not be responsible for those of another city, or
village, town or county.
C. The state is responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code with respect to buildings, premises and equipment in the
custody of, or activities related thereto undertaken by, a state
department, bureau, commission, board or authority.
D. The State Education Department shall likewise administer and enforce
the Uniform Code for school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services.
E. To the maximum extent practicable, the City acting under this section
shall consult with those other governmental entities providing services,
under authority of other laws, to those areas where the authority
conferred by this section is exercised.
§ 125-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-5
125:189
A. Single-station smoke detecting alarm devices shall conform to the
requirements of Part 850 of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
B. Such device shall be designed and installed so as to avoid dead air
space, detect smoke and activate the alarm, be reasonably free from
false alarm and provide visible indication that the alarm is energized.
C. The alarm shall be clearly audible in sleeping spaces with intervening
doors closed.
D. After January 1, 1987, the above requirements in Subsections A, B and
C shall apply to all existing one- and two-family homes and other
residential units in the City of Auburn.
§ 125-5 AUBURN CODE § 125-5
125:190
ARTICLE II
Enforcement Officers
§ 125-6. Appointment of Building Inspector; qualifications.
§ 125-7. Appointment of assistants; designated inspectors.
§ 125-8. Acting Building Inspector.
In the absence of the Building Inspector or in the case of his or her inability
to act for any reason, the City Manager shall designate one or more of the
above inspectors to act in his or her behalf and to exercise all of the powers
conferred upon him or her by this Part 1.
§ 125-9. Restrictions on officers and employees.
No officer or employee of the Building Department or any of the designated
inspectors shall engage in any activity inconsistent with his or her duties
or with the interests of the Building Department, nor shall he or she,
during the term of his or her office or employment, be engaged directly or
indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor, materials, or
appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or
the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the City of Auburn,
excepting only that this provision shall not prohibit any officer or employee
A. Appointment. There is hereby designated in the City of Auburn a public
official to be known as the "Building Inspector," who shall be appointed
by the City Manager at a compensation to be fixed by the Council.
B. Qualifications. The Building Inspector shall be a person who shall have
had at least five years' experience as a licensed professional engineer
or architect, building inspector, building contractor or supervisor of
building construction.
A. The City Manager may appoint one or more fire fighters as assistants to
the code enforcement supervisor to act under the supervision of the
code enforcement supervisor and to exercise any portion of his or her
powers and duties. The compensation of such assistants shall be fixed
by the Council. [Amended 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 29-1995]
B. The Housing Code Inspector shall have primary responsibility for
enforcing the Housing Code, as provided in Chapter 182. The Plumbing
Inspector shall have primary responsibility for making all plumbing
inspections in existing buildings and new construction. The Electrical
Inspector shall have primary responsibility for making electrical
inspections as hereinafter provided in this Part 1. The Fire Inspector,
detailed from the Fire Department, shall have primary responsibility for
making the inspections and otherwise enforcing Chapter C of the
Uniform Code. However, each of the above inspectors shall have
complete power and authority to enforce all provisions of the Uniform
Code.
§ 125-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-9
125:191
from such activities in connection with the construction of a building or
structure owned by him or her and not constructed for sale.
§ 125-10. Powers and duties of Building Inspector.
§ 125-11. Department records and reports.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided, the Building
Inspector shall administer and enforce all provisions of the Uniform
Code and laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings
and structures, and the installation and use of materials and equipment
therein, and the location, use, occupancy and maintenance thereof.
B. He or she shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts
thereof and shall examine the premises for which such applications
have been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of
insuring compliance with the Uniform Code and laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations governing building construction.
C. He or she shall issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal
or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during
construction and to insure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the requirements of the Uniform Code and applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. He or she shall make all
inspections which are necessary or proper for the carrying out of his or
her duties, except that he or she may accept written reports of
inspection from officers or employees of the Building Department,
inspectors designated in § 125-7 or from generally recognized and
authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided the same are
certified by a responsible official thereof.
D. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Code, applicable laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations covering building construction, he or
she may require the performance of tests in the field by experienced,
professional persons or by accredited and authoritative testing
laboratories or service bureaus or agencies.
E. The Building Inspector and his or her assistants, including other
inspectors designated in § 125-7, are authorized to issue appearance
tickets pursuant to § 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law and
Paragraph (a) of Subdivision 4 of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law
in the exercise of their duties to administer and enforce this Part 1, the
Uniform Code, any other chapter in this Municipal Code, and any state
statute, rule or regulation when he or she has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has committed a misdemeanor, or has committed
a petty offense, as defined in the Criminal Procedure Law, in his or her
presence relating thereto.
§ 125-9 AUBURN CODE § 125-11
125:192
§ 125-12. Cooperation of other departments.
The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of the Police and Fire Departments or officers and of all other
municipal officials exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or
occupancy of buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
§ 125-13. Variances and appeals.
A request for a variance from the Uniform Code and an appeal to review
a determination of or failure to render a determination by the enforcement
official shall be processed with the appropriate Board of Review as provided
in 19 NYCRR 440.
A. The Building Inspector shall keep permanent records on all
transactions and activities conducted by him or her, including all
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and
collected, inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such
records shall be public records open to public inspection during
business hours.
B. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the Council a written
report and summary of all business conducted by the Building
Inspector, including permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and
appeals or litigation pending.
§ 125-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-13
125:193

ARTICLE III
Building Permit
§ 125-14. Application for building permit. [Amended 3-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 4-2000]
A. No person, firm, corporation, association or partnership shall
commence the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or change in the nature
of the occupancy of any building or structure, or cause the same to be
done, or install heating, ventilation and/or central air-conditioning
equipment, without first obtaining a separate building permit from the
Building Inspector for each such building or structure.
B. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector on forms provided by him or her and shall contain the
following information:
(1) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
(2) A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and of
the building or structure.
(3) The valuation of the proposed work.
(4) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant, and
the names and addresses of their responsible officers, if any of
them are corporations.
(5) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(6) Four sets of plans and specifications as set forth in Subsection D of
this section.
(7) A statement that the work shall be performed in compliance with
the Uniform Code and applicable state and local laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations.
(8) With respect to a permit for the installation of heating, ventilation
and central air-conditioning equipment, the contractor shall
provide proof of liability insurance.
C. Application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or
by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the
proposed work. Where such application is made by a person other than
the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or
applicant that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and that
the applicant is authorized to make such application.
D. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan drawn
to scale and showing the location and size of all proposed new
construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
§ 125-14 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-14
125:195
§ 125-15. Issuance of building permit.
§ 125-16. Performance of work under building permit.
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be
incorporated, distance from lot lines, the relationship of structures
on adjoining property, widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks
and alleys and, where required by the Building Inspector, details of
structural, mechanical and electrical work, including computations,
stress diagrams and other essential technical data.
E. Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person
responsible for the design and drawings, together with a statement by a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of this state,
when the signature of such an architect or professional engineer is
required to be affixed to plans and specifications by Title 8 of the
Education Law, that such plans and specifications comply with the
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and local requirements. The
Building Inspector may waive the requirement for filing plans in
appropriate situations.
F. Amendments to the application or the plans and specifications
accompanying the same may be filed at any time prior to the completion
of the work, subject to the approval of the Building Inspector.
A. The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents
filed therewith. He or she shall approve or disapprove the application
within a reasonable time.
B. Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of the legal fees
therefor, he or she shall issue a building permit to the applicant upon
the form prescribed by him or her and shall affix his or her signature or
cause his or her signature to be affixed thereto.
C. Upon the approval of the application, all sets of plans and specifications
shall be endorsed with word "approved." Three sets of such approved
plans and specifications shall be retained in the files of the appropriate
City agencies and the other set shall be returned to the applicant
together with the building permit and shall be kept at the building site
open to inspection by the Building Inspector or his or her authorized
representative at all reasonable times.
D. If the application, together with plans, specifications and other
documents filed therewith, describes proposed work which does not
conform to all the requirements of the Uniform Code and applicable
building regulations, the Building Inspector shall disapprove the same
and shall return the plans and specifications to the applicant. Upon the
request of the applicant, the Building Inspector shall cause such
refusal, together with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the
applicant in writing.
§ 125-14 AUBURN CODE § 125-16
125:196
§ 125-17. Building permit and related fees. [Amended 12-19-1991]
§ 125-18. Revocation of building permit.
The Building Inspector may revoke a building permit theretofore issued and
approved in the following instances:
§ 125-19. Stop orders.
Whenever the Building Inspector or any other inspector designated in this
Part 1 has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any building or
A. A building permit shall be effective to authorize the commencing of
work in accordance with the application, plans and specifications on
which it is based for a period of six months after the date of its issuance.
For good cause, the Building Inspector may allow a maximum of two
extensions for periods not exceeding three months each. Any further
extensions may only be granted by order of the Planning Board.
B. The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the
applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and in accordance with the Uniform Code and
applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. All
work shall conform to the approved application, plans and
specifications.
A. Permit required for construction or excavation. No construction work,
including excavation, whether new construction or additions or
alterations to existing structures or whether of a temporary or
permanent nature, will be commenced in the City of Auburn except
upon the issuance of a building permit by the Building Inspector after
payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed.
B. Refund. In the event that an application for a building permit is not
approved, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of 50% of the fee
paid, provided no construction has been commenced. If construction
work has been started and the application is not approved, the fees paid
shall not be refunded.
A. Where he or she finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
B. Where he or she finds that the building permit was issued in error and
should not have been issued in accordance with the applicable law.
C. Where he or she finds that the work performed under the permit is not
being prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application,
plans or specifications.
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 125-16 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-19
125:197
structure is being prosecuted in violation of the provisions of the Uniform
Code or applicable building laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or not
in conformity with the provisions of an application, plans, or specifications
on the basis of which a building permit was issued or in an unsafe and
dangerous manner, he or she shall notify the owner of the property, or the
owner's agent, or the person performing the work, to suspend all work and
any such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building
activities until the stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice
shall be in writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed either
by delivering it personally to him or her or by posting the same upon a
conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a copy
of the same by registered mail.
§ 125-20. Right of entry.
§ 125-21. Inspections.
A. Any building official shall be authorized, in the performance of his or
her duties, to conduct inspections of premises, or parts of premises, at
such times and in such manner as the building official may find
convenient or necessary, with the consent of the person in possession or
occupancy.
B. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the person in
possession or occupancy, the building official shall be authorized to
obtain a warrant to make an inspection, provided reasonable or
probable cause is shown.
C. In case of an emergency, the building official may, without a warrant,
enter any premises, or parts of premises, to inspect the same, at any
time, without the permission of the person in possession or occupancy.
A. Work for which a building permit has been issued under this article
shall be inspected for approval prior to enclosing or covering any
portion thereof and upon completion of each stage of construction,
including but not limited to building location, site preparation,
excavation, foundation, framing, superstructure, electrical, plumbing,
and heating and air conditioning. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner, applicant, or his or her agent to inform the Building Inspector
that the work is ready for inspection and to schedule such inspection.
B. Existing buildings.
(1) Existing buildings not subject to inspection under Subsection A of
this section shall be subject to periodic inspections for compliance
with the Uniform Code in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) All areas of public assembly defined in the Uniform Code, all
buildings or structures containing areas of public assembly,
§ 125-19 AUBURN CODE § 125-21
125:198
§ 125-22. Permits for solid-fuel-burning heating appliances,
chimneys and flues.
A building permit for installation of a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance,
chimney and flue in any dwelling unit shall be obtained prior to installation
as provided in § 125-14 of this Part 1; provided, however, that the
installation may be commenced without such permit if the delay in obtaining
such permit could be expected to cause irreparable damage to the property
or serious injury to the occupants, and provided an application for the
building permit is made within three business days of commencement of
the installation. If the Fire Inspector, after inspection, determines that the
installation is in compliance with the Uniform Code, he or she shall issue
a certificate of compliance on a form to be prescribed by resolution of the
City Council. A violation of this section and of Subdivision 5 of § 378 of the
Executive Law shall be punishable as provided in such Subdivision 5.
§ 125-23. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-20-1994 by Ord. No.
2-1994]
and the common areas of multiple dwellings: every three
months.
(b) All buildings or structures open to the general public: every six
months.
(c) All other buildings: every 12 months.
(2) Notwithstanding any requirement of this Subsection B to the
contrary, no regular, periodic inspections of occupied dwelling
units shall be required; provided, however, that this shall not be a
limitation on inspections conducted at the invitation of the
occupant or where conditions on the premises threaten or present
a hazard to public health, safety or welfare.
C. Inspections shall be made in response to bona fide complaints
regarding conditions or activities allegedly failing to comply with the
Uniform Code.
A. Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as follows:
(1) A first violation within an eighteen-month period shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
(2) A second violation within an eighteen-month period shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 or
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
(3) A third violation within an eighteen-month period shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 125-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-23
125:199
B. Said fine as set forth in Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above shall be
levied against either the private contractor providing construction
services and/or the property owner contracting for said services, or
both, individually or separately. Furthermore, each fine rendered
against an individual and/or contractor shall be cumulative, regardless
of the address or site at which the initial violation(s) is cited.
C. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
violation.
§ 125-23 AUBURN CODE § 125-23
125:200
ARTICLE IV
Certificate of Occupancy
§ 125-24. Purpose.
The certificate of occupancy certifies to a prospective or current owner or
occupant that a building, its dwelling units and uses conform to Building
and Housing Code regulations, comply with the Zoning Ordinance, and may
be legally occupied.
§ 125-25. New buildings.
No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part
unless prior to its use or occupancy a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 125-26. Changes in existing buildings.
No change shall be made in the use, type of occupancy or number of
dwelling units of an existing building unless prior to its use or occupancy a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 125-27. Multiple dwellings and mixed uses. [Amended 10-7-1993
by Ord. No. 32-1993; 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A certificate of occupancy shall be applicable to all buildings containing
two nonowner-occupied dwelling units, three or more dwelling units and
all mixed commercial/residential uses, and application shall be filed for a
certificate of occupancy when any one of the following occurs:
A. Transfer of title, unless taken by a mortgagee as a result of a
foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure.
B. Execution or recording of a mortgage for a property without a valid
certificate of occupancy.
C. Vacancy of one or more units for six months or more.
D. Change of use as set forth in § 125-26.
E. Issuance of a building permit pursuant to § 125-14A when said permit is
for any one of the following:
(1) Necessary repairs which materially affect structural features.
(2) Alterations to existing buildings, provided that the alterations:
(a) Cost in excess of $10,000.
(b) Materially affect structural features.
(c) Affect firesafety features, such as hard-wired smoke detectors,
sprinklers, required fire separations and exits.
§ 125-24 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-27
125:201
§ 125-28. Single-family dwellings. [Added 7-2-1998 by Ord. No.
8-1998]
§ 125-29. Inspections.
The Building Inspector shall perform a complete inspection of the interior
and exterior of the building, dwelling units, and site to assure and certify
that the property, dwelling units, site and uses are in compliance with
zoning and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 125-30. Issuance, refusal or revocation of certificate of occupancy.
(d) Involve the installation or extension of electrical systems.
(e) Include the installation of solid-fuel-burning heating
appliances and associated chimneys and flues.
F. Expiration, revocation or other terminations of an existing certificate of
occupancy.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be applicable to single-family dwellings,
and application shall be filed for a certificate of occupancy when said
dwellings are vacant for a period in excess of six months.
B. For purposes of this section, the six-month time period shall commence
on the date a single-family dwelling is placed on the Auburn Fire
Department's weekly inspection list.
A. Within 10 days after written application therefor and after final
inspection, if it is found that the building complies with all building,
housing, zoning, and all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
B. If the Building Inspector does not issue such certificate within 10 days,
the Building Inspector may, on request of the owner, a certified agent,
prospective owner or lending institution, issue a temporary certificate
of occupancy for the building, or a section or a part thereof, for a period
of 90 days or less, provided that such certificate shall bear the
endorsement that the building has been inspected by the Building
Inspector and that such temporary occupancy may be done safely
without endangering life or the public welfare.
C. Such temporary certificate shall also contain a detailed list of all items
required to be replaced, repaired, installed or fixed before a certificate
of occupancy shall be issued. Such temporary certificate may be
renewed at the discretion of the Building Inspector, for similar periods,
but shall not extend, together with such renewals, beyond nine months
from the date of the original issuance.
D. A certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a period of five years or
until such time as a new certificate is required pursuant to § 125-27 of
this article.
§ 125-27 AUBURN CODE § 125-30
125:202
§ 125-31. Contents.
§ 125-32. Right of appeal.
§ 125-33. (Reserved)
E. A certificate of occupancy may be revoked or suspended in whole or in
part at the discretion of the Building Inspector for any building or
portion thereof found to be in violation of any building, housing, zoning,
and all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed and that the proposed use and occupancy are in conformity
with the provisions of the applicable building, housing, zoning, and all
other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The certificate shall
specify the use or uses and the extent thereof to which the building or
structure or its several parts may be put.
B. Each certificate of occupancy shall bear a certificate number, date of
expiration, date of inspection, date of issuance, zoning district, and
street name and number, in addition to the other pertinent information.
Certificates for residential structures shall also contain the number and
size of dwelling units. Certificates for commercial and mixed-use
structures shall also contain the number of square feet.
A. Any and all decisions of the Building Inspector under this article shall
be subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals heretofore established.
B. Any and all provisions set forth in Chapter 305, Zoning, Article II of the
City of Auburn Municipal Code shall be applicable to any appeal taken
under this article.30
30.Editor's Note: Original § 26.49, Schedule of Fees, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 12-19-1991.
§ 125-30 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-33
125:203

ARTICLE V
Electrical Inspections
§ 125-34. Authorization to make inspections.
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of any
electrical inspection agency designated by the Council are hereby
authorized and deputized as agents of the City to make inspections and
reinspections of all electrical installations hereinafter described and to
approve or disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost or
expense of such inspections and reinspections be a charge against the City.
§ 125-35. Duties of inspector.
§ 125-36. Schedule of rates.
The schedule of rates charged for inspection shall be filed with the City
Clerk and the Building Inspector.
§ 125-37. Exemption permits.
A. It shall be the duty of the inspector to report to the Building Inspector
all violations of or deviations from or omissions of the electrical
provisions of the Uniform Code and this Municipal Code. The inspector
shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in
and on properties in the City upon the written request of the Building
Inspector as herein provided.
B. The inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of
electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances and equipment in
and on properties within the City where he or she deems it necessary
for the protection of life and property, with the exception of singlefamily
dwellings. He or she shall inspect single-family dwellings only
upon request of the Building Inspector.
C. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to make
electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer of
the City.
D. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the City and owners and/or lessees of property where
defective electrical installations and equipment are found upon
inspection.
E. He or she shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance when
electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with the
Uniform Code or with the Municipal Code, and he or she shall direct
that a copy of the certificate of compliance be sent to the Building
Inspector.
A. To the extent authorized by law, the Building Inspector is empowered
and directed to issue a permit granting exemption from the provisions
§ 125-34 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-37
125:205
§ 125-38. Exceptions.
§ 125-39. No waiver or assumption of liability.
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City or
of this article to each person, firm or corporation engaged in the
conduct of manufacturing in or on properties in the City upon written
application of such person, firm or corporation, hereinafter called the
"applicant," setting forth that:
(1) The applicant is engaged in the conduct of manufacturing in the
City.
(2) The applicant regularly employs one or more journeyman
electricians, whose principal duties are the installation,
maintenance and repair of electrical machinery, appliances,
equipment and wiring for electric light, heat or power, hereinafter
called "electrical work," in or upon the premises used by the
applicant in the conduct of manufacturing.
(3) By reason of the amount and frequency of electrical work so
performed upon the applicant's premises, compliance with the
provisions of this article would impose an undue burden on the
applicant's conduct of manufacturing operations.
B. The term "journeyman electrician" shall mean a person who has
completed an apprentice course, or received equivalent training, or has
equivalent experience of at least three years in electrical work.
C. Each permit so issued shall be for a period of one year, and such permit
shall be renewed for successive one-year periods upon supplemental
application by the applicant certifying that the statements contained in
the original application remain true and correct.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the electrical
installations in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the
installations or equipment employed by a railway, electrical or
communication utility in the exercise of its function as a utility and
located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose.
B. This article shall not apply to any work involved in the manufacture,
assembly, test or repair of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials
and equipment by a person, firm or corporation engaged in electrical
manufacturing as his or its principal business.
C. This article shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in
its entirety by the government of the United States or the State of New
York or its political subdivisions.
§ 125-37 AUBURN CODE § 125-39
125:206
the authorized electrical inspection agency be deemed to have assumed any
such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this article.
§ 125-40. Violations.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm, or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter or repair electrical wiring
for light, heat or power in or on properties in the City until an
application for inspection has been filed with an authorized electrical
inspection agency.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate, or a certificate of compliance,
by an authorized electrical inspection agency.
§ 125-39 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-40
125:207

ARTICLE VI
Fire Prevention
§ 125-41. Administration.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall detail a Fire Inspector or Inspectors
to administer and enforce Chapter C of the Uniform Code and related
provisions of the Uniform Code and Chapter 182, Housing Standards, of the
City of Auburn Municipal Code relating to fire and life safety within the City
of Auburn. However, such Fire Inspectors shall have complete power and
authority to enforce all provisions of the Uniform Code and the Housing
Code.
§ 125-42. Fire prevention permit.
A. Purpose. A fire prevention permit shall constitute permission to
maintain, store, or handle materials, or to conduct processes, which
produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment
used in connection with such activities. Such permit shall not take the
place of any other license or permit required by law. It shall not be
transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall
require a new permit.
B. Inspection required. Before a permit may be issued, the Fire Inspector
shall make such inspections or tests as are necessary to assure that the
provisions of the Uniform Code are complied with.
C. Issuance; fee. All permits shall be issued by the City Clerk after the
necessary approval as set forth in Subsection B of this section. The fee
for each such permit shall be $25. This fee shall be in addition to the fee
under any other local law or ordinance of the City of Auburn.
D. Nontransferable. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in
activity, operation, location, ownership, or use shall require a new
permit.
E. Indefinite term; limitations. Permits shall continue until revoked or for a
period of time designated at the time of issuance. An extension of the
permit time period may be granted provided a satisfactory reason can
be shown for failure to start or complete the work or activity authorized
within the required time period.
F. Activities for which permits required. Permits shall be obtained for the
following:
(1) Acetylene generators. To operate an acetylene generator having a
calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
(2) Automobile tire rebuilding plants. To operate an automobile tire
rebuilding plant.
§ 125-41 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-42
125:209
(3) Automobile wrecking yards. To operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
(4) Bowling establishments. For bowling pin refinishing and bowling
lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
(5) Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film. To store, keep or have on
hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
(6) Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin),
which shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(7) Combustible fibers. To store, handle, or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products
on a farm.
(8) Combustible materials. To store combustible materials, including
but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels,
or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork, or
other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
(9) Compressed gases.
(a) To store, handle, or use at normal temperatures and pressures
more than:
[1] Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or
[2] Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle, or use any quantity of liquefied natural or
hydrogen gas.
(10) Cryogenics. To store, handle, or use cryogenic fluids, except
cryogenics used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks,
as follows:
(a) Production, sale, or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic
oxidizers, or liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(11) Dry-cleaning plants. To use in excess of four gallons of solvents or
cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(12) Dust-producing plants. To operate any grain elevator, flour, starch
or feed mill, woodworking plant, or plant pulverizing aluminum,
§ 125-42 AUBURN CODE § 125-42
125:210
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur, or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
(13) Explosive, ammunition and blasting agents.
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell, or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
(14) Flammable and combustible liquids.
(a) To store, handle, or use flammable liquids in excess of 61/2
gallons inside dwellings or in excess of 10 gallons inside any
other building or other occupancy or in excess of 60 gallons
outside of any building. This provision shall not apply to:
[1] Liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft,
portable or stationary engine, boat, or portable heating
plant.
[2] Paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures, when
such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting, or
similar purposes.
(b) To store, handle, or use combustible liquids in excess of 25
gallons inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a
building. This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.
(c) For the initial installation of an oil burner and a fuel oil tank
used in connection therewith. A permit shall be required for
the replacement of a fuel oil tank connected to an oil burner.
(d) For processing, blending, or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(15) Flammable finishing. For spraying, coating, or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
(16) Fruit-ripening process. To conduct a fruit-ripening process using
ethylene gas.
(17) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. To conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
(18) Hazardous chemicals.
(a) To store, handle, or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive
liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more
than 10 pounds of organic peroxides; or more than 50 pounds
§ 125-42 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-42
125:211
of nitromethane; or 1,000 pounds or more of ammonium
nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures
containing 60% or more ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
(b) To store, handle, or use any quantity of air-reactive, waterreactive,
or unstable materials.
(19) Junkyards. To operate a junkyard.
(20) Liquefied petroleum gas. For each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of
interconnected containers of over 2,000 gallons' water capacity
and for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of
containers, made at buildings in which 20 or more persons
congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all
installations and replacement of portable cylinders and have it
available for inspection.
(21) Lumber yards. To operate a lumber yard.
(22) Magnesium. For melting, casting, heat treating, machining, or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(23) Matches.
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (Note: One case equals
one matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(24) Organic coatings. To perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(25) Ovens and furnaces. To operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F. which are heated with oil or
gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
(26) Places of assembly. To maintain, operate, or use a place of
assembly.
(27) Service stations and repair garages. To operate a service station or
repair garage.
(28)Welding and cutting. To operate a welding and cutting business. A
record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are
performed shall be maintained and kept available for inspection by
the permit holder.
G. Consolidated permits.
§ 125-42 AUBURN CODE § 125-42
125:212
§ 125-43. Inspections. [Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
§ 125-44. Compliance required; violation orders.
(1) When more than one permit is required for the same property or
premises, a single permit may be issued listing all materials or
operations covered.
(2) Revocation of a portion or portions of such consolidated permit for
specific hazardous materials or operations shall not invalidate the
remainder.
H. Display of permits. Permits shall at all times be kept in a conspicuous
place on the premises designated therein and shall be subject to
inspection at all times by any officer of the City of Auburn Fire
Department.
A. Periodic. The Fire Inspector shall conduct fire prevention inspections
based upon a twelve-month schedule at premises that maintain the
activities listed in § 125-42F for compliance with the provisions of the
Uniform Code. Such inspections may be made at any reasonable time.
B. Refusal to admit; procedure. If entrance to make an inspection is
refused or cannot be obtained, the Fire Inspector may apply for a
warrant to make an inspection to any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Inspection fees.
(1) The City Manager shall promulgate an inspection fee applicable to
the inspections required herein to be posted in the office of the Fire
Chief.
(2) Noncompliance fee. The noncompliance fee shall be the Fire
Inspector's salary rate multiplied by the number of hours expended
in reinspections after an order to correct has been issued (two-hour
minimum) and shall be paid by the owner of the property. The first
reinspection after the issuance of an order to correct will not be
charged to the owner if the property is in compliance at the time of
the reinspection. If the property is not in compliance at the time of
the first reinspection, then the time involved in all subsequent
reinspections shall be chargeable as a noncompliance fee.
A. Compliance with applicable laws. A person owning, operating,
occupying or maintaining property or premises within the scope of
Chapter C of the Uniform Code or this article shall comply with all the
provisions of Chapter C of the Uniform Code, this article and all orders,
notices, or determinations issued in connection therewith.
B. Issuance of violation order. Whenever the Fire Inspector finds that
there has been a violation of Chapter C of the Uniform Code or this
article, a violation order shall be issued to the person or persons
responsible.
§ 125-42 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-44
125:213
§ 125-45. Board of Review.
The Regional Board of Review established by the Secretary of State in Part
440 of Title 19 NYCRR shall exercise all powers and duties of reviewing
any order or determination of the Fire Inspector made or taken pursuant
to Chapter C of the Uniform Code in accordance with Section 440.4 of Part
440.
§ 125-46. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-18-2001 by Ord. No.
3-2001]
C. Violation orders; contents. Violation orders shall be in writing, shall
identify the property or premises, shall specify the violation and
remedial action to be taken, shall provide a reasonable time limit for
compliance, and shall state the time within which an appeal may be
taken.
D. Service of violation orders. Violation orders may be served by personal
service; by mailing by registered or certified mail; or by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises and by mailing a copy
thereof to the premises on the same day as posted, enclosed in a
postpaid wrapper addressed to the person responsible.
E. Appearance tickets. In case the owner, lessor, occupant or his agent
shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove, eliminate or abate the violation
within the time specified in the violation order, the Chief of the Fire
Department and/or the designees of the Chief shall have the authority,
as provided in Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 4(a), to issue
appearance tickets in accordance with Article 150 of the New York
State Criminal Procedure Law to enforce any statute, local law,
ordinance or regulation relating to fire prevention and/or safety.
[Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
A. There shall be two categories of penalties for violations of this article or
for violations within the City of Auburn of those portions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code pertaining to
firesafety or fire prevention. The categories shall be:
(1) Violation with mandatory fines. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this article, or for violations within the City of Auburn
of those portions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code pertaining to firesafety or fire prevention, and
fail to comply with any order of the Fire Chief, Fire Inspector or
designee shall be guilty of a violation, as defined in Article 10 of the
Penal Law, punishable by a fine of not less than $50 for each day on
which the violation exists and not more than $250 for each day on
which the violation exists. Each day on which a person continues to
violate said code is considered a separate violation.
(2) Misdemeanors. If injury occurs to any person or to property as the
result of any violation of any provision of this article or for
§ 125-44 AUBURN CODE § 125-46
125:214
violations within the City of Auburn of those portions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code pertaining
to firesafety or fire prevention, the person who violated the
provision of the code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 for
each separate violation of the code and for each day on which
the violation exists and further punishable by imprisonment for
not more than one year. Each day on which a person continues to
violate the code is considered a separate violation.
B. The imposition of a penalty for any violation of the fire codes shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, nor shall the imposition of
a penalty prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 125-46 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-46
125:215

ARTICLE VII
Unsafe Buildings
§ 125-47. Determination of unsafe conditions.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed unsafe buildings:
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the City of Auburn.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to
cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or
those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of escape.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
I. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of this City.
J. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of this Municipal
Code, such as but not limited to Chapter 182, Housing Standards, and
Chapter 305, Zoning.
K. Any building or structure which remains vacant and unattended
continuously for a period of five years.
§ 125-47 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-48
125:217
§ 125-48. Inspections.
Buildings which are unsafe or are reasonably believed to be unsafe may be
inspected as provided in § 125-20 of this Part 1.
§ 125-49. Declaration of nuisance.
All unsafe buildings within the terms of § 125-47 of this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or
demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided.
§ 125-50. Duties of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall:
A. Complaints. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which
complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or
structure is or may be existing in violation of this article or any other
provisions of this Municipal Code or law or code of the State of New
York.
B. Police and Fire Department reports. Inspect any building, wall or
structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the Fire or Police
Department of this City as probably existing in violation of the terms of
this article.
C. Notice to owner, etc. Notify personally or in writing the owner or some
one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or
any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the property,
by registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other person having a vested or contingent interest in
the same, as shown by the records of the Assessor or in the office of the
County Clerk, of any building found by him or her to be an unsafe
building within the standards set forth in § 125-47 of this article that:
(1) The owner must vacate or repair or demolish said building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this article.
(2) The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it
repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession.
(3) Any mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in said
building may, at his or her own risk, repair, vacate or demolish said
building or have such work or act done, provided that any person
notified under this subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any
building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 30
days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act
required by the notice provided for herein.
D. Contents of notice to owner. Set forth in the notice provided for in
Subsection C hereof a description of the building or structure deemed
§ 125-48 AUBURN CODE § 125-50
125:218
§ 125-51. Performance of work by City; recovery of costs.
unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or
structure an unsafe building and an order requiring the same to be put
in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such
length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable.
E. Placement of notice on unsafe buildings.
(1) Place a notice on all unsafe buildings reading as follows: "This
building has been found to be an unsafe building by the Building
Department. This notice is to remain on this building until it is
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice
which has been given the owner, or some one of the owner's
executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other
person having a vested or contingent interest in the property, by
registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other person having vested or contingent
interest in the same, as shown by the records of the Assessor or in
the office of the County Clerk, of any building found to be an unsafe
building within the standards set forth in § 125-47 of Chapter 125
of the City of Auburn Municipal Code. It is unlawful to remove this
notice until such notice is complied with."
(2) In case the Building Inspector finds that there is actual and
immediate danger of failure or collapse so as to endanger life, such
notice shall also require the building or portion thereof to be
vacated forthwith, and no person shall enter the building or portion
thereof except for the purpose of inspecting, making repairs or
demolishing the same.
F. File a copy of such notice specified in Subsection C in the office of the
County Clerk, which notice shall be filed by such Clerk in the same
manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules and shall have the same effect as a notice of
pendency as therein provided. A notice so filed shall be effective for a
period of one year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may
be vacated upon the order of a judge or justice of a court of record or
upon the consent of the Corporation Counsel. The County Clerk shall
mark such notice and any record or docket thereof as canceled of
record upon the presentation and filing of such consent or a certified
copy of such order.
G. Notify the Fire Chief and Police Chief of all buildings placarded as
unsafe and reasons for placarding.
A. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with an
order of the Building Inspector within 30 days, or fails to request an
appeal of said order, as hereinafter provided, the Building Inspector
shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or
§ 125-50 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-51
125:219
§ 125-52. Emergency cases.
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
life or safety of any person unless an unsafe building as defined herein is
immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the Building Inspector shall
cause the immediate repair, vacation, or demolition of such unsafe building.
The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such unsafe
building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in § 125-51 of
this article.
§ 125-53. Hearings.
demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards hereinbefore
provided for in § 125-47 of this article. The expenses thereby incurred
shall be paid by the interested person or persons as hereinabove set
forth, or by the person or persons who caused or maintained such
nuisance or other matter. The Building Inspector shall file as a part of
his or her records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the
items of expense and that each said item was necessary and the cost
thereof does not exceed the current hourly rate of wages for the action
and the date of execution of actions as authorized by this article.
B. The Building Inspector may institute a suit to recover such expenses or
may cause such expenses, together with a charge of 50% thereof to
cover supervision and administration, to be charged against the
property as a lien. A notice of such lien shall be mailed to or served
upon the interested person or persons as hereinabove set forth claimed
liable to pay the same, and a similar copy may be filed in the office of
the City Treasurer and the Assessor of the City of Auburn and upon
such filing shall be a lien on the real property to the same extent as City
taxes and shall be included in the general City tax roll and enforced in
the same manner as other City taxes.
A. If a person upon whom an order is served requests a hearing within
seven days in writing, the Building Inspector shall advise the City
Council forthwith but not later than two weeks thereafter of such
request.
B. The City Council shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a public
hearing on the matter. A City officer or other qualified person may be
appointed as the hearing officer.
C. The hearing officer shall notify either personally or by registered mail
the Building Inspector and the person or persons charged of the time,
place and date of the hearing and may, in his or her discretion, cause a
public notice to be published in a daily newspaper published in the City
at least five days before the date thereof advising the public of the
purpose of the public hearing and the right of interested parties to be
heard.
§ 125-51 AUBURN CODE § 125-53
125:220
§ 125-54. Failure to comply with final order.
If the owner of the unsafe building or structure fails or refuses to repair
or remove the unsafe building or structure within the time specified in the
final order of the hearing officer, the Building Inspector shall report the
same to the City Council. The City Council may direct that the City shall
cause the repair or removal of the unsafe building. After the work has been
completed, the Building Inspector shall file with the City Treasurer and
Assessor the affidavit and notice of lien as provided in § 125-51 or take such
other action as provided in § 125-51.
§ 125-55. Personal liability.
Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the Building
Inspector may institute suit against the owner of said premises for the
direct costs, together with a charge of 50% in addition thereto as
compensation to the City for administering, supervising and handling said
work, and enter judgment thereon against the owner personally for the
aforesaid amount. The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty
hereinafter prescribed shall not bar the right of the City to collect the
cost of the removal or repair of any unsafe building or structure as herein
prescribed.
D. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the hearing officer
until all relevant evidence is submitted by all concerned parties. All
interested persons shall have the right to present evidence, to crossexamine
witnesses, and to be represented by counsel.
E. The hearing officer shall be responsible for safeguarding the
constitutional rights of all parties involved and may issue such orders
and directives necessary to effectuate such purposes, including but not
limited to the right to have specific charges served, a reasonable time to
prepare a defense, and the right to an impartial hearing.
F. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination in writing, and a copy of the same shall be served either
personally or by registered mail on all parties who appeared therein.
G. The determination shall state whether the original order is sustained,
modified or reversed. If reversed, no further proceeding shall be had.
H. If the original order is sustained, in whole or in part, the hearing officer
shall also include an order directing the owner to proceed in
accordance therewith and shall further specify that unless the work is
commenced within 10 days after service and completed within a
reasonable time thereafter, which the hearing officer shall designate,
the penalties hereinafter provided shall be invoked.
§ 125-53 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-56
125:221
§ 125-56. Transfer of title.
The transfer of title by the owner of premises upon which an unsafe building
or structure is located shall be no defense to any proceedings under this
article.
§ 125-57. Emergency work.
§ 125-58. Penalties for offenses.
A. In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, actual
and immediate danger of the falling of a building or structure so as to
endanger public safety, life or property, or actual or immediate menace
to health or public welfare as a result of the conditions present in or
about a building or structure, he or she shall cause the necessary work
to be done or render such building or structure temporarily safe,
whether the procedure prescribed in this article for unsafe or
dangerous buildings or structures has been instituted or not.
B. When emergency work is to be performed under this section, the
Building Inspector shall cause the owner thereof to be served
personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, and if served
by registered mail shall post on the premises, a notice to comply
containing a description of the premises, a statement of the facts in
which the structure is unsafe or dangerous, and orders and directions
to correct said conditions which constitute an emergency within a
specified period, not to exceed three days from actual or constructive
receipt of the notice.
C. In the event the emergency does not permit any delay in correction, the
notice shall state that the City has corrected the emergency condition.
D. In both cases, the notice shall state that the corrective costs of the
emergency will be assessed against the owner pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
A. The owner of any unsafe building who shall fail to comply with any final
notice or order to repair, vacate, or demolish the building or structure
given by the Building Inspector shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, for each and every day such failure to comply continues
beyond the date fixed for compliance.
B. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building or structure in
accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment, for each and every day such failure
to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance.
§ 125-56 AUBURN CODE § 125-58
125:222
C. Any person removing the notice provided for in Subsection E of
§ 125-50 hereof prior to completion of the work required by this article
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 125-58 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-58
125:223

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 125-59. Remedies; penalties for offenses.
§ 125-60. Abatement of violation.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to
prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any premises, and these
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties prescribed in the preceding
section.
A. Violations of the Uniform Code and this Part 1, except § 125-22 and
Article VII hereof, shall be enforced as provided in § 382 of the
Executive Law.
B. In addition to the remedies prescribed by Executive Law § 382, any
person, corporation, association, firm or partnership that fails to
remedy the condition found to exist in violation of the Uniform Code
and this Part 1 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues to exist beyond the
date fixed in the order of the enforcement official to remedy the
violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 125-59 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-60
125:225

Part 2
[Adopted 7-12U-n2i0fo0r7mB CyoLd.Le. No. 7-2007]
ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 125-61. Purpose.
This Part 2 provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code)
in this City. This Part 2 is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this Part 2, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 125-62. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 125-64 of this Part 2.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this Part 2.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY and CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 125-67B of this Part 2.
CITY — The City of Auburn.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 125-63B of this Part 2.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 125-75A of this Part 2.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 125-63D of this Part 2.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 125-70 of this Part 2.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this Part 2.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 125-66 of this Part 2.
§ 125-61 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-62
125:227
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 125-67D of
this Part 2.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 125-63. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this Part 2. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this Part
2;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 125-75A, Compliance orders, of this
Part 2;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the City Council of this City;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this City's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this Part 2, or to abate or
§ 125-62 AUBURN CODE § 125-63
125:228
§ 125-64. Building permits.
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this Part 2; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this Part 2.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience
related to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the City
Manager to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this Part 2.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the City Manager to act
under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer
and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this Part 2. Each inspector shall, within the time
prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the City Council of this City.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 125-63 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-64
125:229
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area is
less than 144 square feet (13.38 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
§ 125-64 AUBURN CODE § 125-64
125:230
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
§ 125-64 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-64
125:231
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
§ 125-64 AUBURN CODE § 125-64
125:232
§ 125-65. Construction inspections.
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 125-76, Fees, of this Part 2 must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
§ 125-64 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-65
125:233
§ 125-66. Stop-work orders.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 125-76, Fees, of this Part 2 must be paid prior to
or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
§ 125-65 AUBURN CODE § 125-66
125:234
§ 125-67. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 125-75, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this Part
2 or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the
time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy and certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy and certificate of compliance shall be required
for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all
structures, buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy and certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy and certificates of compliance.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy
and/or a certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of
the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or a certificate of
compliance. In addition, where applicable, the following documents,
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the
applicant for the certificate of occupancy and/or a certificate of
compliance, shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and/or a certificate of
compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy or certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
§ 125-66 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-67
125:235
(4) If the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy, certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
§ 125-67 AUBURN CODE § 125-67
125:236
§ 125-68. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this City shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer
of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel-burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 125-69. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Local Law
Number 2 of 1991, Chapter 125, the Uniform Code Enforcement Ordinance
of the City of Auburn, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 125-70. Operating permits.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 125-76, Fees, of this Part 2 must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the City Council of this City.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
§ 125-67 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-70
125:237
§ 125-71. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked, or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 125-76, Fees, of this Part 2 must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
§ 125-70 AUBURN CODE § 125-71
125:238
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this Part 2 shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
§ 125-71 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-71
125:239
§ 125-72. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this Part 2, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 125-73. Recordkeeping.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 125-76, Fees, of this Part 2 must be paid prior to
or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 125-75,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this Part 2;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
§ 125-71 AUBURN CODE § 125-73
125:240
§ 125-74. Program review and reporting.
§ 125-75. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 125-64 through 125-72, inclusive, of this Part 2; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the City Council
a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 125-73,
Recordkeeping, of this Part 2 and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this City, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this City relative to administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this City is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this City in connection with
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this Part 2. Upon finding that
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this Part 2; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this Part 2 which is/are violated by the specified
§ 125-73 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-75
125:241
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at
the affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this Part 2, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy, certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this Part 2, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this City.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this Part 2, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this Part 2. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this Part 2, or any stop-work order, compliance
order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this Part 2, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the
name of this City, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the
requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the
building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of
such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection
shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the
City Manager of this City.
§ 125-75 AUBURN CODE § 125-75
125:242
§ 125-76. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the City Council of this
City. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy,
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this Part 2.
§ 125-77. Intermunicipal agreements.
The City Council of this City may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor of
this City to enter into an agreement, in the name of this City, with other
governments to carry out the terms of this Part 2, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 125-66, Stop-work orders, of this Part 2, in any other section of this
Part 2, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 125-66, Stop-work orders, of this Part 2, in
any other section of this Part 2, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
§ 125-75 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 125-77
125:243
Chapter 126
BARRIER-FREE CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
§ 126-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are specifically enacted to further the policy
of the City of Auburn to provide that new, single-family homes, duplexes
and triplexes which are constructed with public funds, as herein described,
be provided with design features to provide accessibility and usability for
physically disabled people.
§ 126-2. Applicability.
The following regulations shall be applicable to new, single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes which receive City, state or federal
assistance. For purposes of this chapter, the funding includes: Community
Development Block Grants (CDBG) and federal and state construction
funds, and any other public funds.
§ 126-3. Design requirements.
In addition to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code as referenced in this Code, the following design requirement shall
apply:
A. Building entrances.
(1) Applicable dwelling units shall be designed and constructed to
have at least one building entrance on an accessible route served
by a ramp or a slope, in compliance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, with a maximum slope of
1:12, unless it is impractical due to characteristics of the terrain.
This entrance should have an accessible door in accordance with
ANSI. Any entrance at the front, side or back of the dwelling is
acceptable.
(2) The aforementioned requirement may be waived by the Auburn
City Manager or his/her designee by issuing an "Exterior
Accessibility Waiver" only in instances of site impracticability. The
individual requesting such waiver shall file an application for the
waiver, which will include providing proof that the topographical
conditions of the building site prevent complying with the above
despite proper grading and site preparation to improve
§ 125-77 AUBURN CODE § 126-3
126:244
§ 126-4. Contracts.
The provisions of this code shall be incorporated in all City of Auburn
contracts for new construction. This chapter shall only apply to newly
constructed homes as defined in § 126-2. Conversely, this chapter shall
not apply to projects utilizing the Home Repair Assistance Program or
other similar programs which give assistance for rehabilitation of existing
housing.
Chapter 129
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
accessibility. An independent party shall make verification of the
site's impracticability. A good faith attempt must be made on the
part of a developer to improve accessibility of the site.
B. Interior door criteria.
(1) All dwelling units, whether or not on an accessible route, shall be
designed in such a manner that the doors be sufficiently wide to
allow passage into and within all premises by persons in
wheelchairs. Lever hardware is required.
(2) Doors, except those serving closets less than 15 square feet in area,
within individual dwelling units intended for user passage must
provide a minimum clear opening of 32 inches.
C. Accessible routes into and through the dwelling unit. An accessible
route shall be designed and constructed in such manner that a thirtysix-
inch-wide level route, except at doors, must be provided through the
main floor of the unit with ramped or beveled changes at the
thresholds.
D. Wall reinforcement in bathrooms. Reinforcement in the walls shall be
provided at designated locations as specified by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) for future grab bar installation.
E. Light switches, electrical controls, thermostats and other
environmental controls. All applicable dwelling units shall be designed
and constructed in such a manner that all premises contain light
switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other controls in
accessible locations, no higher than 48 inches and no lower than 16
inches from the floor.
F. Usable first-floor kitchen with wheelchair maneuvering clearance as set
forth by the International Code Council (ICC)/ANSI A117.1 - 1998.
G. Usable first-floor bathroom with wheelchair maneuvering clearances as
set forth in ICC/ANSI A117.1 - 1998.
§ 126-3 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 126-4
129:245

ARTICLE I
Establishment and Operation
[Adopted 8-3-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
§ 129-1. Applicability of state law.
The provisions set forth in Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall
govern the establishment and operation of Business Improvement Districts
and the Business Improvement Districts Management Association within
the City of Auburn.
§ 129-2. Amendment or extension of district.
Any amendments or extensions of any proposed Business Improvement
District shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article
19-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 129-3. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon compliance with the requirements
of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law and upon compliance with all
other requirements of law.
§ 129-1 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 129-3
129:247

ARTICLE II
Downtown Business Improvement District
[Adopted 2-1-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 129-4. Establishment; findings; boundaries.
The Auburn Downtown Business Improvement District shall be and is
hereby established in the City of Auburn, the City Council having found
that the establishment of the Business Improvement District is in the public
interest; that all notice, mailing and hearing requirements have been
complied with; that all properties within the district will benefit from its
establishment; and that all property benefited is included in the boundaries
of the district. The boundaries of said district are contained in the district
plan attached to Resolution No. 221 of this body dated November 20, 2000,
calling for a public hearing, and are set forth below:
All that tract, or parcels of land, situate in the City of Auburn, County of
Cayuga and State of New York, more particularly bounded and described
as follows:
Northward from intersection of Genesee Street and North Street:
Northwest Side: All properties fronting North Street from Genesee
Street to Chapel Street.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting Dill Street from Genesee Street
to Chapel Street.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting State Street from Dill Street to
Arterial East.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting Clark Street from Dill Street to
Tax Parcel No. 115.52-1-28.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting Clark Street from Dill Street to
Tax Parcel No. 115.60-2-36.1.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting East Garden Street from North
Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.37-1-40 and Tax Parcel No. 116.45-1-2.
Northwest Side: All properties fronting Genesee Street from North
Street to Tax Parcel No. 115.60-2-67.
Northeast Side: All properties fronting North Street from Genesee
Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.37-1-9.
Northeast Side: All properties fronting Genesee Street from North
Street to East Genesee Street.
Northeast Side: All properties fronting Market Street from Genesee
Street to North Street.
Northeast Side: All properties fronting East Genesee Street from
Genesee Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.46-1-16, including Tax Parcel No.
116.46-1-10 rear parcel located behind 23 Genesee Street, and Tax
Parcel No. 116.46-1-9 rear parcel located behind 25 Genesee Street.
§ 129-4 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 129-4
129:249
Northeast Side: All properties fronting Seminary Street from East
Genesee to Arterial East.
Northeast Side: All properties fronting John Street from East Genesee
Street to Arterial East (west side of street excluding Tax Parcel No.
116.46-1-8, No. 116.46-1-11).
Southward from intersection of Genesee Street and South Street:
Southwest Side: All properties fronting South Street from Genesee
Street to William Street.
Southwest Side: All properties fronting Genesee Street from South
Street to Tax Parcel No. 115.60-1-38.
Southwest Side: All properties fronting William Street from Genesee
Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.61-1-25.
Southeast Side: All properties fronting Genesee Street from South
Street to East Genesee Street.
Southeast Side: All properties fronting East Genesee Street from
Genesee Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.46-1-28.
Southeast Side: All properties fronting Osborne Street from East
Genesee Street to Tax Parcel No. 116.45-1-87, No. 116.45-1-85.
Southeast Side: All properties fronting South Street from Genesee
Street to Grover Street including Tax Parcel No. 116.53-2-38.
Southeast Side: All properties fronting Lincoln Street from South Street
to Osborne Street.
§ 129-5. Provision of services.
The provision of services within the district shall be pursuant to such
district plan of the Auburn Downtown Business Improvement District and
Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Auburn and the District
Management Association. All said services shall be in addition to, and not a
substitution for, required municipal services provided by the City of Auburn
on a citywide basis.
§ 129-6. Applicability of state law; conflicting provisions.
A. To the extent not otherwise explicitly provided herein, the provisions
set forth in Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall govern the
operation of the Auburn Downtown Business Improvement District and
the District Management Association in the City.
B. Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other local law or act, the provisions of this article
shall be controlling.
§ 129-4 AUBURN CODE § 129-7
129:250
§ 129-7. Amendments.
Any amendments to the Auburn Downtown Business Improvement District
or the district plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 980-i of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 129-8. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon compliance with the requirements
set forth in § 980-g of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law and upon
compliance with all other requirements of law.
§ 129-7 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 129-8
129:251
Chapter 135
CEMETERIES
§ 129-8 AUBURN CODE § 129-8
135:252
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Cemeteries Ordinance."
§ 135-2. Scope.
A cemetery shall be deemed to include any place set aside or dedicated for
the burial of the dead, and any burial ground connected with any church in
the City. Soule Cemetery in the Town of Sennett, owned and controlled by
the City, shall be deemed and considered a cemetery within the scope of this
chapter.
§ 135-3. Interment only in cemetery.
No person shall bury or inter, or aid or assist in burying or interring, any
human body within the City except in one of the cemeteries.
§ 135-4. Written consent required to dig grave or inter or disinter
body.
No person shall dig any grave or inter or disinter any dead human body in
or within any cemetery in the City, or controlled by the City, without the
written consent of the sexton or superintendent in charge of such cemetery
and, in the case of a burial ground connected with a church, the consent of
the church.
§ 135-5. Purchase of cemetery lot; payment prerequisite to
interment.
Purchases of cemetery lots in public cemeteries shall be made upon
application and payment to the City Clerk, which payment, at the option
of the purchaser, may be made in 12 equal monthly installments over a
twelve-month period; provided, however, that no interment in such lot shall
be made or permitted unless and until the purchase price for such lot shall
have first been paid in full.
§ 135-6. Approval required to erect fences or markers or dig up soil.
No person shall put up any fence, gravestone or marker of any kind at any
grave, or dig up any soil in any of the public cemeteries of the City, without
the approval of the sexton or superintendent in charge of such cemetery.
§ 135-7. Traffic in cemeteries.
No person shall walk or drive any vehicle or other conveyance over or upon
any lot or plot in any cemetery within the City, except upon or over the paths
and roads therein laid out, or leave any vehicle standing in any road or path
§ 135-1 CEMETERIES § 135-7
135:253
in any cemetery so as to hinder the free passage of other persons using such
roadway. No person shall enter into or upon any cemetery except through
the gates and entrances thereto.
§ 135-8. Use as thoroughfare or public walk.
No person shall use any cemetery as a common thoroughfare or public
walk, and all visiting or traveling through or across any cemetery, except in
connection with cemetery purposes or for the purpose of visiting a burial
lot, is forbidden.
§ 135-9. Injuring trees, plants or animals; depositing waste.
No person shall cut, break or in any manner injure or destroy any tree,
shrub or plant; or pick, crush or gather or in any manner injure or destroy
any flower, either wild or cultivated, or the fruit or product of any tree,
shrub or plant; or catch, shoot, wound or kill any bird or animal of any
kind, or rob, disturb or destroy any bird's nest; or deposit any filth, waste or
rubbish in any cemetery within the City or owned or controlled by the City.
§ 135-10. Defacing monuments, markers or fences.
No person shall injure, destroy, remove, deface, or write upon any
monument, fence, stake, post or other markers in or connected with any
cemetery within the City.
§ 135-7 AUBURN CODE § 135-10
135:254
ARTICLE II
Public Cemeteries
[Adopted 10-16-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
§ 135-11. Applicability.
This article shall apply to cemeteries owned and controlled by the City of
Auburn, including but not limited to Soule Cemetery and the North Street
Cemetery.
§ 135-12. Cemetery Commission.
§ 135-13. Responsibility of City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the general administrative head and shall
conduct such administration generally in accordance with the policy, plans
and regulations adopted by the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of § 135-16. The City Manager shall have authority to appoint an
administrator to act on his or her behalf and employ a superintendent and
such other help in connection with the conduct, maintenance and upkeep of
such cemetery as the Commission may deem advisable.
§ 135-14. Duties of City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Commission and shall keep a
correct and true record of all of its meetings and of all action taken by such
Commission, and he or she shall be the general custodian of the records and
maps of cemeteries and the Commission.
§ 135-15. Powers of Commission.
The Commission shall have the power to provide for the upkeep and
maintenance of cemeteries and their use for burial purposes and to provide
for the survey, plotting or replotting of cemeteries and of all lands owned
by the City in connection therewith, in order to show the various sections
A. There shall be a commission consisting of eight individuals to be known
as the "Cemetery Commission." Such Commission shall consist of the
City Manager, Comptroller, Director of Public Works, a member of the
Council, and one cemetery lot owner residing in the City of Auburn, one
cemetery lot owner residing in the Town of Sennett, one licensed
funeral home director regularly conducting a funeral business in the
City of Auburn and one ex-officio member-at-large. The cemetery lot
owners, funeral director and ex-officio member shall be recommended
by the Mayor and approved by Council, shall hold office for two years
from the first day of January following their appointment, and shall
serve without compensation.
B. The Commission shall meet at City Hall from time to time upon the call
of the City Manager, or of any two other members of such Commission.
Four members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 135-11 CEMETERIES § 135-15
135:255
or divisions of the cemetery that are opened up and in use, with the names
of owners of lots so far as the same can be ascertained, and the sections,
lots or parcels remaining unsold and available for burial purposes. The
Commission shall have authority to fix the prices at which various lots
or portions of lots belonging to cemeteries may be sold and to provide
and adopt general regulations for the maintenance, conduct and upkeep of
cemeteries, but no sums of money appropriated or belonging to a cemetery
shall be expended for any capital purpose in excess of an aggregate amount
of $250 unless by special authority of the Council.
§ 135-16. Limitation of powers.
The Commission shall be subject to the control and direction of the Council,
and any general regulation, direction or resolution for the conduct, upkeep
or improvement of cemeteries shall be subject to amendment, revision or
rescission by the Council.
§ 135-17. Sales of cemetery lots.
Sales of a cemetery's lots shall be made at prices fixed by the Commission.
All conveyances shall be executed in the name of the City by the City
Manager and attested by the City Clerk, who shall keep a record of all
such conveyances and the price received therefor. No conveyance shall
be delivered except upon receipt of the purchase price, which shall be
immediately deposited by the City Clerk with the City Treasurer to the
credit of such Cemetery Fund. The City Clerk shall also provide and keep a
record of the owners of lots and of the transfer of title thereto from time to
time.
§ 135-18. Finances and revenue.
A. Accounts and reports. The City Comptroller shall keep a general
account of all moneys, funds and securities belonging to a cemetery or
held or received in trust or for the purposes of such cemetery and shall,
from time to time, invest and reinvest such funds under the general
direction of the Commission. He or she shall at least annually, on or
before the first day of May in each year, and at such other times as the
Commission may direct, make a full report and account of the finances
and various funds of such cemetery and of the moneys expended in the
upkeep and maintenance of same.
B. Deposits and investments. All moneys and funds belonging to a
cemetery or received by the City and designated as part of the special
endowment fund shall be kept and deposited separately and apart from
other City funds. Any bank deposit of such funds shall be in the name of
such "Cemetery Fund, City of Auburn" and shall be withdrawn only
upon the check of the City Treasurer issued upon an appropriate
warrant of the City Comptroller. Any investment of trust funds, or funds
available for investment, shall be in the name of the City for the benefit
§ 135-15 AUBURN CODE § 135-18
135:256
§ 135-19. Funds established.
So far as practicable there shall be two general funds or accounts of moneys
received, appropriated or belonging to each cemetery, as follows:
§ 135-20. Duty of City Council.
It shall be the duty of the Council to provide for the necessary upkeep,
maintenance and extension of cemeteries and the necessary capital
expenditures therefor.
§ 135-21. Appropriations for maintenance, upkeep and extension.
The Council shall make an appropriation in its budget for upkeep,
maintenance and extension of cemeteries and shall, if other funds of a
cemetery are insufficient, provide for the payment of necessary labor
required for such maintenance and upkeep.
of such cemetery. No investment of any trust funds belonging to a
cemetery shall be made unless approved by the Commission.
C. Custody of securities. The City Comptroller shall have the custody of all
securities taken or held on behalf of a cemetery or representing
investment of cemetery funds. Such securities shall be kept by the City
Comptroller in a safety deposit box in such bank or trust company as
may be designated by the Commission and shall be subject to the
general direction of the Commission. All such securities shall be
inspected and checked at least annually by the Commission.
A. Fund for upkeep and extension. A general indebtedness, maintenance
and endowment fund, consisting of funds received from the sale of lots,
the purpose of which shall be to provide for expenditures that are to be
made in connection with the upkeep or extension of such cemetery.
Moneys from this fund may be deposited with other City funds.
B. Special endowment fund. A special endowment fund which shall consist
of legacies and donations made generally for the perpetual care of lots.
The income from this fund shall be used so far as necessary for the care
and maintenance of the particular cemetery, lots or sections for which
given, and any excess income may be available for general upkeep and
maintenance.
§ 135-18 CEMETERIES § 135-21
135:257

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Amended 10-16-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
§ 135-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of Article I of this chapter shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
§ 135-22 CEMETERIES § 135-22
135:259
Chapter 140
COLLATERAL LOAN BROKERS
§ 140-1. License required.
Pursuant to Article 5 of the General Business Law of the State of New
York, no person shall conduct the business of collateral loan broker in the
City of Auburn without a license issued by the City Manager. The title
"pawnbroker" shall be used exclusively by a collateral loan broker.
§ 140-2. Grant of license; fee; expiration; bond.
§ 140-3. Action on bond.
An action on the bond may be instituted by any person aggrieved pursuant
to General Business Law § 42.
§ 140-4. Compliance with state law and regulations required.
A collateral loan broker shall comply with all the provisions of Article 5 of
the General Business Law, in particular §§ 43 through 53 of said article,
A. The City Manager may from time to time grant, under his or her hand
and the official seal of his or her office, to such citizens, or aliens
lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States, as he
or she shall deem proper and who shall produce to him or her
satisfactory evidence of their good character a license authorizing such
person to carry on the business of a collateral loan broker, which
license shall designate the house in which such person shall carry on
said business, and no person, corporation, partnership or firm shall
carry on the business of a collateral loan broker without being duly
licensed, or in any other house than the one designated in said license,
under a penalty of $100 for each day he, she or it shall exercise or carry
on said business without such license or at any other house than the one
so designated.
B. Any person receiving such license shall pay therefor the sum of $25
yearly, and every such license shall expire one year from the date
thereof and may be renewed on application to the City Manager each
and every year on payment of the same sum and upon performance of
the other conditions herein contained.
C. Every person so licensed shall, at the time of receiving such license, file
with the City Manager granting the same a bond to the City of Auburn,
to be executed by the person so licensed and by two responsible
sureties, in the penal sum of $10,000, to be approved by the City
Manager, which bond shall be conditioned for the faithful performance
of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed, and
the City Manager shall have full power and authority to revoke such
license for cause as provided in Chapter 200, Licensing, of this Code.
§ 135-22 AUBURN CODE § 140-4
140:260
as well as all rules and regulations promulgated by the State Comptroller
pursuant to General Business Law § 55.
§ 140-5. Penalties for state law violations.
Pursuant to General Business Law § 51, the City Manager shall have full
power and authority after a hearing to impose fines and penalties of not
less than $25 nor more than $100 upon persons offending against any of
the provisions of said Article 5, §§ 42 through 50, and may also suspend or
revoke the license of the collateral loan broker willfully violating any of the
aforesaid provisions. The procedures set forth in Chapter 200, Licensing, of
this Code shall apply.
§ 140-6. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 147
DRAIN LAYERS
§ 147-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Drain
Layers Licensing Ordinance."
§ 147-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and in particular the sanitary sewer system, the storm sewer system
and the potable water main system of the City of Auburn by requiring the
installation of laterals by competent drain layers.
§ 147-3. License required; exception.
§ 147-4. Examination of applicants.
A. No person shall install laterals connecting to the sanitary sewer system,
the storm sewer system and the potable water main system of the City
of Auburn without procuring and having in effect a drain layer's license.
B. This requirement shall not apply to plumbers licensed by the Examining
Board of Plumbers of the City of Auburn.
A. The Examining Board of Plumbers of the City of Auburn shall examine
applicants desiring to be licensed as drain layers as to experience and
qualifications for such trade, business or calling. Such examination
shall be in writing and reasonably related to the knowledge and
procedures in installing laterals to the sanitary sewer system, the storm
§ 140-4 DRAIN LAYERS § 147-4
147:261
§ 147-5. Issuance of license; fee; renewal. [Amended 7-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-2005]
§ 147-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, other than a licensed plumber of the City of Auburn, who shall
engage in the business of drain layer without a license as herein provided
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 153
ELECTRICIANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
§ 153-1. Purpose and short title.
sewer system and the potable water main system, and in particular with
Chapter 297, Water Service, and Chapter 242, Sanitary Sewers, of the
Municipal Code of the City of Auburn. At the time of application for
examination the applicant shall pay the fee established in § 164-6C(2).
[Amended 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005]
B. Upon successfully completing the examination, the Examining Board of
Plumbers of the City of Auburn shall issue a certificate of competency
which shall entitle the holder thereof to a drain layer's license as
hereinafter provided.
A. Upon presenting the certificate of competency to the Director of
Municipal Utilities, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall issue a drain
layer's license for a one-year term upon payment of an initial fee of
$100.
B. Renewals shall be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days
before expiration of the license. Unless the Director of Municipal
Utilities has revoked or suspended the license pursuant to Chapter 200,
Licensing, of this Municipal Code or the Director of Municipal Utilities
requires the licensee to submit to re-examination, a license may be
renewed for another year and for each successive year upon payment of
a yearly renewal fee of $100.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of life and
property through ensuring the proper installation, maintenance and
repair of electrical wiring in the City of Auburn. The provisions
contained herein shall constitute the rules regulating a person or
§ 147-4 AUBURN CODE § 153-1
147:262
§ 153-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless different meanings are clearly
indicated by the context:
APPLIANCE INSTALLER — Any person who possesses or is qualified to
possess an appliance installer license.
APPLIANCE INSTALLER'S LICENSE — A license issued to a person who is
qualified to electrically connect small appliances, including but not limited
to washers, dryers, ranges, hot-water heaters, window air conditioners, airconditioning
units with up to three-ton capacity, hot-water boilers and hotair
furnaces that do not exceed 300,000 Btu's in capacity. See § 153-8A(3).
BOARD — The Electrical Examining Board of the City as provided for in
§ 153-3 of this chapter.
ELECTRICIAN — One who installs, maintains or repairs electrical devices
and circuits.
INACTIVE LICENSE — A license may become inactive upon application to
and approval of the Board. No person will be issued an inactive license. An
inactive license may be brought to active status by paying the difference in
fees within a five-year period whereby the Board approved that the license
would become inactive.[Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
LIMITED ELECTRICIAN — A person who possesses or is qualified to
possess a limited electrician's license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
LIMITED ELECTRICIAN'S LICENSE — A license issued to an electrician
who has proven his/her qualification and ability and has been authorized by
the Board to possess this type of license. This license, while in active status,
entitles the holder to engage in the business of installing, maintaining and
repairing electrical wiring, services and equipment in new and old homes
not in excess of four dwelling units. However, the holder of a limited license
shall be permitted to perform minor repair work in individual apartments
in buildings over four dwelling units or residences where each unit has a
separate electric service. See § 153-8A(2).
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — A person who possesses or is qualified to
possess a master electrician's license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN'S LICENSE — A license which is issued to an
electrician who has proven his/her qualifications and ability and has been
authorized by the Board to possess this type of license. This license, while
in active status, entitles the holder to engage in the business of installing,
persons engaged in the work of electrical installation, repair and/or
maintenance in the City of Auburn.
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Electricians Licensing Ordinance."
§ 153-1 DRAIN LAYERS § 153-2
147:263
maintaining and repairing electrical wiring, services and equipment in all
types of properties, including the specific occupancies described in Chapter
5 of the National Electrical Code. See § 153-8A(1).31
§ 153-3. Electrical License Board of Examiners.
A. Established. There is hereby created a Board to be known as the
"Electrical License Board of Examiners," which shall consist of five
members to be appointed by the City Manager as follows: the City
Building Inspector, an inspector of an electrical inspection agency
authorized to make electrical inspections in the City of Auburn, a
master electrician and two other members not limited as to
classification. Each member shall hold office for three years, or until a
successor has been appointed, with the exception of the Building
Inspector, whose term shall be concurrent with his or her office.
B. Vacancies; removal of members. Any member or members may be
removed by the City Manager for misfeasance or malfeasance in office,
incompetence, neglect of duty or for other good and sufficient cause. All
vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term of office shall be
filled by the City Manager for the unexpired term.
C. Officers. Such Board shall elect its own Chairperson and appoint its
Secretary.
D. Duties.
(1) Meetings. It shall be the duty of the Electrical License Board of
Examiners to hold a meeting at least once during each month, if
necessary, for the transaction of such business as may regularly be
brought before it, exclusive of examinations. Examination meetings
shall be held in the months of November and May and may be held
on regular meeting nights or at a special designated night during
these months. Meetings shall also be held whenever they shall be
called for by the Mayor or City Manager, which shall be in writing,
for the purpose of examinations if there are any applications
pending. [Amended 11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 18-2002]
(2) Examination of applicants for licenses. The Board shall examine the
applicants for licenses as to their knowledge of the rules and
regulations for the installation of electrical wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment as set forth in the relevant statutes of
this state, in the ordinances and local laws of the City, the National
Electrical Code and the generally accepted standards of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and to
determine the general qualifications and fitness of each such
applicant for executing electrical work.
31.Editor's Note: The former definition of “temporary electrician’s license,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014.
§ 153-2 AUBURN CODE § 153-3
147:264
§ 153-4. License required; exceptions.
(3) Quorum. Three members of the Board present at any meeting shall
constitute a quorum for the granting and revoking of licenses and
the transaction of other business, and the majority of such Board
shall prevail.
(4) Records. Records of the meetings of the Electrical License Board of
Examiners shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times and
shall include the names and addresses of all holders of licenses.
The Secretary of the Board shall be responsible for filing the
records of the meetings with the office of the City Clerk.
(5) Reciprocal agreement. The Electrical License Board of Examiners
shall have the authority to negotiate reciprocal agreements with
other municipalities when deemed appropriate. Reciprocal
agreements shall be executed by the Mayor and the City Manager
and shall only be entered into if the qualifications required to
obtain a license from the other municipalities are substantially
similar to those required within the City of Auburn. Said reciprocal
agreements shall require Council approval.
A. Type of work. No person shall engage in or conduct the business of
installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any electrical work in the
City of Auburn unless licensed therefor pursuant to this chapter, or
unless working under the general supervision of a company officer who
is licensed pursuant to this chapter and who carries the full
responsibility for the electrical work performed under his/her
supervision as a primary duty. No proprietorship, partnership, firm,
corporation or subsidiary of a parent corporation which is engaged in or
is conducting the business of installing, maintaining, altering or
repairing any electrical work in the City of Auburn that requires
licensure by the terms of this chapter shall perform such work without
the owner, partner or officer duly licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and who shall assume the responsibility for
his own work and that of any unlicensed electricians under his
supervision. Should any license holder become incapacitated whereby
he/she is unable to carry out his/her supervision duties as referenced
above in a manner satisfactory to the Board, the Board at its discretion
may suspend that electrician's license until such time as that individual
can return to such supervisory duties. [Amended 5-31-2001 by Ord.
No. 18-2001]
B. Exceptions. A license shall not be required by the provisions of this
section for persons executing the following classes of work:
(1) Electrical work performed in a single-family residence by the
owner-occupant which does not exceed 250 volts.
(2) The work performed by persons employed by manufacturers or
purveyors of electrical equipment in servicing their own products.
§ 153-3 DRAIN LAYERS § 153-4
147:265
§ 153-5. Application for license.
An application for a license shall be made in the Office of Code Enforcement
on forms as prescribed by the Board. The applicant shall specifically state
the type of license for which he/she is applying. At the time of application
(3) The connection or disconnection of portable plug-in appliances to
permanently installed receptacles or the attachment or
disconnection of input terminals of electrical appliances; the
replacement of defective devices with directly interchangeable
types, i.e., fuses, lamps, switches (when enclosed in boxes or not
disturbed), receptacles, sockets, motors, transformers, ballasts,
relays, timers, heaters, circuit breakers or fuse holders that are
part of a control assembly and similar devices that generally do not
disturb the fixed wiring system; electrical work performed on
portables themselves or within the internal assembly of appliances;
all classes of normal adjustments to electrical devices; and the
rewinding and repair of motors and similar devices.
(4) Transmission lines from the source of supply to the service
connection on the premises where used.
(5) Public service companies authorized to generate or sell electricity.
(6) Automotive, railway, aeronautical or marine equipment.
(7) Such other highly specialized or restricted activities within which
the Board may determine that the need does not exist or require
licensure on the part of those performing electrical work on such
operations, nor is the safety or welfare of the general public
jeopardized by the lack of required licensure for such operation.
C. A license is required by the provisions of this section for persons
executing the following classes of work, unless otherwise exempted by
the preceding Subsection B:
(1) Electrical work performed for any proprietorship, partnership,
corporation or association on premises owned or leased by the
employer that is located within the City of Auburn. The contractor
hired to perform electrical work must be duly licensed.
(2) Replacement of fuse holders or circuit breakers for branch and/or
feeder circuits.
(3) Replacement of wire or cable that is a part of a fixed wiring system.
(4) Replacement of switches when the enclosing boxes are disturbed.
(5) Work performed on supply circuits up to the attachment for input
terminals to electrical appliances.
(6) Any wiring less than 50 volts which is covered by the National
Electrical Code.
§ 153-4 AUBURN CODE § 153-5
147:266
for examination the applicant shall pay the fee established in § 153-11B(1).
The Building Inspector shall deliver to the Secretary of the Board all
applications to be considered by the Board at a time prescribed by the
Board. Upon successful completion of an examination, the applicant shall
pay the fee established in § 153-11B(2).
§ 153-6. Qualifications for licensed electricians.
A license shall be granted to an applicant who shall prove to the satisfaction
of the Board that he/she is a competent electrician qualified to do electrical
contracting, construction, installation work and wiring and that he/she
possesses a working knowledge of electricity and the actual laws and
functions of electricity and of appliances, apparatuses and devices for
electric light, heat and power purposes used and required in the scope of
work for which he/she is making application, combined with a practical
working knowledge of the City ordinances relating to electrical work and
the provisions of the National Electrical Code. Said applicant shall submit
to an examination by the Board. The Secretary of the Board or his/her
designee shall post public notice 30 days prior to the examinations.
§ 153-7. (Reserved)32
§ 153-8. Experience requirements for licensing.
§ 153-9. Issuance of license.
A. The following experience is required for licensing:
(1) Masters electrician's license: a minimum of 10 years' experience
directly related to the electrical industry, of which five years shall
have been working directly on the installation and maintenance of
electrical systems, and three of those five years shall have been on
new construction of commercial and/or industrial installations.
(2) Limited electrician's license: a minimum of five years' experience
directly related to the electrical industry, of which a minimum of
three years shall have been working directly on the installation and
maintenance of electrical systems, and one of those three years
shall have been on new residential construction.
(3) Appliance installer: a minimum of three years' experience directly
related to the installation of furnaces, air conditioners and other
small appliances.
B. The Board may, at its discretion, adjust the requirements of this section
in unusual cases where a person's training and experience shall, in the
opinion of the Board, be the substantial equivalent of its requirements.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 153-7, Requirements for issuance of temporary license, was
repealed 5-31-2001 by Ord. No. 18-2001.
§ 153-5 DRAIN LAYERS § 153-9
147:267
§ 153-10. Renewal of license.
A. As soon as is practical, but not exceeding 30 days after the completion
of an investigation or examination of an applicant, the Secretary of the
Board shall report to the City Manager, in writing, the Board's findings
and recommendations in each case. In the case of a successful
applicant, the Secretary shall submit to the City Manager the
applicant's name, his/her address, the type of license to be issued, the
fees that have been paid and the effective dates of the license. This
information, together with the number of the license, shall be kept by
the Electrical Board in a book for that purpose. Each license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the
business of electrical work within the City of Auburn to the extent and
for the duration of time which may be specified on said license.
B. The license shall take the form or forms as prescribed by the Board. The
license shall specify the name of the person licensed, who shall be
known as a holder of the license. It shall indicate the type of license
issued, the limitations (if any) of electrical work to be performed, the
number of the license, the expiration date (if appropriate) and issuing
date of the license.
C. The successful applicant shall obtain his/her license from the Board
after proof is submitted that the total fees have been paid. An applicant
must obtain his/her license within six months from the date upon which
he/she is notified of successful completion of the examination. The
applicant agrees to notify the Board of any change in name or address
within 10 days' time of such change. The holder of a permanent license
shall display his/her certificate of license in a conspicuous place and in
his/her principal place of business. The replacement of licensing forms
for any reason shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Board. All electricians' licenses shall be issued for a maximum
period of 12 months, to terminate on December 31 of the year issued.
A. The application for renewal of a license shall take the form or forms
prescribed by the Board. The applicant shall make application for
renewal of a license in the Office of Code Enforcement no later than
December 31. The applicant shall specify the type of license for which
renewal application is made. The applicant shall pay a total license fee
for renewal at the time application for renewal is made. The Office of
Code Enforcement shall deliver to the Secretary of the Board all
applications for renewal to be considered by the Board at a time
prescribed by the Board.
B. All licenses are renewable for a twelve-month period. Any person
holding a valid license will not be subject to a formal examination to
obtain renewal of a license, provided that a renewal application is
submitted and all required fees are paid by December 31. Late renewal
applications, submitted between January 1 and January 31 of a given
year, may also be made without examination upon payment of an
additional late renewal fee. (See § 153-11C.) Failure to renew a license
§ 153-9 AUBURN CODE § 153-10
147:268
§ 153-11. License fees; insurance requirements.
by January 31 in the year following the expiration of such license will
result in automatic revocation of said license. In the event of a disability
or serious illness of the licensee, the Board may, in its discretion, extend
the renewal date without penalty up to one year beyond the January 31
expiration date.
C. Licenses which have been suspended or revoked may be renewed with
or without examination in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Board. In the event that a license is suspended during the time
required for its renewal, the applicant shall apply for renewal in writing
but will be required to pay the additional fee as hereinafter prescribed
and be subject to reinstatement at a date different than the normal
renewal date. In the event that a license has been revoked, a new
application for a license may be made by the applicant as provided for
in §§ 153-5 through 153-9. No portion of previous fees paid is
redeemable because of lost time during the suspension or revocation of
a license.
D. The Board shall investigate all renewal applications submitted. It shall
call in any applicants for renewal that are deemed fit to examine prior
to taking action on their applications for renewal. As soon as practical,
but not exceeding 30 days after the decision of the Board, the Secretary
of the Board shall report to the City Manager, in writing, the Board's
findings and recommendations in each case. He shall report the
successful applicant's name, business address, type of license renewal
to be issued and effective dates of the license renewal. This information,
together with the number of the license renewal and the fee paid, shall
be kept by the Board Secretary in a book for that purpose. Each
renewal of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
holder thereof to continue to engage in the business of electrical work
within the City of Auburn to the extent and for the duration of time
which may be specified on said renewal. The renewal of the license
shall take the form or forms prescribed by the Board.
A. A fee shall be paid by the applicant when filing an application for a
license or for a change in type or status or when renewing a license.
B. Fees for new permanent licenses and for temporary licenses. The
following fees will be enacted by the Auburn City Council on an annual
basis as the City of Auburn Fee Schedule is adopted:33 [Amended
2-15-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001, 11-8-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001;
6-3-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
(1) Examination fee (due with application).
(2) License fee (due with certification and paid yearly thereafter).
33.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 153-10 DRAIN LAYERS § 153-11
147:269
§ 153-12. Payments.
Payments of any fee required by this chapter and any other sum shall be
made payable to the order of the City Treasurer and shall be paid at the
Code Enforcement Office.
(3) Inactive license renewal.
C. Late renewal (January 1 to January 31): set by the City of Auburn Fee
Schedule.34 [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
D. Suspension and revocation.
(1) Reinstating a suspended license: set by the City of Auburn Fee
Schedule.35 [Amended 6-3-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004;
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
(2) Reinstating/renewing a revoked license: the fees required for a new
license apply. If renewed with examination, the total fee paid must
not be less than if the license had been kept valid by regular
renewals.
E. Other fees. Any fees not set forth in this section shall be prescribed by
the City Manager and shall be consistent with the fees set forth by the
City of Auburn Fee Schedule.36 [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No.
14-2014]
F. Refund.
(1) There shall be no refund of fees for the period during which a
license has been suspended.
(2) There shall be no refund of fees when a license is revoked.
(3) There shall be no refund of fees to an applicant who fails to acquire
a license.
G. Applicants must supply proof of commercial general liability insurance,
to include product and completed operations coverage, for the
following three levels. [Amended 1-18-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
Level Occurrence/General Aggregate
Appliance Installer $75,000/$150,000
Limited Electrician $150,000/$300,000
Master Electrician $1,000,000/$2,000,000
H. Applicants must also submit proof of having complied with the state
requirements for workers' compensation and disability insurance.
34.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the City offices.
35.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the City offices.
36.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 153-11 AUBURN CODE § 153-13
147:270
§ 153-13. Unauthorized use of titles and license; suspension or
revocation of license.
§ 153-14. Preferring charges.
Persons desiring to prefer charges against any holder of a license granted
hereunder shall conform to and comply with all rules and regulations of the
Board regarding the preferring and hearing of such charges. The defendant
shall present himself for a hearing of such charges at such time and place
as the Board shall determine. Upon failure to appear, his/her license shall
be suspended until such time as it is restored by the Board.
§ 153-15. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for
damages to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the
City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of any examination
authorized herein for any license or certificate issued as herein provided.
A. No individual shall falsely represent himself as a master electrician or
employing electrician by the use of the words "master electrician,"
"special electrician," "licensed electrical contractor" or words of similar
import or meaning on signs, cards, stationary, telephone directories or
in any other manner.
B. No individual shall sell, lend or in any manner transfer or assign his/her
license, name and/or license number to any other individual, nor shall
any individual make use of a license, name or license number which is
not actually his/her own. Every such license may, after due notice to the
holder thereof and opportunity to be heard, be suspended or revoked by
the Board for failure or refusal of the licensee to comply with the City
ordinances and National Electrical Code requirements or for other
cause deemed sufficient by the Board, including the selling, lending,
renting, transferring or assignment of a license contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
C. The City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative is
authorized to temporarily suspend a license which has been issued
under the provisions of this chapter when the holder of the license has,
in the opinion of the City Manager, violated the provisions of this
section, until such time as a hearing shall be held by the Board for the
purpose of reviewing such suspension. The City Manager shall notify
the Secretary of the Board of said suspension within six days thereafter.
A hearing on such charge shall be held by the Board at such time and
place as designated in the rules and regulations relating to suspension
of licenses.
§ 153-13 DRAIN LAYERS § 153-16
147:271
§ 153-16. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$150 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, or by a penalty of not less than $5 or not more than $500 to
be recovered by the City of Auburn in a civil action.
Chapter 157
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement centers — See Ch. 100.
Bingo and games of chance — See Ch. 119.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Public conduct — See Ch. 234.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
§ 157-1. License required.
No person shall at any place within the City exhibit, display, conduct,
hold or have, for public entertainment or amusement, for money or other
valuable consideration, any show, theater, theatrical performance, circus,
moving picture, panorama, concert, minstrel show, bowling alley, shooting
gallery, merry-go-round, or any other exhibition, performance, contrivance,
mechanism or arrangement for public entertainment or amusement unless
such person shall first have obtained a license therefor as herein provided
or the hall or building in which the same is held or given shall have paid a
license fee as a public hall as herein provided.
§ 157-2. Exemptions.
No license shall be required and no license fee charged in the case of any
concert, exhibition or performance given by any person or organization for
any recognized charitable or religious purpose, or for any auditorium or
public hall, or performance, concert or entertainment, under the control,
direction or auspices of the Board of Education of the City of Auburn School
District.
§ 157-3. Issuance of license; terms and conditions.
Upon receiving the fees herein fixed, the City Manager shall, upon
application, issue licenses for the particular kind of show, performance,
exhibition, amusement or entertainment desired to be held, which said
license shall be issued in the name of the City Manager upon the express
terms and conditions that the licensee shall comply with all provisions of
law and of the laws and ordinances of the City now in force or hereafter
adopted and which shall be upon such other terms and conditions as the
§ 153-16 AUBURN CODE § 157-3
157:272
City Manager may in his or her judgment prescribe as reasonable or
suitable.
§ 157-4. Revocation of license.
Such license may at any time be revoked as provided in Chapter 200,
Licensing, of this Code if such show, performance, exhibition, amusement or
entertainment, or any part or feature thereof, or the purpose to which such
public hall is put, is contrary to law, or to the laws or ordinances of the City,
or is subversive or contrary to good morals, or for any reason that appears
to be good and sufficient.
§ 157-5. Miniature golf courses.
No person shall hereafter construct, maintain or operate a miniature golf
course or any similar amusement for commercial purposes anywhere in the
City without first obtaining a license or permit therefor from the Council
and paying to the City Clerk the fee prescribed in this chapter.
§ 157-6. Motion picture theaters.
§ 157-7. Public entertainment on Sunday.
A. Operator required. In all theaters, auditoriums, places of amusement,
and other public places where projectors are used for the projection of
motion pictures, there shall not be less than one operator on duty.
B. Qualifications of operator. Each such operator shall not be less than 21
years of age, shall be experienced in the operation of such machines,
and shall, if required by the City Manager, submit to an examination as
to his or her qualifications by two qualified examiners to be appointed
by the City Manager.
C. Compliance prerequisite to license. No license for operation as
provided by this section shall be issued by the City Manager to any
theater, public hall or place of amusement unless its motion picture
machines are operated as herein required, and any license issued may
be revoked for a violation of this provision.
D. Violations. Any person owning, managing, directing or in charge of any
such theater, auditorium, public hall or other public place who shall
sanction or permit the operation of the picture machines used in such
place contrary to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
A. Motion pictures. It shall be lawful to conduct or participate in motion
picture exhibitions on the first day of the week after 1:05 p.m., to
witness which the public is invited or an admission fee is charged,
either directly or indirectly, in the City.
B. Special license required. Such motion pictures shall not be so exhibited
by any person in any place without there having been procured a
§ 157-3 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 157-7
157:273
§ 157-8. Baseball games on Sunday.
special license therefor from the Council in addition to the license
required to be procured under any other provision of the existing law
and ordinances of the City, and the Council may issue such licenses,
fix the fees therefor to be paid to the City Treasurer, and prescribe
the terms and conditions thereof and at any time, for good cause to it
appearing, may revoke any such license so issued by it.
C. Compliance with conditions required. Such motion pictures shall be so
exhibited on the first day of the week within such hours only in
compliance with and obedience to the terms and provisions of the
license issued by the Council therefor, and such other orders and
regulations as may be made from time to time with respect to such
exhibitions by the Council, and not otherwise.
D. Admission fee. No greater admission fee shall be charged for such
exhibition than has been charged for an exhibition on weekdays.
E. Other activities prohibited. In connection with or in addition to the
motion pictures so exhibited on any such day, there shall not be given,
introduced or offered any show, dance, song, monologue, sketch, play,
entertainment or other exhibition whatsoever, and no person shall give,
introduce or offer or participate in giving, introducing or offering any of
said matters in connection with, or in addition to, any such motion
pictures or exhibition thereof on such day.
F. Applicability. The foregoing restrictions as to motion pictures shall not
be deemed to apply to exhibitions by churches or religious
organizations where no admission fee is charged.
A. Hours and location. It shall be lawful to conduct, witness, participate or
engage in the playing of baseball games on the first day of the week
after 1:05 p.m., to witness which the public is invited or an admission
fee is charged, either directly or indirectly, in the City at such place and
on such grounds as shall be designated or permitted for that purpose by
the City Manager upon due application. Any such designation may be
revoked or altered by the City Manager or by the Council at any time.
B. Authority to charge for admission. For the purpose of witnessing such
games an admission fee may or may not be charged, as may be
approved by the City Manager, but no greater fee shall be charged on
Sunday than on any weekday.
C. Conduct regulated. Such baseball playing shall not, nor shall any
person participating therein, unreasonably disturb the peace of the day.
D. Revocation of permission. Any such permission so granted may be
revoked at any time by the City Manager or by the Council for any
cause.
§ 157-7 AUBURN CODE § 157-9
157:274
§ 157-9. License fees.
The following are hereby fixed as rates or fees to be paid upon such
licenses:
§ 157-10. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 164
FEES
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Schedule of Fees Ordinance."
§ 164-2. Building permit and related fees.37 [Amended 6-3-2004 by
Ord. No. 9-2004]
The following fees shall be paid at the office of Code Enforcement upon the
filing of an application for a building permit:
A. For theaters, auditoriums or other public halls intended for public
amusement, per year in advance: $75.
B. For circuses or other outdoor performances or shows charging a
general admission for adults of $0.25 or upwards, including sideshows
connected therewith, per day: $50.
C. For circuses or other outdoor performances or shows charging a
general admission for adults of less than $0.25, including sideshows
connected therewith, per day: $25.
D. For menageries, exhibitions, panoramas, moving pictures,
performances, concerts, minstrel shows and other exhibitions,
performances or amusement devices not held in a public hall, per day:
$10.
E. For miniature golf courses or similar amusement, per year in advance:
$50.
F. For public dance halls charging admission, per year: $20; per night: $5.
A. A basic fee of $40 plus the following applicable fee:
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 157-9 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 164-2
157:275
§ 164-3. Certificate of occupancy fees.38 [Amended 6-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 9-2004]
The following fees shall be paid at the office of the Code Enforcement
Officer upon the filing of an application for a certificate of occupancy:
Type Fee
General remodeling, one room $10.00
General remodeling, over one
room
$10.00 and 0.05 per square foot
Steps, siding, rebuild porch 0
Windows 0
Re-roof $20.00
Fireplaces and wood, gas and
pellet stoves
0
Addition $10.00 and 0.10 per square foot
Garage/storage shed $10.00 and 0.10 per square foot
Remodel bath or kitchen $25.00
Deck $25.00 and 0.10 per square foot
over 100 square feet
New house $60.00 and 0.10 per square foot
Commercial building $160.00 and 0.05 per square foot
Demolition $10.00 and 0.02 per square foot
Aboveground pool $30.00
In-ground pool $40.00
Fence $25.00
Moving building through or across
street
$50.00
Gasoline storage tanks $100.00 per
Gasoline pumps $50.00 per
B. Above permit fees double when permit is taken out pursuant to order of
the office of Code Enforcement.
A. Residential uses: $50 per unit.
B. Commercial and mixed uses:
Square Feet Fee
0 to 25,000 $100
25,001 to 50,000 $150
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 164-2 AUBURN CODE § 164-3
157:276
§ 164-4. Housing Code fees.39 [Amended 6-3-2004 by Ord. No.
9-2004]
§ 164-5. Zoning, planning and subdivision fees.40
The following fees shall be paid at the office of the Building Inspector upon
the filing of any of the following applications:
Square Feet Fee
50,001 or more $200
C. Reinspections.
(1) Reinspection following expiration of time period in temporary
certificate of occupancy: $25.
(2) All other inspections, including but not limited to missed inspection
appointments: $50.
A. Inspection per complaint: no charge.
B. Inspection following expiration of time period in violation order: $25.
C. All other inspections, including but not limited to missed inspection
appointments: $50.
A. Special use permit: $50 per application.
B. Special use permit, conversion: $50 plus $25 for each unit over two.
C. Variance (area or use): $50 per application.
D. Any other application requiring Zoning or Planning Board action: $50
per application.
E. Zoning compliance certificate: $15.
F. Signs.
(1) Nonilluminated.
Square Feet Fee
Up to 50 $20
51 to 100 $35
101 to 150 $50
151 to 200 $70
(2) Illuminated.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Housing Standards.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Planning and Subdivision, and Ch. 305, Zoning.
§ 164-3 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 164-5
157:277
§ 164-6. Plumbing permit fees. [Added 4-17-1997 by Ord. No.
11-1997; amended 8-23-2001 by Ord. No. 24-2001; 6-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 9-2004]
The following fees shall be paid at the Office of Code Enforcement:
§ 164-7. Appearance tickets and mandatory administration fee.
[Added 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2-2017]
Square Feet Fee
Up to 50 $40
51 to 100 $70
101 to 150 $100
151 to 200 $140
G. Site plan review: $50 each plus cost of additional work contracted out
(traffic studies, etc.).
H. Subdivision applications: $50 per lot; maximum fee: $300.
I. SEQRA review; environmental impact statement (EIS).
(1) Residential project: not to exceed 2% of cost.
(2) Nonresidential project: not to exceed 0.5% of cost.
A. Permit fees, to be paid upon the filing of a permit:
(1) Residential: $10, plus $2 per fixture.
(2) Commercial: $40, plus $2 per fixture.
B. Annual license fees:
(1) Master plumber license: $200.
(2) Journeyman plumber license: $50.
(3) Apprentice plumber license: $20.
(4) Inactive plumber: $20.
(5) Drain layers: $100.
C. Certificate of competency examination fees:
(1) Master plumber: $100.
(2) Drain layer: $100.
A. All property owners and/or other responsible parties who have been
duly served with an appearance ticket pursuant to Chapter 5 of the City
Code and are required to appear in court for the violation(s) set forth
§ 164-5 AUBURN CODE § 164-7
157:278
Chapter 167
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 167-1. Findings; statutory authority.
The City of Auburn, like other municipalities, experiences fires which
damage or destroy residential, commercial and industrial structures within
its city limits, many of which remain standing unrepaired. Oftentimes,
insurance proceeds are paid to the owner without the structure being
repaired or demolished. In addition, taxes are often due and outstanding
on such real property which often are not paid by the owner after a fire.
General Municipal Law § 22 provides a procedure by which a municipality
may file a lien with the Superintendent of Insurance for any unpaid taxes,
special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other charges imposed upon
real property.
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICER — The City Treasurer.
LIEN — An unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other
charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of the City of Auburn,
whether or not evidenced by written instrument, and provided that one
such tax, levy, assessment or other charge has remained undischarged for a
period of one year or more.
REAL PROPERTY — Property upon which there is erected any residential,
commercial, or industrial building or structure except a one- or two-family
residential structure.
§ 167-3. Procedure established.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 22, a claim against fire insurance
procedure is hereby established as follows: The City of Auburn is hereby
authorized and empowered to claim against the proceeds of a policy of fire
therein shall be required to pay a mandatory administrative fee for each
and every appearance that is required.
B. Said fee shall not apply in instances where the judge makes a
determination that there was no legal basis for the service of the
appearance ticket and dismisses the case. Said fee shall be separate
and independent from any fines and penalties imposed by the court
resulting from the violation(s) set forth in the appearance ticket.
C. Said fee shall be payable to the City of Auburn Treasurer at the time of
each court appearance in an amount to be set by the City of Auburn Fee
Schedule, which is on file in the City offices.
§ 164-7 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 167-3
167:279
insurance insuring the interests of an owner and issued on real property
located within the City of Auburn to the extent of any liens thereon, which
claim, when made and perfected in a manner provided herein, shall further
constitute a lien against such proceeds and which shall, as to such proceeds,
be prior to all other liens and claims except the claim of a mortgagee of
record named in such policy.
§ 167-4. Manner of filing.
Upon the adoption of a resolution by the City Council of the City of Auburn,
the City Treasurer shall cause a notice of intention to claim against
proceeds to be served upon the State Superintendent of Insurance for entry
into the index of tax districts maintained by him or her as provided in
§ 331 of the Insurance Law. Thereafter, the City Treasurer shall render to
any insured the certificate required and in the manner described by such
section, and the amount stated in such certificate shall be a lien on the
proceeds of the insurance policy until paid.
§ 167-5. Return of proceeds.
The City Treasurer shall release or return to the insured any amounts to
which the City of Auburn would otherwise be entitled to claim, provided
that the insured agrees with the City of Auburn, in writing, to restore the
affected premises to the same or improved condition that it was in prior to
the time that the lien of the City of Auburn against proceeds provided for
herein arose, subject to such conditions as such resolution shall provide to
guarantee performance of such obligation, including but not limited to an
agreement to deposit such proceeds in an escrow account or a requirement
that the insured obtain a performance bond.
§ 167-6. Other remedies.
The provisions herein shall not be deemed or construed to alter or impair
the right of the City of Auburn to acquire or enforce any lien against real
property but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to
acquire or enforce such right.
Chapter 169
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 167-3 AUBURN CODE § 169-1
169:280
§ 169-1. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Auburn finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of
the City of Auburn and that such damages may include destruction or loss
of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and
privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize
the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives
hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted. Furthermore, this chapter
supersedes and replaces any prior laws and/or ordinances and amendments
thereto adopted previously by the City of Auburn regarding floodplain
regulation and flood damage protection.
§ 169-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 169-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 169-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-3
169:281
§ 169-4. Word usage and definitions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Code Enforcement Officer
Brian Hicks' or his successor's interpretation of any provision of this
chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term “special flood hazard area
(SFHA)” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special
flood hazard.”
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER BRIAN HICKS, OR HIS SUCCESSOR
— The person appointed by the community to administer and
§ 169-3 AUBURN CODE § 169-4
169:282
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of
the lowest floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to
or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space
shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or,
in the case of a building in Zones V1-V30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
§ 169-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-4
169:283
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 169-4 AUBURN CODE § 169-4
169:284
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
(4)
§ 169-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-4
169:285
regulation adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base
flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 169-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual “start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 169-4 AUBURN CODE § 169-4
169:286
§ 169-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Auburn, Cayuga County.
§ 169-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 169-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Auburn, Community
Number 360102, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36011C0303E,
36011C0305E, 36011C0308E, 36011C0311E, 36011C0312E,
36011C0316E, the effective date of which is August 2, 2007, and
any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect
areas under our community's jurisdiction. [Amended 7-26-2007
by L.L. No. 8-2007]
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Cayuga County, New York, All Jurisdictions,” dated effective August
2, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
City of Auburn City Hall, Auburn, NY.
§ 169-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-7
169:287
§ 169-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Auburn from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 169-19 and
169-20 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 169-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Auburn, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 169-10. Designation of Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or
his successor.
The City Council or its designated representative hereby appoints Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, to administer and
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or local laws, the most
restrictive or that imposing the highest standards shall govern.
§ 169-7 AUBURN CODE § 169-10
169:288
implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 169-11. Purpose of floodplain development permit; fees.
§ 169-12. Permit application.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate;
additional information may be required on the permit application form:
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 169-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, and may include but
not be limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities and the location of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of Auburn for any
additional expert costs, such as legal and engineering fees, necessary
for review, inspection and approval of this project. The Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, may require a
deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH or Zone A if base
flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer Brian
Hicks, or his successor, the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or
his successor, the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a
professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 169-15C, Utilities.
§ 169-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-12
169:289
§ 169-13. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Officer Brian
Hicks, or his successor.
Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, shall
include but not be limited to the following:
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 169-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 169-6, when notified by the Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, and must pay any
fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant
must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the
altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, which
shows whether proposed development to be located in an area of
special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks,
or his successor, shall conduct the following permit application review
before issuing a floodplain development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 169-12, Permit application, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 169-14 through 169-18 and, in
particular, § 169-14A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 169-12 AUBURN CODE § 169-13
169:290
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, may require the
applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data
necessary to complete the determination. If the proposed
development may result in physical damage to any other property
or fails to meet the requirements of §§ 169-14 through 169-18, no
permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the application to
include measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and
resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or
his successor, shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, including data developed pursuant to § 169-12G, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data is not available, the Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, may use flood
information from any other authoritative source, such as historical
data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood
hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks,
or his successor, shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his
successor, shall:
§ 169-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-13
169:291
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion
of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure,
obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in relation to
mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by the same. For manufactured homes, the
permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon
placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a
site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed
and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, shall review all
data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stopwork
order for the project unless immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his
successor, and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and
enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit
and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, shall
issue or cause to be issued a stop-work order for any floodplain
development found ongoing without a development permit.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in § 169-8 of this chapter.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, shall
issue or cause to be issued a stop-work order for any floodplain
development found noncompliant with the provisions of this
chapter and/or the conditions of the development permit.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in § 169-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 169-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
§ 169-13 AUBURN CODE § 169-13
169:292
§ 169-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 169-6:
Brian Hicks, or his successor, stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, upon
satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks,
or his successor, shall retain and make available for inspection copies of
the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
(2) Certificates of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement.
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1)
and whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 169-19 and 169-20.
(5) Notices required under § 169-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
§ 169-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-14
169:293
§ 169-15. Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The City of Auburn agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the City
of Auburn for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the City of Auburn for all costs
related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 169-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood;
or
(b) The City of Auburn agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the City of Auburn for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the City of
Auburn for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
§ 169-14 AUBURN CODE § 169-15
169:294
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation.
Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels
shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation unless they
conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New
York State for location of such items in wet locations.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall.
§ 169-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-15
169:295
§ 169-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 169-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 169-14B, Encroachments, and § 169-15,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special
flood hazard as indicated:
§ 169-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in § 169-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 169-14B,
Encroachments, and § 169-15, Standards for all structures.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 169-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below the
base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
§ 169-15 AUBURN CODE § 169-17
169:296
§ 169-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 169-14, General
standards, and § 169-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer
Brian Hicks, or his successor, that certifies that the design and methods
of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of Subsection A(2), including the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
§ 169-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-18
169:297
§ 169-19. Appeals board.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and
is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that
the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 169-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Auburn Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the City of
Auburn shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Auburn Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or
his successor, in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Auburn Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
§ 169-18 AUBURN CODE § 169-19
169:298
§ 169-20. Conditions for variances.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
of this chapter.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer Brian Hicks, or his successor, shall
maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 169-19D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
§ 169-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 169-20
169:299
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public; or conflict with existing chapters or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 169-13H of this chapter.
§ 169-20 AUBURN CODE § 169-20
169:300
Chapter 178
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Sites Commission — See Ch. 11, Art.
IV.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Tax exemption for historic properties — See
Ch. 265, Art. VIII.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 178-1. Purpose.
A. The historic preservation regulations as established in this chapter are
designed to protect the many structures and landscape features having
a special character or historic interest to the City of Auburn, the State
of New York or the nation. The City Council finds that there exist within
the City of Auburn places, sites, structures and buildings of historic or
architectural significance, antiquity, uniqueness of exterior design or
construction, which should be conserved, protected and preserved to
maintain the architectural character of the City, to contribute to the
aesthetic value of the City and to promote the general good, welfare,
health and safety of the City and its residents.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare by
providing for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation,
and use of buildings, structures, signs, features, appropriate
improvements, sites, and areas within the City of Auburn that reflect
special elements of the City's historical, architectural, cultural,
economic or aesthetic heritage for the following reasons:
(1) To foster public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation in the
beauty and character of the City of Auburn and in the
accomplishments of its past;
(2) To ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and
development of the City;
(3) To enhance the visual character of the City by encouraging new
design and construction that complements the City's historic
buildings;
(4) To protect and promote the economic benefits of historic
preservation to the City, its inhabitants and visitors;
(5) Encourage private efforts and stewardship in support of such
purposes; and
§ 169-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-1
169:301
§ 178-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACQUISITION — The act or process of acquiring fee title or other interest
in real property, including acquisition of development rights or remainder
interest.
ADDITION — Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a building or structure by adding to, joining with
or increasing the size or capacity of the building or structure.
ALTERATION — Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of an improvement or landscape feature, including
but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of
any improvement or landscape feature.
APPROPRIATE — Especially suitable or compatible in the circumstances.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE — The quality of a building or structure
based on its date of erection, style and scarcity of same, quality of design,
present condition and appearance or other characteristics that embody the
distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction.
BOARD — The Historic Resources Review Board provided for by § 178-4.
BUILDING — Any construction created to shelter any form of human use,
such as a house, garage or barn, and which is permanently affixed to the
land. "Building" may also refer to a historically related complex, such as a
house and a barn.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person, or his or her designee, authorized
and certified to enforce the New York State Fire Prevention and Building
Code. The person, or his or her designee, who is also authorized by the City
Council to enforce this chapter, except where another official is expressly
authorized.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The person, or his or her designee, authorized to
grant permits for construction, alteration, and demolition pursuant to the
codes adopted by the City.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — An official form issued by the
City Historic Resources Review Board stating that the proposed work on
a designated historic resource is compatible with the historic character of
the property and thus in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and therefore: (1) the proposed work may be completed as specified in the
(6) To identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the
preservation of historic landmarks/districts and alternative land
uses; and
(7) To conserve valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use
and maintenance of the existing built environment.
§ 178-1 AUBURN CODE § 178-2
169:302
certificate; and (2) the City's departments may issue any permits needed to
do the work specified in the certificate.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — An official form issued by the
City Historic Resources Review Board when the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness has deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property of
all reasonable use of, or economic return on, the property.
CHANGE — Any alteration, demolition, removal or construction involving
any property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
CHARACTER — Defined by form, proportion, structure, plan, style or
material. General character refers to ideas of design and construction such
as basic plan or form. Specific character refers to precise ways of combining
particular kinds of materials.
COMPATIBLE — In harmony with location, context, setting, and historic
character.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding to an existing structure or erecting a
new principal accessory structure on any real property.
DEMOLISH/DEMOLITION — Any act or process that destroys in part or
in whole any exterior improvement or landscape feature of an historic
landmark or historic property within an historic district or any designated
public interior.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — A situation in which a property owner,
or others having legal possession, custody or control of the property,
intentionally allows the condition of a property located within an historic
district or a designated local landmark to suffer such deterioration,
potentially beyond the point of repair as to threaten the structural integrity
of the structure or significant architectural detail.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Official allowing
the applicant to demolish a building or structure, after having received a
certificate of appropriateness approval from the Board.
EVALUATION — The process by which the significance and integrity of a
building, structure, object, or site is judged by an individual who meets the
professional qualification standards published by the National Park Service
at 36 CFR Part 61 as determined by the State Historic Preservation Office,
using the designation criteria outlined in § 178-11 of this chapter.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — The architectural style, design,
general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of any
building or structure.
FEATURE — Elements embodying the historical significance or
architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of all of
the exterior surfaces of any landmark or historic property, including, but not
limited to, the type of building materials, and type and style of windows,
doors, or other elements related to such landmark or historic property.
GOVERNING BOARD or MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BOARD — The law
making or legislative body of the City consisting of the City Council.
§ 178-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-2
169:303
HISTORIC CONTEXT — A unit created for planning purposes that groups
information about historic properties based on a shared theme, specific time
period and geographical area.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated as an historic district by this
chapter which contains within definable geographic boundaries a
significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings,
structures, objects or landscape features united historically or aesthetically
by plan or physical development. A designated historic district shall not be
construed as a zoning district of the City, and nothing contained herein shall
be construed as authorizing the board to adopt a law, bylaw, or regulation
that regulates or limits the height and bulk of buildings, regulates and
determines the area of yards, courts and other open spaces, regulates
density of population or regulates or restricts the locations of trades and
industries or creates zoning districts for any such purpose.
HISTORIC FABRIC — Original or old building materials (masonry, wood,
metals, marble) or construction.
HISTORIC INTEGRITY — The retention of sufficient aspects of location,
design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling or association for a
property to convey its historic significance.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — A building, district, site, structure, object or
landscape feature significant in American history, cultural, architectural,
engineering, or archeology at the City, the state or the national level.
HISTORIC PROPERTY — A district, site, building, structure, object or
landscape feature significant in American history, cultural, architectural,
engineering, or archeology at the City, the state or the national level.
HISTORIC RESOURCE SURVEY — a) The process of systematically
identifying, researching, photographing, and documenting historic
resources within a defined geographic area; and b) the resulting list of
evaluated properties that may be consulted for future designation. For the
purpose of this chapter, all surveys shall be conducted in accordance with
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Identification
and Evaluation, as may be amended.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — The quality of place, site, building, district, or
structure based upon its identification with historic persons or events in the
City of Auburn.
INTEGRITY — The authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced
by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's
historic or prehistoric period.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet specified
criteria of significance.
LANDMARK — Any building, structure or site that has been designated as a
"landmark" by the City Council, pursuant to procedures described in § 178-8
that is worthy of preservation, restoration or rehabilitation because of its
historic or architectural significance.
§ 178-2 AUBURN CODE § 178-2
169:304
LANDSCAPE FEATURE — Any natural topographic feature or man-made
landscape element.
LISTING — The formal entry or registration of a property.
MAINTAIN — To keep in an existing state of preservation or repair.
MINOR WORK — Any change, modification, restoration, rehabilitation, or
renovation of the features of an historic resource that does not materially
change the historic characteristics of the property.
MOVE — Any relocation of a building or structure on its site or to another
site.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — The official inventory
of the nation's historic properties, districts, sites, structures, objects and
landmarks which are significant in American history, architecture,
archeology, and culture, maintained by the Secretary of the Interior under
the authority of the Historic Sites Act of 1935 and the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. § 470 et seq., 36 CFR 60 and 63, as may
be amended).
NONCONTRIBUTING — A feature, addition or building, structure, object or
site which does not add to the sense of historical authenticity or evolution
of an historic resource or landmark or where the location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, history, and/or association of the feature, addition
or building, structure, object or site has been so altered or deteriorated
that the overall integrity of that historic resource or landmark has been
irretrievably lost.
OBJECT — Things that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small
in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be moveable by nature
or design, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment.
Examples include boundary markers, mileposts, fountains, monuments, and
sculpture. This term may include landscape features.
OWNER — Those individuals, partnerships, corporations, or public agencies
holding fee simple title to property, as shown on the records of the Tax Map
of the City of Auburn.
PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANCE — The length of time when a property was
associated with important events, activities, or persons, or attained
characteristics which qualify it for landmark status. "Period of significance"
usually begins with a date when significant activities or events began giving
the property its historic significance; this is often a date of construction.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary to
sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of an historic property.
Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property,
generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic
materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new
§ 178-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-2
169:305
construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of this
treatment; however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical,
electrical, and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make
properties functional is appropriate within a preservation project.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of making possible a compatible
use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while
preserving those portions or features of the property which convey its
historical, architectural and cultural values.
RETAIN — To keep secure and intact. The act of keeping an element,
detail or structure and continuing the same level of repair to aid in the
preservation of elements, sites, and structures.
REVERSIBLE — An addition which is made without damage to the project's
original condition.
SCENIC LANDMARK — Scenic landmarks encompass structures that are
not buildings, such as bridges, piers, parks, cemeteries, sidewalks, clocks,
and trees.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR THE TREATMENT
OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES — Principles developed by the National Park
Service (36 CFR 68.3, as may be amended) to help protect historic
properties by promoting consistent preservation practices and providing
guidance to historic building owners and building managers, preservation
consultants, architects, contractors, and project reviewers on how to
approach the treatment of historic properties. The Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties may also be
referred to in this chapter as "Secretary of the Interior's Standards."
SIGNIFICANT — Having particularly important associations with the
contexts of architecture, history and culture.
SITE — The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic
occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined
or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archeological
value regardless of the value of any existing buildings, structures or other
objects. Examples of a site are a battlefield, designed landscape, trail, or
campsite.
STABILIZATION — The act or process of applying measures designed to
reestablish a weather-resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an
unsafe or deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form as it
exists at present.
STRUCTURE — Buildings whose functional constructions are made usually
for the purposes other than creating human shelter. Examples include:
bandstands, gazebos, lighthouse, silos, and windmills.
STYLE — A type of architecture distinguished by special characteristics of
structure or ornament and often related in time; also a general quality of
distinctive character.
§ 178-2 AUBURN CODE § 178-2
169:306
UNDERTAKING — Any project, activity or program involving the expansion,
modification, development or disposition of any historic property.
§ 178-3. Enabling authority.
Pursuant to Article 5, § 96-a, Article 5-G, Article 5-J and Article 5-K, § 119-dd
of the General Municipal Law; Article 14 of the Parks, Recreation and
Historic Preservation Law; and § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
it is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts are
necessary to promote the cultural, economic and general welfare of the
public.
§ 178-4. Historic Resources Review Board.
There is hereby created a board to be known as the City of Auburn Historic
Resources Review Board.
A. Membership. The Board shall consist of seven members.
B. Appointment. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval of the City Council. No person appointed to the
commission can also serve as a member of the City Council establishing
the Board.
C. Terms of office. The terms for all members of the Board shall be
staggered and fixed. The Board members shall serve for a term of three
years, with the exception that of the initial term of five Board members,
three shall be for one year and two shall be for two years.
D. Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the Board other than by expiration of
term of office shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of City Council, but such appointment shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced.
E. Reappointment. Members may serve for more than one term, and each
member shall serve until the appointment of a successor.
F. Qualifications. To the extent possible, Board members shall be required
to have the following expertise:
(1) At least one shall be a historian;
(2) At least one shall be a state-licensed real estate professional;
(3) At least one shall have demonstrated significant interest in and
commitment to the field of preservation planning as evidenced
either by involvement in a local or regional historic preservation
group, employment or volunteer activity in the field of preservation
planning, or other serious interest in the field; and
(4) All members shall have a known interest in historic preservation
planning within the City of Auburn.
§ 178-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-4
169:307
§ 178-5. Board organization.
§ 178-6. Regulations and meetings.
(5) In the event that the Mayor, subject to the approval of City Council,
determines that any of the positions described in Subsection F(1),
(2) and (3) cannot be filled by persons so qualified, the Mayor,
subject to the approval of City Council, may fill any such position by
appointing persons qualified under Subsection F(4).
G. Compensation. Members shall serve without compensation.
H. Board training.
(1) Each member of the Board is encouraged to complete, at a
minimum, two hours of training each year designed to enable such
members to more effectively carry out their duties. Training
received by a member in excess of two hours in any one year may
be carried over by the member in succeeding years in order to meet
this requirement. Such training may include, but not be limited to,
training provided by a municipality, regional or county planning
office or commission, county planning federation, state agency,
statewide municipal association, college or private firm. Training
may be provided in a variety of formats, including, but not limited
to, electronic media, video, distance learning and traditional
classroom training.
(2) No decision of a Board shall be voided or declared invalid because
of a failure to comply with Subsection I, Board training.
A. Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Board shall be designated by the
Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor's designation, the Chairperson of
the Board shall be designated by vote of an affirmative majority of the
members of the Board. The Chairperson shall have the right to vote in
all matters before the Board.
B. Chairperson duties. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine by
affirmative vote. In his or her absence, an acting Chairperson may
perform the duties of the Chairperson.
C. Secretary. The City of Auburn Office of Planning and Economic
Development shall provide a secretary to the Board. At the time of
service, the secretary shall not also serve as a member of the Board.
The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings, certificates of
appropriateness, actions of the Board, as well as attendance of Board
members.
D. Quorum. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
§ 178-4 AUBURN CODE § 178-6
169:308
§ 178-7. Powers and duties.
A. Regulations. The Board may recommend to the City Council regulations
relating to any subject matter over which the Board has jurisdiction
under this chapter of City Code. Any such recommendation may be
adopted by the City Council.
B. Meetings. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business, which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular
meetings. Regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once each
month. The Board's rules shall provide for the calling of special
meetings by the Chairperson or by the majority of the Board. All regular
or special meetings of the Board shall be consistent with the notice
provisions of the New York Open Meetings Law and shall be open to the
public.
A. General and advisory powers. The Board shall, from time to time:
(1) Review any local laws or regulations, including existing local
landmarks or historic preservation laws or regulations in the City,
and recommend to the City Council any changes and amendments
thereto;
(2) Recommend to the City Council additional regulations to be
adopted pursuant to Chapter 178 that may be necessary for the
Board to conduct its business, consistent with the scope and intent
of this chapter;
(3) Recommend to the City Council the adoption of criteria for the
identification of significant historic, architectural, cultural, and
scenic landmarks and for the delineation of historic districts.
(4) Conducting of surveys of significant historic, architectural, and
cultural landmarks and historic districts within the City.
(5) Recommending designation by City Council of identified structures
or landscape resources as landmarks and historic districts.
(6) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
public education programs.
(7) Conduct investigations, prepare maps, brochures and descriptive
material, reports and recommendations in connection with the
Board's advisory authority related to the planning, development
and administration of the City's landmarks preservation policies,
regulations and ordinance as needed.
(8) Reporting on matters referred to it by the City Council. The City
Council may by resolution provide for the referral to the Board for a
report on any matter or class of matters that impact the
municipality's landmarks preservation local law, policies,
§ 178-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-7
169:309
§ 178-8. Criteria for designation of landmarks and historic districts.
The Board shall delineate landmarks or historic districts and recommend
them to the City Council for designation under local law.
regulations or administrative processes before final action is taken
thereon by the City Council or other office of the City having final
authority over said matter. The City Council may further stipulate
that final action thereon shall not be taken until the Board has
submitted its report thereon, or has had reasonable time, to be
fixed by the City Council in said resolution, to submit the report.
(9) Recommending acquisition of an historic landmark or an
improvement or landscape feature within an historic district by the
City government where its preservation is essential to the purpose
of this chapter and where private preservation is not feasible.
B. Administrative reviews. In accordance with the regulations adopted by
the City Council for landmarks and historic preservation purposes, the
Board shall:
(1) Evaluate an application for certificate of appropriateness (COA);
approve, approve with modifications, or deny any proposal for
exterior changes to a designated individual landmark or property
within a designated historic district resulting from any such
application;
(2) Evaluate an application for a certificate of economic hardship;
approve, approve with modifications, or deny any such application;
(3) Evaluate an application for a certificate of appropriateness for
demolition, removal or relocation; approve, approve with
modifications, or deny any such application;
(4) Staff has the authority to review and approve applications for
certificate of appropriateness for ordinary maintenance and repair
of historic resources, properties or landmarks; approve, approve
with modifications, or deny any such applications;
(5) Perform other functions that the City Council may designate by
local law.
C. The Board may designate or advise designation of an historic district as
per this Chapter 178 of City Code and that historic district(s) are not to
be construed as a zoning district under the City local law. Nothing
contained in this Chapter 178 of City Code shall be construed as
authorizing the Board to adopt a law, bylaw or regulation that regulates
or limits the height and bulk of buildings, regulates and determines the
area of yards, courts and other open spaces, regulates density of
population or regulates or restricts the locations of trades and
industries or creates zoning districts for any such purposes.
§ 178-7 AUBURN CODE § 178-8
169:310
A. Local landmark. The Board may delineate an individual property as a
landmark if it:
(1) Exemplifies or possesses special character, or historic or aesthetic
interest of value as part of the political, economic, or social
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, the
state or the nation;
(2) Is identified with persons or events significant in the City, state or
national history;
(3) Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction or design style, or is a valuable example of
the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or is
representative of the work of a designer, architect or builder;
(4) Representing an established and familiar visual feature of the
community by virtue of its unique location or singular physical
characteristics, represents an established or familiar scenic
landscape feature of the City, state or nation; or
(5) Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
B. Historic district. The Board may delineate a group of properties within
the City as an historic district if a majority of the properties therein:
(1) Contain properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation as a landmark and which may have within its
boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such
historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as
landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the
historic district; and
(2) Constitute a unique section of the City by reason of possessing
those qualities that would satisfy such criteria.
C. Scenic landmarks. The Board may delineate a landscape feature or
group of features as scenic landmarks if such scenic landmark has
special historical or aesthetic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or
nation and:
(1) The designation must be accompanied by such historical and
architectural information as is required by the Board to make a
recommendation concerning the application to City Council;
(2) The boundaries of landmarks and historic districts shall be
specified by and reference by existing tax map identification
numbers maintained by the Cayuga County Office of Real Property
Services.
§ 178-8 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-8
169:311
§ 178-9. Notice and hearing requirements for proposed
designations.
The Board shall designate individual landmarks or historic districts in the
following manner:
D. Ordinarily, properties that have achieved significance within the past 50
years are not considered eligible for designation under this
preservation local law adopted by the City Council. However, such
properties may qualify if they are:
(1) Integral parts of historic districts that meet the criteria for
designation; or
(2) If they are properties of exceptional importance.
A. Initiation of proposed designation. Designation of an individual historic
landmark or district may be proposed by the Board, by the owner of the
property, or by any resident of the City of Auburn.
B. Application for designation. Individuals and organizations interested in
voluntarily having a property considered for local landmark and/or
district designation must own the property that is at least 50 years old
and complete the Board's designation application.
C. Public hearing; general notice.
(1) Within 60 days after receipt of an application for historic landmark
and/or district delineation, the Board shall schedule a public
hearing. Public notice of any such hearing shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at
least 15 days prior to the public hearing date.
(2) The Board, property owners, and any interested parties may
present testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing which
will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural,
or cultural importance of the proposed resource, individual,
landmark or historic district.
D. Notice of public hearing; multiple properties proposed for designation.
(1) Districts. Notice of public hearing for a proposed designation
involving multiple properties shall be sent to individual property
owners within the area of the proposed historic district at least 15
days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such notice shall
include a description of the properties proposed for designation
and state the time and place where any public hearing to consider
such designation will be held by the Board.
(2) The district notice provisions are in addition to the general notice
requirements under Subsection B of this section.
§ 178-8 AUBURN CODE § 178-9
169:312
§ 178-10. Designation of historic landmarks and districts.
In accordance with the designation criteria set forth in § 178-8, the
following properties are hereby designated:
E. Work moratorium. Once the Board has issued notice of a proposed
designation, it may recommend to the City Council that a moratorium
be put in place, prohibiting any work relating to the individual
landmark or district proposed for designation as long as the proposed
designation is under active consideration by the Board and until the
Board has made its decision on designation.
F. Board record. The Board shall compile a public record in support of its
delineation of a resource, landmark or historic district. In addition to
testimony or documentary evidence received at any public hearings,
the record may also contain reports, public comments, expert
testimony, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing, but
submitted for the Board's consideration by the date of the public
hearing. As a minimum, the record of the delineation shall contain the
application, Board and/or staff reports, any comments made on the
application at the public hearing, and the Board's recommendation to
the City Council to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
application requesting designation.
G. City Council decision. Within 62 days after the close of the public
hearing, the City Council shall by resolution undertake a designation in
whole or in part, or shall disapprove in entirety, setting forth in written
meeting minutes the reasons for the decision. Notice of the City Council
decision shall be sent by the Board to the applicants and owners of a
designated property or, in the case of an approved historic district,
notice shall be sent to the applicants and owners of all properties within
the approved district.
H. The Board may agree with the applicant in writing to extend the time
period within which a recommendation will be made.
I. The Board shall forward notice of each property designated as an
individual landmark and/or the boundaries of each designated historic
district to the City Offices of Codes, Planning and Clerk and Cayuga
County Offices of Real Property Services and Clerk.
J. Failure to send notice. Failure to send any notice to property owners
where the address of such owner is not a matter of property tax records
shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed
designation.
K. Amendment or rescission. The Board may amend or rescind any
designation of an individual landmark or historic district in the same
manner and procedure as followed for designation.
A. Historic local landmarks.
§ 178-9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-10
169:313
§ 178-11. Certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Willard Mansion, Case Research Lab and Carriage House (Cayuga
Museum Property), Tax Parcel ID No. 115.67-1-49.1, 203 Genesee
Street.
(2) Willard Memorial Chapel and Welch Memorial Building, Tax Parcel
ID No. 116.37-1-13.2, 17 Nelson Street.
(3) Case Memorial Library (Seymour), Tax Parcel ID No. 115.60-1-34.1,
176 Genesee Street.
(4) Harriet Tubman Home for the Aged, Tax Parcel ID No. 123.38-1-2,
180 South Street.
(5) Judge Charles C. Dwight Residence, Tax Parcel ID No. 116.21-1-40,
149 North Street.
(6) Auburn Schine Theater, Tax Parcel ID No. 116.45-2-73, 16 South
Street.
(7) Dr. Allen and Edith Dulles Residence, Tax Parcel ID No.
116.61-1-22, 67 South Street.
B. Local historic district(s). Grover Street Local Historic District, including
all properties on Grover Street between South Street and Osborne
Street.
C. National Register Historic District(s). South Street Historic District,
including all designated properties on South Street between Metcalf
Drive/Clymer Street and Lincoln Street including select properties on
Grover Street, Swift Street, Fitch Avenue, MacDougall Street, Hamilton
Street, Elizabeth Street, and Williams Street.
A. Certificate of appropriateness required. The City of Auburn Historic
Resources Review Board is responsible for the approval or disapproval
of proposals for exterior changes to an historic property designated
under this chapter. No person shall carry out any exterior alteration,
restoration, reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or move of a
designated historic landmark or resource or landscape feature within a
designated historic district without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness from the Board.
B. Application for certificate of appropriateness. Prior to the
commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness,
the owner shall file an application for such a certificate with the Board.
No building permit/sign permit shall be issued for any proposed work
until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the Board.
C. Criteria for issuing a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) General criteria. The Board shall approve the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness only if it determines that the
§ 178-10 AUBURN CODE § 178-11
169:314
proposed work will not have a substantial adverse effect on the
aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the
individual landmark or, if the proposed work is within an historic
district, proposed work will not have a substantial adverse effect
on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance of the
property itself, the district or neighboring properties in such
district.
(2) In making this determination, the Board's decision to approve,
approve with modification(s) or deny an application for a certificate
of appropriateness in an historic landmark or district, the Board
shall be guided by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and
Guidelines for Rehabilitation.
(3) In applying the principles set forth in Subsection C(2), the Board
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The general design and character of the proposed alteration or
new construction relative to existing features of the property
or resource;
(b) The scale and visual compatibility of the proposed alteration or
new construction in relation to the property itself, surrounding
properties, and the neighborhood;
(c) Texture and materials, and their relation to similar features of
the property and other properties in the neighborhood;
(d) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setbacks; and
(e) The importance of historic physical and visual features to the
significance of the property.
D. In approving an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Board shall find that the building or structure for which the permit was
requested, if erected or altered in accordance with the submitted plan
or with stated modifications, would be consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter, would not be visually offensive or inappropriate
by reason of poor quality of exterior design, monotonous similarity or
visual discord in relation to the sites or surroundings, would not mar
the appearance of the area, would not impair the use, enjoyment and
desirability or reduce the values of properties in the area, would not be
detrimental to the character of the neighborhood, would not prevent an
appropriate development and utilization of the site or of adjacent lands
and would not adversely affect the functioning, economic stability,
prosperity, health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 178-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-11
169:315
§ 178-12. Certificate of appropriateness application procedures.
E. Where the Board grants a certificate of appropriateness under
circumstances where the permitted activity is likely to uncover or affect
archaeological resources, the Board shall require reasonable efforts to
protect and preserve such resources. Where such protection and
preservation is not feasible, the Board shall nonetheless impose
appropriate and reasonable conditions to insure that the archaeological
resource is made accessible for a reasonable period to qualified
persons.
F. In approving an application for certificate of appropriateness, the
Board shall not review changes to exterior paint colors.
G. Interior space. The Board shall not consider changes to interior spaces
unless they are open to the public or affect the exterior appearance.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the property owner shall file an application for a
building permit with the City Code Enforcement Office and an
application for such certificate with the Board.
B. The application for certificate of appropriateness shall require, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) Property owner contact information and address;
(2) Existing condition photographs of property and/or project area;
(3) Architectural elevation drawings of proposed changes (if
applicable); and
(4) List and/or sample of all building materials to be used, including
proposed color scheme.
C. Upon receipt of all the information required herein and additional
information as required by the application for certificate of
appropriateness, the Board shall deem the application complete and
shall place the application on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled Board meeting.
D. Upon submission of a complete application, the Board shall have the
authority to, without public comment:
(1) Determine whether the proposed work constitutes ordinary
maintenance and repair and authorize Board staff to issue a
certificate of appropriateness;
(2) Determine whether the proposed work is considered replacement
in-kind and authorize Board staff to issue a certificate of
appropriateness;
§ 178-11 AUBURN CODE § 178-12
169:316
§ 178-13. Certificate of appropriateness public notice requirements
and approval.
(3) Determine work of any other type that has been previously
determined by the Board to be appropriate for delegation to staff.
E. Board staff will report to the Board on a monthly basis on all activities
for which applications were submitted and decisions made without any
public comment.
A. Public comment. The Board shall hold an opportunity for public
comment prior to rendering a decision on any application for a
certificate of appropriateness. The property owner and any interested
party may present testimony or documentary evidence regarding the
proposal at the Board meeting, which will become a part of the record.
The record may also contain staff reports, public comments, and other
evidence offered outside of the Board meeting, but presented by the
Board meeting date.
B. In the event, however, that the Board shall make a finding of fact that
the circumstances of a particular application require further time for
additional study and information, then the Board shall have a period of
up to an additional sixty-two-day period from the date of any such
finding within which to act upon such an application.
C. Decisions. All Board decisions shall be in writing. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be effective to authorize the commencement of
work in accordance with the application, plans, specifications, etc.,
upon which it is based for a period of six months after the date of its
issuance. In issuing such certificate, the Board may prescribe the
conditions that it deems to be necessary to carry out the intent and
purpose of this chapter. A certificate issued pursuant to this section
shall relate solely to proposed plans accompanying the application or
otherwise submitted to the Board for official consideration prior to
issuance of said certificate. It shall be unlawful to deviate from the
plans, including any modifications required as a condition of the
issuance of such certificate, unless and until an amended certificate
shall be applied for and issued. It shall also be unlawful to commence
work upon a certificate that has expired. A certificate of
appropriateness may be renewed for a second six-month period, but not
valid after a period of one year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Board shall not issue any such certificate unless and until it has been
advised by the Building Inspector that there is no impediment to the
issuance of any building, sign, or other permit as may be required by
applicable state or local law, ordinance or regulation for said work.
D. Delay of demolition; time limit; procedure. With respect to an
application for demolition of an historic landmark or an improvement or
landscape feature located in an historic district, the Board shall have
the right to issue a delayed certificate of appropriateness. Such
certificate shall not permit the demolition for a period of up to 10
§ 178-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-13
169:317
§ 178-14. Demolition, removal, or relocation of landmark and
historic district buildings.
months from the date of application therefor, during which time the
Board and the applicant shall undertake serious and continuing
discussion for the purpose of finding a method to save such property.
At the end of such delay, the Board will reconsider whether to grant or
deny the certificate of appropriateness.
E. Denial or delay of certificate; appeal to City Council. If the Board
determines that a certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, or
that a delayed certificate or a certificate contingent upon specific
structural performance should be issued, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing of such determination. Such notice shall advise the
applicant of his or her right to appeal such determination to the City
Council in accordance with § 178-18.
F. Building permits not to be granted without certificate. Unless the action
of the Board is reversed by the City Council or a court of competent
jurisdiction, the Building Inspector shall refuse to grant a building
permit, sign, demolition permit or other permit for any historic
landmark or district where a certificate of appropriateness has been
denied or has expired due to the applicant's failure to commence work
as described in Subsection C.
G. Effect of failure to act on application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if
the Board fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness or notify the
applicant of its determination not to issue a certificate within 45 days
after application therefor is filed, or within such additional time period
as the Board and the applicant may agree, such application shall be
deemed approved.
A. Demolition of an individual landmark or of a structure located in and
contributing to the significance of an historic district shall be allowed
only in case of economic hardship, unless the City Code Enforcement
Office, upon due deliberation, has made an express written finding that
the structure presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety
and welfare.
B. Any person desiring to demolish a designated historic building shall
first file an application for a building permit with the City Code
Enforcement Office and an application for certificate of
appropriateness with the Board. An application must submit, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) Report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any buildings on the
property and their suitability for rehabilitation;
(2) Expert testimony or opinion on the feasibility of rehabilitation or
reuse of the existing structure by an architect, developer, real
§ 178-13 AUBURN CODE § 178-14
169:318
estate consultant, appraiser, and/or other real estate professional
experienced in historic properties and rehabilitation;
(3) Existing condition photos of the property and/or resource;
(4) Documentation of architectural floor plans of proposed building,
structure or feature to be demolished.
C. Demolition by neglect.
(1) No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as
a landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in
the judgment of the Board, produce a detrimental effect upon the
character of the historic district as a whole, neighborhood
streetscape, or the life and character of the property itself. It is a
violation of the City's ordinance to not remedy a condition of
neglect within the period of time set by a final administrative
determination, as described in §§ 178-16 and 178-17 of this
chapter.
(2) Examples of such deterioration include, but are not limited to:
(a) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports that
causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling;
(b) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members that causes
leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling;
(c) Deterioration of exterior chimneys that causes crumbling of
exterior plasters or mortars;
(d) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or
foundations, including broken windows or doors;
(e) Signs of rot or decay, such as holes, or any deterioration that
creates a hazardous condition;
(f) A lack of maintenance of the surrounding environment, such as
fences, retaining walls, carriage houses and other outbuildings
and landscape features; and
(g) Deterioration of exterior features so as to create a hazardous
condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is
necessary for the public safety.
D. Demolition of any such building may be approved only in connection
with approval of a replacement project.
E. The Board shall hold a public hearing and shall take one of the following
actions:
§ 178-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-14
169:319
§ 178-15. Demolition, removal or relocation hardship criteria.
(1) Approve the demolition in conformance with the provisions of this
section;
(2) Approve the demolition subject to a waiting period of up to 120
days to consider relocation and/or hardship documentation as per
§ 178-15;
(3) Deny the application.
F. During the continuance period, the Board may investigate relocation of
the building (on site) or modification of the building for future uses in a
way which preserves the architectural and historical integrity of the
building.
A. Certificate of appropriateness for demolition, removal or relocation. An
applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition, removal or relocation of a landmark, resource or property
has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of economic
hardship. In order to prove the existence of economic hardship
sufficient to justify demolition, removal, or relocation, the applicant
shall establish that the denial of a certificate of appropriateness will
prevent the property owner from earning a reasonable return on
investment, regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible.
B. Certificate of appropriateness for demolition. The applicant for a
certificate of appropriateness for demolition must establish to the
Board an imminent plan of reuse or redevelopment of the affected
property. The applicant for an income-producing property shall
establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return,
regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable
return possible; and
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a
reasonable return; and
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
(4) In deciding upon such application for removal, relocation or
demolition, the Board may consider whether the owner has
intentionally allowed an historic property to suffer severe
deterioration, potentially beyond the point of repair thereby
creating a situation of self-hardship.
C. Submissions. Any property owner or person desiring to demolish a
designated historic building and seeking a certificate of
§ 178-14 AUBURN CODE § 178-15
169:320
appropriateness for demolition, removal or relocation of an incomeproducing
property and claiming economic hardship must submit the
following for Board review:
(1) Current level of economic return.
(2) Estimated market value of the property in its current condition;
after completion of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition, or removal; after any changes recommended by the
Board; and, in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation
of the existing property for continued use.
(3) In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate
professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic
feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the
property.
(4) Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party
from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship,
if any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person
from whom the property was purchased and any terms of financing
between the seller and buyer.
(5) If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and
maintenance expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation
deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if
any, during the same period.
(6) Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by
the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two
years.
(7) All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner
or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or
ownership of the property.
(8) Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers
received, if any, within the previous two years.
(9) Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent
assessments.
(10) Real estate taxes for the previous two years.
(11) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture, or other.
(12) Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the
owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property, considered
§ 178-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-15
169:321
§ 178-16. Maintenance and repair requirement.
necessary by the Board to a determination as to whether the
property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.
D. Proof required. In order to prove the existence of economic hardship,
the applicant must establish that unless the proposed work is
accomplished, the property will be incapable of earning a reasonable
return or of being put to reasonable use. In the case of a proposal to
remove or demolish a landmark or structure within an historic district,
the applicant must additionally prove that:
(1) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or a purchaser, which would result in reasonable
return.
(2) Reasonable efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the
property for rehabilitation and preservation have been made and
failed.
E. Determination by Board. If hardship is not proven, the Board shall deny
the application and notify the applicant by mail of the final denial. If the
Board finds that the economic hardship has been proven, relief shall be
provided in one of the following ways:
(1) The Board may relax the strict application of the criteria in § 178-7
sufficiently to relieve the hardship. In this case, the Board shall
issue a certificate of appropriateness, with conditions, as
necessary.
(2) The Board may investigate plans and make recommendations to
the City Council for City actions which, if taken, will allow for a
reasonable use of or reasonable return from the subject property or
will otherwise preserve the property without hardship to the owner.
F. If neither Subsection E(1) or (2) resolves the issue, the Board may issue
a certificate of economic hardship allowing the work to proceed as
proposed.
A. Ordinary maintenance; repair. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any
exterior architectural feature of an historic landmark or property within
an historic district that does not involve a change in design, building
materials, color or outward appearance. The Board may evaluate and
decide, without public hearing, whether or not proposed work
constitutes ordinary maintenance and repair or requires a certificate of
appropriateness.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as an
individual landmark or included with an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair. Maintenance shall be
required, consistent with the Property Maintenance Code of New York
§ 178-15 AUBURN CODE § 178-16
169:322
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all other
application local regulations.
C. Every property owner or person responsible for an improvement on a
landmark site or in an historic district shall keep in good repair:
(1) All of the exterior portions of such improvements; and
(2) All interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause
or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to
deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a
serious state of disrepair. Examples of deterioration or disrepair
would include:
(a) Deterioration of exterior plaster or mortar walls or facades;
(b) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation;
(c) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports or any
structural floor members of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety;
(d) Deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports that
split, lean, list or buckle due to defective materials or
deterioration;
(e) Deterioration of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or
other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to
defective material or deterioration or are of insufficient size to
carry imposed loads;
(f) Ineffective or inadequate waterproofing of exterior walls,
exterior chimneys, roofs, foundations or floors, including
windows or doors, which may cause or tend to cause
deterioration, decay or damage;
(g) Defective or insufficient weather protection for roofs,
foundation or exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or
weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering,
which may cause or tend to cause deterioration, decay or
damage;
(h) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to
defective material or deterioration or are of insufficient size or
strength to carry imposed loads with safety;
(i) Any fault or defect in the building or structure which renders it
not properly watertight or otherwise compromises the life and
character of the building or structure.
D. Interiors. Every property owner or person responsible for an
improvement to an interior landmark shall keep in good repair:
(1) All portions of such interior landmark; and
§ 178-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 178-16
169:323
§ 178-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(2) All other portions of the improvement, which, if not so maintained,
may cause or tend to cause the interior landmark contained in such
improvement to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or
otherwise to fall into a serious state of disrepair.
E. Every owner or person in charge of a scenic landmark shall keep in
good repair all portions thereof.
A. All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to the requirements expressly stated
in the certificate or reasonably inferred therefrom. It shall be the duty
of the Building Inspector to periodically inspect any such work to
assure compliance with the certificate and all applicable law. In the
event any requirement included in the certificate of appropriateness
has not been met, or upon notification of that fact by the Historic
Resources Review Board, the Building Inspector shall issue a stop-work
order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be
undertaken on the project as long as a stop-work order is in effect.
B. Any property owner or person responsible for a property who
demolishes, alters, constructs, or permits a designated property to fall
into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this chapter in the
absence of a certificate of appropriateness, a finding of economic
hardship, or other approval by the Board may be required by the City
Council to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior to the
violation.
C. If, in the judgment of the Board, a violation of this chapter exists that
will result in a detrimental effect upon the life and character of a
designated historic resource, landmark, property or on the character of
an historic district as a whole, the Board shall notify the City Code
Enforcement Office. If, upon investigation, the City Code Enforcement
Office finds noncompliance with the requirements of the Property
Maintenance Code of the New York State Fire Prevention and Building
Code, or any other applicable law or regulation, the City Code
Enforcement Office shall order such remedies as are necessary and
consistent with this chapter and shall provide written notice thereof to
the secretary of the Board.
D. Penalties. A violation of this chapter is deemed an offense punishable by
a fine(s) as outlined in the City's Fee Schedule. In addition to any
penalties imposed under this chapter, continued violations of this
chapter shall be punishable in any other manner provided under other
local regulations, and state and federal law.
E. The Board shall notify the City Council of an enforcement matter
arising under this chapter and shall refer it to the City Corporation
Counsel. Action to enforce this chapter shall be brought by the City
Corporation Counsel or other attorney designated by the City Council.
§ 178-16 AUBURN CODE § 178-17
169:324
§ 178-18. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a ruling or determination of the Board may appeal
to the City Council, which may reverse or affirm the action of the Board or
remand to the Board with instructions. In ruling upon an appeal, the Council
must consider the same evidence and be guided by the same criteria as used
by the Board in rendering its decision. A decision to reverse the Board's
action will require the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council
members.
§ 178-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, clause or phrase in this
chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections or portions of this chapter, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
Chapter 182
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Neighborhood and Housing
Commission — See Ch. 11, Art. VI.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Drain layers — See Ch. 147.
Electricians — See Ch. 153.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 178.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Solid waste — See Ch. 254.
Water service — See Ch. 297.
Civil remedies authorized under § 178-17 of this chapter shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 178-17 HOUSING STANDARDS § 178-19
182:325

Part 1
Residential Premises
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 182-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Housing Code for the
City of Auburn, New York."
§ 182-2. Purpose and intent.
§ 182-3. Scope.
This chapter shall be applicable to the following:
§ 182-4. Exemptions.
A. This chapter provides standards governing the facilities and the
condition, use, occupancy, and maintenance of residential premises, to
safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users
thereof.
B. It is intended that this Part 1 be compatible with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code but enacted to provide
more specific standards than those contained in Chapter F of the
Uniform Code. It is further intended that any of the standards contained
in this Part 1 be more stringent than those contained in the Uniform
Code and that this Part 1 shall be so construed.
C. In case of conflict with any provisions in this Part 1, the regulations
contained in the Uniform Code shall prevail if it is determined that the
regulations contained in the Uniform Code are more stringent.
A. Lots, plots, or parcels of land on which are located buildings devoted to
residential use or occupancy, mixed-occupancy buildings, or accessory
structures.
B. Buildings devoted to residential use or occupancy, including one- and
two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings, mixed-occupancy
buildings and accessory structures. Migrant housing shall be governed
solely by Chapter F of the Uniform Code.
A. This chapter shall not apply to mobile housing premises or migrant
housing premises or to nursing, convalescent, and old-age homes or
similar institutional occupancies.
B. This chapter shall not apply to fallout shelters constructed or installed
to provide safety and security to occupants in accordance with
specifications and standards contained in regulations or orders issued
§ 182-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-4
182:327
§ 182-5. Effect on other regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall supplement state and local laws,
ordinances, codes, or regulations. Where a provision of this Part 1 is found
to be in conflict with a provision of a state or local law, ordinance, code,
or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall prevail when legally
permissible.
§ 182-6. Work, materials and equipment to be safe.
Installations, alterations, and repairs to residential premises which are
required to correct violations of the provisions of this chapter, and
materials, assemblies, and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall
be safe to persons and property. Conformity of such work, materials,
assemblies, or equipment with applicable requirements of the State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, hereinafter referred to as
the "Uniform Code," and generally accepted standards shall satisfy this
requirement.
§ 182-7. Abbreviations and definitions.
by the New York State Civil Defense Commission or other analogous or
successor body.
A. General.
(1) Abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives used in
this Part 1 shall have the meanings stated in this section. Terms and
words not defined shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as the context may imply.
(2) Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
include the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include
the feminine and neuter genders.
(3) The word "shall" is always to be construed as mandatory.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations as used throughout this Part
1 shall have the following meanings:
Btu British thermal unit
C Centigrade
cfm Cubic feet per minute
F Fahrenheit
ft Foot or feet
gal Gallon or gallons
in Inch or inches
psf Pounds per square foot
psi Pounds per square inch
§ 182-4 AUBURN CODE § 182-7
182:328
C. Definitions. As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure used or occupied as an
adjunct of, or in conjunction with, the use or occupancy of premises, or
a building or buildings thereon, and which is located on the premises or
adjacent thereto.
ACCESSORY USE — A use or occupancy of premises in conjunction
with, or for the service of, the residential use. Such accessory use may
be located within a residential building or on the same or adjoining
premises and may include but not be limited to:
AMPACITY — Current-carrying capacity expressed in amperes.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling or mixedoccupancy
building.
APARTMENT HOTEL — A building containing primarily apartments
rented either furnished or unfurnished, with maid, telephone, desk,
linen, or other services provided to the occupants. See "hotel" and
"multiple dwelling."
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building containing primarily apartments.
See "apartment hotel" and "multiple dwelling."
APPROVED — Adjudged satisfactory by the enforcement officer
pursuant to the regulations of this Part 1, by an authority designated
by law or this Part 1 or, when used in connection with materials,
appliances, equipment, or devices, by a testing agency recognized
under the Uniform Code.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade,
which has 1/2 or more of its height, measured from floor to ceiling,
above the average finished grade.
BATHROOM — An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs,
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories,
or fixtures serving similar purposes. See "toilet room."
(1) Offices for the building management;
Public dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens, and
ballrooms;
(2)
(3) Recreation and play rooms;
Laundries for the use of occupants provided by or in connection
with the management and operation of a residential building;
(4)
Maintenance and work shops and storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies, and occupants' equipment and effects;
(5)
(6) Stores, rooms, or space for the sale or display of merchandise;
(7) Garages used for the storage of motor vehicles.
§ 182-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-7
182:329
BOARDINGHOUSE — See "lodging house."
BOATEL — See "hotel."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior
walls, or within exterior and party walls, and a roof. The term "building"
shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof" unless
otherwise indicated by the text.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade, which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from floor to
ceiling, below the average finished grade.
CENTRAL DINING ROOM — A room where meals are furnished or
served.
CENTRAL KITCHEN — A kitchen serving a central dining room.
CLUB — See "dormitory."
COMBUSTIBLE — Material or a combination of materials which will
ignite and support combustion when heated at any temperature up to
1,382° F. (750° C.) during an exposure for five minutes.
COMMUNAL DINING ROOM — A room designed and equipped for
eating purposes for occupants.
COMMUNAL KITCHEN — A kitchen available for common use of
occupants.
CONVALESCENT HOME — A facility regulated by the state and
operated for the purpose of providing therein lodging, board, and
bedside care or hygienic attention, but not including medical or nursing
care, to sick, infirm, disabled, or convalescent persons.
DORMITORY — A building containing dormitory units, lodging units, or
apartments for the use of students, employees, or guests. See "multiple
dwelling."
DORMITORY UNIT — A room designed to be used for sleeping purposes
only by four or more occupants.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing only one dwelling
unit and occupied by only one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing only two dwelling
units and occupied by only two families.
DWELLING UNIT — A complete, self-contained residential unit with
living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities within the unit, for use
by one family.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure
to the exterior, at a street, or to a yard, court, or passageway leading
to a public open area, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes, and all other elements
necessary for egress or escape.
§ 182-7 AUBURN CODE § 182-7
182:330
FALLOUT SHELTER — A building, structure, or other real property, or
an area or portion thereof, constructed, altered, or improved to afford
protection against radioactive fallout.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit
occupied by one or more persons.
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING — Time in hours, or parts thereof, that
a material, construction, or assembly will withstand fire exposure, as
determined in a fire test made in conformity with generally accepted
standards, or as determined by extension or interpretation of
information derived therefrom.
FLAME-RESISTANT MATERIAL — Material which is flame resistant by
nature or has been made flame resistant in conformity with generally
accepted standards.
FLAME SPREAD RATING — The measurement of flame spread on
the surface of materials or their assemblies, as determined by tests
conducted in conformity with a generally accepted standard.
FRATERNITY HOUSE — See "dormitory."
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule,
guide, or procedure in the field of construction, or related thereto,
recognized and accepted as authoritative under the Uniform Code,
listed and published as of January 1, 1984.
GRADE —
GROUND COVER —
HABITABLE SPACE — Space used for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be habitable space. See
"nonhabitable space," "public space," and "exit."
HOTEL — A building containing primarily hotel units for the purpose
of furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for transient occupancy
and with management maintaining a register and providing daily
FINISHED — The natural surface of the ground or the surface of
the ground after completion of any change in contour.
(1)
AVERAGE FINISHED — The average elevation of the finished
grade adjoining a building wall. Where two or more building walls
are involved, the average shall be computed on the following basis:
multiply the length of each building wall by the average elevation
along the respective wall and add the products obtained to form
a total; divide this total by the sum of the lengths of the building
walls.
(2)
VEGETATIVE — Lawn, turf, or vegetative growth other than weeds,
thistles, allergenics, drug derivatives, or similar plants.
(1)
MECHANICAL — Crushed stone or other mechanically applied
materials which stabilize ground surface.
(2)
§ 182-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-7
182:331
housekeeping and other incidental services, including desk, telephone,
or bellboy services. See "apartment hotel" and "multiple dwelling."
HOTEL UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping purposes, with or without
sanitary facilities.
INFESTATION — The presence, within a building or structure, or on
premises, of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests.
INTERIOR FINISH — Material applied directly to walls or ceilings
for acoustical correction, surface insulation, decorative treatment, or
similar purposes, including but not limited to veneer, wainscoting, and
paneling. Surface finishes of wallpaper or other materials not more
than 1/28 inch thick having no greater fire hazard than wallpaper shall
not be deemed to be interior finish.
INTERIOR TRIM — Material generally not exceeding 12 inches in width
around openings or on the wall or ceiling, including casings, stools,
aprons, baseboards, chair rails, picture molds, cornice moldings, and
moldings applied for decoration.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed for operation by any power
other than muscular power, including trailers, lacking a current license
plate and which has been abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled (in
whole or in part) and/or is in a rusted or wrecked condition or which is
not in condition for legal use upon the highways.[Added 1-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, designed
and equipped for the purpose of cooking and preparation of food. See
"central kitchen" and "communal kitchen."
KITCHENETTE — Space less than 60 square feet in floor area designed
and equipped for the purpose of cooking and preparation of food.
LODGING HOUSE — A building containing primarily lodging units,
with or without meals provided as a condition of occupancy. See
"multiple dwelling."
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single unit,
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping purposes, with
or without sanitary facilities, and having no cooking facilities. See
"dwelling unit."
MIGRANT — A seasonal laborer who moves from area to area for work
purposes in agriculture, horticulture, or food processing.
MIGRANT HOUSING PREMISES — Property used, or intended to be
used, as residential accommodations and related facilities for migrants.
MIXED-OCCUPANCY BUILDING — A building occupied in part for
residential use and in part for some other nonaccessory use. See
"multiple dwelling."
§ 182-7 AUBURN CODE § 182-7
182:332
MOBILE HOUSING PREMISES — Property, including improvements
and facilities, designed to accommodate mobile homes and recreational
vehicles, including such units located thereon.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Auburn in the County of Cayuga and
State of New York.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Material or a combination of materials which
will not ignite and support combustion when heated at any temperature
up to 1,382° F. (750° C.) during an exposure for five minutes.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used for and including, but not
limited to, kitchenettes; pantries; bath, toilet, laundry, rest, dressing,
locker, storage, utility, heater, and boiler rooms; and other spaces for
service and maintenance of the building or structure. See "habitable
space," "public space," and "exit."
NURSING HOME — A facility regulated by the state, providing therein
nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled, or convalescent persons,
in addition to lodging and board.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, or in possession, or in control
of premises, or using premises.
OLD-AGE HOME — A facility regulated by the state and operated for
the purpose of providing therein care to adult persons who, though not
requiring medical or nursing care, are in such condition by reason of
age as to require, in addition to lodging and board, personal services to
assure their safety and comfort.
OWNER — The person exercising dominion or control over, or vested
with title in, premises; a proprietor (legal owner, joint owner, part
owner, record owner, equitable owner, reputed owner, or their
successors in interest); or the respective agent of any of them.
Any of the following:
A building designed or occupied for residential purposes by
more than two families;
(a)
A series of attached, detached, or semidetached buildings
which are provided as a group collectively with essential
services and utilities and which are located on a lot, plot, or
parcel or land under common ownership; or
(b)
(c) The residential part of a mixed-occupancy building.
(1)
Regardless of the foregoing, any residential building, other than a
one- or two-family dwelling on a single zoning lot, shall be deemed
to be a multiple dwelling.
(2)
§ 182-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-7
182:333
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, drainage system,
vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices, and appurtenances within property lines.
POTABLE WATER — Water approved for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a building for public use, such as
lobbies; lounges; reception, ball, meeting, lecture, and recreation
rooms; banquet and dining rooms, including appurtenant kitchens; and
swimming pools.
PROPERTY — Land, including buildings, structures, facilities, and
improvements, used or intended to be used as residential
accommodations or facilities.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Property used or intended to be used for
dwelling or related purposes.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "lodging house."
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and which may include industrial wastes and
liquids containing chemicals.
SHOWER ROOM — See "bathroom."
SORORITY HOUSE — See "dormitory."
STATE UNIFORM FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CODE — The
rules and regulations relating to building construction as promulgated
by the State Fire Prevention and Building Code Council and which
collectively are known as the "New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code," as last amended, and hereinafter referred to as the
"Uniform Code."
STORY — The portion of a building which is between one floor level and
the next higher floor level or the roof. If a mezzanine floor area exceeds
1/3 of the floor immediately below, it shall be deemed to be a story. A
basement shall be deemed to be a story when its ceiling is six or more
feet above the average finished grade. A cellar shall not be deemed to
be a story. An attic shall not be deemed to be a story, if unfinished and
not used for human occupancy.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction
framed of component structural parts for occupancy or use, including
buildings.
TOILET ROOM — An enclosed space containing one or more water
closets which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals, and
other plumbing fixtures. See "bathroom."
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code promulgated by the State Fire Prevention and Building
Code Council pursuant to § 371 of Article 18 of the Executive Law, as
last amended.
§ 182-7 AUBURN CODE § 182-7
182:334
VENTILATION — The supply to and removal of air from a space by
natural or mechanical means:
NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks, with or without wind-driven
devices.
(1)
(2) MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
§ 182-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-7
182:335

ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 182-8. General requirements.
Buildings used or occupied for residential use, as defined and classified
in this Part 1, shall conform to the use, occupancy, size, light, ventilation,
vertical travel, exit and egress requirements, to provide for a safe and
healthful environment.
§ 182-9. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings, for the purpose of this Part 1, shall be classified in respect to their
uses or occupancies as follows:
§ 182-10. Maximum occupancy.
A. One- and two-family dwellings.
B. Multiple dwellings. Apartment houses, apartment hotels, hotels,
motels, boatels, lodging houses, rooming houses, boardinghouses,
clubs, dormitories, and fraternity and sorority houses.
C. Mixed-occupancy buildings.
(1) Residential and accessory use parts shall be classified as multiple
dwellings.
(2) Nonresidential parts shall be classified in accordance with their
occupancy and use under the Uniform Code. Components of such
parts, including but not limited to structural elements, mechanical
and electrical service equipment, and fire-protection equipment,
shall be subject to applicable provisions of this Part 1 and generally
accepted standards of engineering and fire-protection practice, so
as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residential
occupants of the building.
D. Accessory structures.
A. In dwelling units the maximum number of occupants of each such
respective unit shall be limited to a number determined on the basis of
the floor area of each habitable room, other than kitchens, as follows:
(1) One occupant per habitable room having a floor area of at least 80
but less than 120 square feet;
(2) Two occupants per habitable room having a floor area of at least
120 but less than 180 square feet; and
(3) Three occupants per habitable room having a floor area of 180 or
more square feet.
§ 182-8 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-10
182:337
§ 182-11. Use restrictions.
§ 182-12. Habitable space.
B. In hotel units and lodging units the maximum number of occupants
shall be limited to the number determined on the same basis as for
dwelling units.
C. In dormitory units the maximum number of occupants shall be limited
to a number determined by dividing the floor area of the unit by 50
square feet. In no case shall the floor area of a dormitory unit be less
than 200 square feet.
D. The maximum number of occupants permitted in hotel units, lodging
units, or dormitory units shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
such unit.
E. Communal dining rooms and central dining rooms shall contain at least
15 square feet of floor area per occupant. The maximum number of
occupants permitted at any particular time shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each such unit.
F. Communal dining space in communal kitchens shall be exclusive of
clear working space, at least four feet in front of kitchen equipment,
and comply with the requirements for communal dining rooms.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen or
nonhabitable space. Public space shall be permitted to be used for
temporary shelter.
B. It shall be prohibited to prepare meals in hotel units, lodging units, and
dormitory units which have no kitchens or kitchenettes.
C. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
D. It shall be prohibited, in dwelling units, hotel units, lodging units, and
dormitory units, to conduct a home occupation as set forth in
Subsection D(1) or (2), as follows:
(1) When the utilized floor area is more than 25% of the total floor area
of the unit, and in no event more than 500 square feet of floor area.
(2) When the home occupation produces offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat,
humidity, glare or other objectionable effects.
E. It shall be prohibited to occupy or use for residential purposes the
residential part of a mixed-occupancy building, if the nonresidential
part of such building is classified for use as a high-hazard occupancy or
if the nonresidential use is obnoxious or offensive to residential
occupancy or use.
F. Dwelling units shall be separate from each other.
§ 182-10 AUBURN CODE § 182-12
182:338
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches, measured from floor to ceiling. In habitable space with a
sloping ceiling, the required minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches shall be provided in at least 50% of the floor area, and
the area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
included in computing required floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area, with a minimum
horizontal dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area, with a minimum horizontal dimension of seven feet.
(4) Alcoves, except cooking spaces or foyers, to be deemed part of a
habitable room shall conform to the following:
(a) An alcove less than 60 square feet in area shall be deemed part
of the habitable room which it abuts, provided the dividing
partition between the alcove and the room has an opening of at
least 80% of the wall area of such partition, measured on the
alcove side, which wall area may not be less than 40 square
feet, and the depth of such alcove does not exceed half its
width.
(b) The floor area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of
the habitable room, for the purpose of complying with the light
and ventilation requirements of Subsection C of this section.
(c) An alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than
80 square feet, shall be deemed part of the habitable room
which it abuts, provided it meets the requirements of
Subsection A(4)(a) and is separately lighted and ventilated, as
required for habitable space in Subsection C of this section.
B. Location in respect to grade level. Habitable space located partially
below grade shall conform to the definition of a basement, with the floor
level of such space not more than four feet below the average finished
grade.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Habitable space shall have natural light provided by means of one
or more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or
any combination thereof, that face directly on open space. The
amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted through
clear glass equal in area to not less than 10% of the floor area of the
habitable space. In computing the amount of light transmitted, only
§ 182-12 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-12
182:339
window or panel areas six inches or more above the adjoining
finished grade shall be included in such calculation.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with electric light appropriate
for the intended use.
(3) Habitable space shall have natural ventilation provided by means of
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face directly on open space, or through openable parts of skylights.
Such openable parts shall have a total clear ventilation area equal
to not less than 5% of the floor area of the habitable space. In
computing the total clear ventilation area, only openable parts of
windows or other openings six inches or more above the adjoining
finished grade shall be included in such calculation.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation
in addition to natural ventilation, but not in substitution thereof,
except kitchens may be provided with natural ventilation,
conforming with Subsection C(3) of this section, or with mechanical
ventilation exhausting not less than 150 cfm.
D. Open space.
(1) Open space shall be of sufficient area to permit required natural
light and ventilation for habitable space.
(2) Windows, panels, and openings required to provide natural light or
ventilation shall face directly on open space conforming to the
following:
(a) Where such open space is bounded on two sides by walls, with
two open ends, and the vertical dimension of the lower wall is
30 feet or less, the horizontal dimension between walls shall be
at least eight feet. For each foot that the vertical dimension of
the lower wall exceeds 30 feet, the horizontal dimension
between walls, above the thirty-foot level, shall be increased by
at least three inches. Vertical dimension shall be measured
from the floor level of the story containing required windows,
panels, or openings to the top of the lower wall. Horizontal
dimension shall be measured, at the same floor level, from the
wall containing such windows, panels, or openings to the
facing wall.
(b) Where such open space is bounded on three sides by walls, in
addition to the requirements of Subsection D(2)(a), the
horizontal dimension from the open end of the open space to
the wall opposite the open end shall not exceed four times the
horizontal dimension between the facing walls.
(c) Where such open space is bounded on four sides by walls, in
addition to the requirements of Subsection D(2)(a), the
horizontal dimension between any two facing walls shall not
§ 182-12 AUBURN CODE § 182-12
182:340
§ 182-13. Public space.
§ 182-14. Nonhabitable space.
exceed two times the horizontal dimension between the other
two facing walls.
E. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from each other.
Sleeping rooms shall not be used as the only means of access to
other sleeping rooms or habitable spaces.
(2) Hotel units, lodging units, and dormitory units shall be designed to
provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
(3) Communal kitchens and communal dining rooms shall be
accessible only from a common hall or passageway.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches, measured from floor to ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public lobbies and lounges shall be provided with electric light
conforming to the requirements of Subsection E of § 182-17.
(2) Public reception, ball, meeting, lecture, and recreation rooms, and
similar public spaces, shall be provided with electric light
appropriate for the intended use.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or with
mechanical ventilation conforming to the requirements of Table
II.41
A. Height. In multiple dwellings, nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces
and attics, shall have a minimum height of seven feet, measured from
floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to
provide privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used as a passageway to a
hall, or other spaces, or to the exterior.
(3) A toilet room or bathroom in a dwelling unit shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through another sleeping
room.
41.Editor's Note: See § 182-39G(4).
§ 182-12 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-14
182:341
(4) Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, lodging units, or
dormitory units, unless located within such respective units, or
directly connected thereto, shall be provided on the same story
with such units and be accessible only from a common hall or
passageway.
(5) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be separate
for each sex where there are five or more employees, shall be
readily accessible to such employees, and shall not open directly
into any public kitchen or other public space used for the cooking
or preparation of food.
(6) The entrance to every toilet room with facilities to serve more than
one person at a time, and opening into a public space or
passageway, shall be provided with a vestibule or fixed partition to
screen the interior from view. The door of every such toilet room
with multiple facilities shall have an effective self-closing device.
Doors of toilet rooms with facilities to serve one person at a time
shall be provided with an interior door lock.
(7) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
(8) In multiple dwelling, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms, and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six
inches or more above floors, except at doors. Walls shall be
constructed or covered with moisture-resistant material.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with
electric light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit
the maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the
space and the appliances, equipment, and fixtures.
(2) In one- and two-family dwellings, kitchenettes, bathrooms, and
toilet rooms shall be provided with ventilation in accordance with
either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation by openings which comply with the
requirements of Subsection C(3) of § 182-12, except that
minimum openings shall be three square feet for kitchenettes
and 1 1/2 square feet for bathrooms and toilet rooms; or
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 150 cfm for
kitchenettes and not less than 25 cfm for bathrooms and toilet
rooms.
(3) In multiple dwellings, kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms
shall be provided with ventilation in accordance with either of the
following:
§ 182-14 AUBURN CODE § 182-14
182:342
§ 182-15. Elevators and escalators.
Elevators and escalators shall be maintained in good and safe operating
condition and adequately lighted at all times.
§ 182-16. Railings and parapet walls.
(a) Natural ventilation by openings which comply with the
requirements of Subsection C(3) of § 182-12, except that
minimum openings shall be three square feet for kitchenettes
and bathrooms and toilet rooms designed for private use, and
one square foot per water closet or urinal, or three square feet,
whichever is greater, for bathrooms and toilet rooms designed
for public use; or
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 150 cfm for
kitchenettes, 25 cfm for bathrooms and toilet rooms designed
for private use, and 40 cfm per water closet or urinal for
bathrooms and toilet rooms designed for public use.
(4) Stairs shall be provided with electric light to allow safe ascent and
descent.
(5) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and similar nonhabitable spaces
shall be provided with electric light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(6) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat-producing
equipment, incinerator, or air-conditioning equipment shall be
ventilated directly to the outer air.
(7) Shower rooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and laundry rooms
shall be provided with either natural ventilation, conforming to the
requirements for habitable space, or with mechanical ventilation
conforming to the requirements of Table II.42
(8) Garages within or accessory to multiple dwellings shall be provided
with electric light appropriate for the intended use of such spaces.
(9) Garage areas above grade, in excess of 1,000 square feet, and all
garage areas below grade shall be provided with mechanical
ventilation, in conformity with Table II.
A. Railings or parapet walls shall be provided at open sides of balconies,
mezzanines, porches, accessible roofs, exit passageways, areaways,
motor vehicle parking decks and ramps, and around floor openings.
B. Railings or parapet walls shall be at least three feet six inches in height
and designed to resist a lateral load, at the top, of at least 50 pounds
42.Editor's Note: See § 182-39G(4).
§ 182-14 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-16
182:343
§ 182-17. Exits.
per linear foot. Fixed openings in railings or parapet walls shall not
exceed six inches in one dimension.
C. Wheel bumper blocks shall be provided at the perimeter and around
floor openings of open motor vehicle parking decks and ramps. Wheel
bumper blocks shall be continuous, at least eight inches in height,
fastened to the floor, and designed to resist a minimum linear load of
300 pounds per foot.
A. General.
(1) Safe, continuous, and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of a building or structure to the exterior, at a street, or to a
yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area.
(2) Exits shall be arranged, constructed, proportioned, and maintained
so that occupants may escape safely from the building or structure
in case of emergency. Width of exits shall conform to generally
accepted standards.
(3) Exits from dwelling units, hotel units, lodging units, and dormitory
units shall not lead through other such units or through toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
(4) Nothing shall be placed, accumulated, or stored on residential
premises which obstructs egress from stairways, passageways,
doors, windows, fire escapes, or other means of exit.
(5) In multiple dwellings, exits, including vestibules, stairways,
passageways, corridors and hallways, but excluding fire escapes,
shall be lighted with natural or electric light at all times, so as to
afford safe passage.
(6) Stairways shall have handrails on at least one side.
(7) Fire escapes shall be maintained free of encumbrances.
(8) Vending machines and other equipment or materials shall not be
located in lobbies, corridors, or passageways if it constitutes a fire
hazard or interferes with the exit facilities.
B. One- and two-family dwellings.
(1) A fixed stairway shall be provided between stories and between the
first story and a basement or cellar.
(2) In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to the primary exit,
there shall be provided an emergency exit from each story. Such
emergency exit may be similar to the primary exit, or a fire escape,
or an opening, such as a window or door, having at least four
square feet of openable area with a minimum dimension of 18
§ 182-16 AUBURN CODE § 182-17
182:344
inches, and with the bottom of the opening not more than three feet
six inches above the floor. All new construction or renovation shall
comply with the Uniform Code.
(3) In two-family dwellings more than three stories in height, exits
shall comply with any of the following:
(a) One interior stairway enclosed in construction having at least a
three-fourths-hour fire-resistance rating with openings in such
enclosure protected by self-closing doors;
(b) Two interior stairways with all doors opening upon such
stairways equipped with a self-closing device;
(c) One interior stairway with all doors opening upon such
stairway equipped with a self-closing device, and one exterior
stairway or fire escape providing exit from each dwelling unit
on any story; or
(d) One interior stairway equipped with an automatic sprinkler
system, with all doors opening upon such stairway equipped
with a self-closing device.
C. Multiple dwellings.
(1) In multiple dwellings two stories or less in height, in addition to the
primary exit from each dwelling unit, hotel unit, lodging unit, or
dormitory unit, there shall be provided an emergency exit from
each such unit conforming to the requirements of Subsection B(2)
of this section.
(2) In multiple dwellings three stories or more in height, there shall be
provided from each story at least two exits accessible to each
dwelling unit, hotel unit, lodging unit, or dormitory unit. The
primary exit shall be an interior public hail, stairway, lobby,
vestibule, or any combination thereof. The secondary exit shall be
another interior public hall, stairway, lobby, or vestibule, or any
combination thereof, or a fire escape. Where the secondary exit is
through the same public hall which provides access to the primary
exit, the primary exit shall be separated from such public hall by
construction having a fire-resistance rating of at least 3/4 hour.
(3) Public halls, stairways, lobbies, and vestibules serving as exits shall
be enclosed with construction having a fire-resistance rating of at
least 3/4 hour. Wood wainscoting in exits is prohibited. Combustible
interior trim in exits is permitted only in buildings three stories or
less in height. Openings, other than doors, in interior walls or
partitions of exits shall be sealed so as to maintain the required
fire-resistance rating of the wall or partition.
(4) Doors from dwelling units, hotel units, lodging units, or dormitory
units opening upon a public hall and doors in stairway enclosures
§ 182-17 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-17
182:345
shall be self-closing. Doors from units opening upon public halls
and doors in stairway enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating
of at least 3/4 hour.
(5) Basement and cellar stairways shall be separated from stairways
leading to or from upper stories, at the grade level story, by
construction having a fire-resistance rating of at least 3/4 hour,
with doors that are self-closing and have a fire-resistance rating of
at least 3/4 hour.
D. Height. In multiple dwellings, passageways, corridors, hallways, and
vestibules shall have a minimum height of seven feet six inches,
measured from floor to ceiling. In stairways, headroom over landing
floors and tread nosings shall have a minimum height of seven feet.
E. Light and ventilation.
(1) In multiple dwellings, exits, including vestibules, stairways,
passageways, corridors, and hallways, but excluding fire escapes,
shall be lighted with natural or electric light at all times, so as to
afford safe passage. Electric light shall conform to the following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting: not less than 1/4 watt per square foot of
floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp or lamps
with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(c) Fluorescent lighting: not less than 1/10 watt per square foot of
floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp or lamps
of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(2) In multiple dwellings, stairways, passageways, corridors, and
hallways shall be provided with ventilation in accordance with
either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation obtained by means of openings to the outer
air, or by means of ducts connected to wind- or gravityoperated
ventilators; or
(b) Mechanical ventilation conforming to the requirements of
Table II.43
F. Stairways.
43.Editor's Note: See § 182-39G(4).
§ 182-17 AUBURN CODE § 182-17
182:346
§ 182-18. Exterior lighting.
(1) Stairway treads, risers, and landings shall be arranged,
constructed, proportioned, and maintained to provide safe ascent
and descent.
(2) Guardrails or balustrades, at least 33 inches in height above
nosings and 36 inches in height above landings, shall be provided
at open portions of stairways.
(3) Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of stairways.
(4) Where stairways provide access to roofs by means of scuttles or
bulkhead doors, such scuttles or doors shall be readily openable
from the interior without the use of tools or keys.
G. Fire escapes.
(1) Fire escapes which serve as a secondary means of egress shall be
of material having the properties of ferrous metal, other than cast
iron, and conform to generally accepted standards. Fire escapes
shall be maintained free of encumbrances.
(2) Access to fire escapes shall be through openable, unobstructed
doors, or windows conforming to the requirements of windows for
emergency exit in Subsection B(2) of this section.
(3) In buildings more than three stories in height, fire escapes shall
continue to the roof, except when the slope of the roof exceeds 15°.
(4) The lowest balcony shall be provided with a drop ladder or
counterbalanced stair, if it is more than five feet above the ground.
A. Exterior artificial lighting shall be maintained in operating condition.
B. Multiple-dwelling premises.
(1) Exterior artificial lighting shall be provided at night to illuminate
facilities used by pedestrians, including walks, driveways, parking
spaces, and entranceways to buildings.
(2) Exterior artificial lighting shall be of an approved type as to
location and safety of installation.
(3) Exterior artificial lighting at or near front entranceways shall
consist of at least one fixture with a lamp or lamps having a
cumulative wattage of at least 50 watts for a building with a
frontage up to 25 feet. Where the frontage is in excess of 25 feet, at
least two fixtures with lamps having a cumulative wattage of at
least 100 watts shall be provided.
§ 182-17 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-18
182:347

ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 182-19. General requirements.
§ 182-20. Exterior protection.
§ 182-21. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and structures shall be structurally sound. Structural
elements which conform to loading criteria specified in the Uniform
Code and stress limitations specified in generally accepted standards
shall be deemed structurally sound.
B. Buildings and structures shall be maintained weather-resistant and in
good condition.
A. Exterior walls, including foundations, shall be maintained so that
ground and surface water does not penetrate into basements and
cellars.
B. Exterior doors, windows, skylights, and similar openings shall be
maintained weathertight.
C. Exterior stairs, porches, entrance platforms, fire escapes, and the
railings thereon shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition.
D. Roofs shall be maintained in a watertight condition.
E. Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Surfaces not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective
coating of paint or other suitable preservative. The surface and exterior
of the building shall be maintained to prevent excessive peeling and
flaking of paint, the rotting of wood or other deleterious conditions. The
overall surface shall at all times present a neat appearance free from
excessive peeling and uniformly painted or treated in a good
workmanlike manner so as not to detract from other buildings in the
neighborhood.
A. Structural members shall be protected and maintained to resist and
prevent deterioration.
B. Unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs, and crawl spaces shall be
ventilated to minimize deterioration.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained safe, sound, and smoketight.
D. Ceilings, walls, floors, and stairways shall be maintained in a safe and
sound condition.
E. Toilet room, bathroom, and laundry room floors shall be maintained in a
watertight condition. Kitchen floors must be covered with a hard,
nonporous material, free of holes, tears, cracks or other openings, and
§ 182-19 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-21
182:349
shall be watertight, suitable for mopping and scrubbing; provided,
however, that suitable kitchen carpeting may be used if it is of a
material which will not absorb moisture or food particles.
§ 182-21 AUBURN CODE § 182-21
182:350
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety Requirements
§ 182-22. General requirements.
Buildings and structures shall be constructed and maintained to prevent
and avoid fire hazards and in a manner conducive to firesafety.
§ 182-23. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
§ 182-24. Prevention of exterior fire spread.
Distance separations between buildings, between buildings and structures,
and between buildings, structures, and property lines shall conform to
requirements of law or regulation of any governmental body having
jurisdiction.
§ 182-25. Prevention of interior fire spread.
A. No highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils,
and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as wastepaper, boxes,
and rags, shall be accumulated or stored on residential premises,
except in spaces in conformance with Subsection C of § 182-25.
B. Nothing shall be placed, accumulated, or stored on residential premises
which obstructs egress from stairways, passageways, doors, windows,
fire escapes, or other means of exit or interferes with the use of firefighting
equipment or performance by fire-fighting personnel.
A. Floors, wails, ceilings, soffits, and other components required to
provide a fire-resistive enclosure or separation, and construction
required to protect structural members, shall be maintained so that the
respective fire-resistance rating of the enclosure, separation, or
construction is preserved.
B. In buildings of mixed-occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by fire separations having a fireresistance
rating of at least one hour.
C. In multiple dwellings, spaces used as carpenter, repair, or paint shops,
and spaces where flammable or combustible materials are stored, shall
be enclosed by construction having a fire-resistance rating of a least
one hour.
D. In multiple dwellings, central kitchens shall be separated from central
dining rooms by construction having a fire-resistance rating of at least
one hour.
E. Self-closing devices of exit doors shall be maintained in good operating
condition. Only approved-type magnetic hold-open devices connected
to fire-protection systems may be used to hold open exit doors, except
§ 182-22 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-25
182:351
§ 182-26. Fireplaces.
§ 182-27. Fire-protection equipment; house numbering.
that no devices or objects may be used to hold open exit doors in
stairway enclosures at floor landings.
F. Vending machines and other equipment or materials shall not be
located in lobbies, corridors, or passageways if it constitutes a fire
hazard or interferes with the exit facilities.
G. A garage within, or attached to, a building containing a residential
occupancy shall be separated from the residential portion of the
building by construction capable of preventing the passage of fumes
and vapors and having a fire-resistance rating as follows: for one- and
two-family dwellings, at least 1/2 hour; for multiple dwellings, at least
one hour.
H. Interior finish in enclosed exits shall have a flame spread rating of not
more than 75.
I. Draperies and decorative materials located in enclosed exits or public
spaces shall be noncombustible or flame-resistant.
A. Fireplaces, and other construction and devices intended for use similar
to a fireplace, shall be stable and structurally safe and connected to
approved chimneys.
B. Fireplaces and similar construction and devices shall be installed and
maintained so that when in use adjacent combustible materials or
construction will not be heated to a temperature exceeding 175° F. nor
ignited by sparks or embers from the fire.
A. Fire-protection equipment shall be provided in readily accessible
locations, and clearly visible, as follows:
(1) In boiler or furnace rooms having fuel-burning equipment with a
capacity of up to 1,000,000 Btu per hour of individual or combined
rating, at least one approved multipurpose dry-chemical-type
portable fire extinguisher; in boiler or furnace rooms with fuelburning
equipment having a capacity in excess of 1,000,000 Btu
per hour, at least two such portable fire extinguishers.
(2) In dormitory units, one approved Class A type portable fire
extinguisher for each multiple of 1,250 square feet of floor area, or
fraction thereof, in excess of 1,250 square feet of floor area.
(3) In central kitchens, one approved multipurpose dry-chemical-type
portable fire extinguisher for each multiple of 1,000 square feet of
floor area, or fraction thereof.
§ 182-25 AUBURN CODE § 182-27
182:352
(4) In public spaces, one approved Class A type portable fire
extinguisher for each multiple of 2,500 square feet of floor area, or
fraction thereof, in excess of 2,500 square feet of floor area.
(5) In garages serving multiple dwellings, one approved multipurpose
dry-chemical-type portable fire extinguisher for each multiple of
2,500 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
B. Where an approved automatic fire extinguishing system is provided,
portable fire extinguishers are not required.
C. Smoke and fire detectors.
(1) Approved smoke and fire detectors shall be installed and
maintained in all public hallways, storage rooms, boiler or furnace
rooms, basements and all other areas intended for common use by
the residents of all multiple-residence buildings.
(2) Sufficient detectors shall be provided and located in order to give
adequate audible warning to all occupants.
D. House numbering. On all houses, buildings and/or properties located
within the City of Auburn there shall be prominently displayed, on each
building which is readily visible from the street, the street number of
said property to assure ready identification thereof for the benefit of all
emergency services in the community. The numbers shall be a minimum
of three inches in size, shall be individual numbers posted on the
building, and should be of a color contrasting to that of the home or
property. [Added 3-4-1993 by Ord. No. 9-1993]
§ 182-27 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-27
182:353

ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 182-28. General requirements.
§ 182-29. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, and fire-protection equipment, elevators,
dumbwaiters, escalators, and other mechanical additions, installations,
or systems for the use of buildings and structures shall be installed,
located, and maintained so that such equipment and systems will
operate satisfactorily and not be a danger to safety, health, or welfare.
B. X-ray equipment used for medical, dental, or other professional
purposes, and shielding of the space where such equipment is used,
shall be approved by the health authority having jurisdiction as
conforming to the standards established by such authority.
A. General. Plumbing systems shall be maintained in good, safe, sanitary,
and serviceable condition.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times. The domestic water supply system of the building shall be
connected to such approved source, shall not be subject to
contamination, and shall not be connected to unsafe water
supplies.
(2) The source of water supply for a one- or two-family dwelling shall
be a public water supply system, when such system is within 100
feet of the premises on which the building is located, measured
along a street, alley, or right-of-way, and a connection may lawfully
be made thereto.
(3) The source of water supply for a multiple dwelling shall be a public
water supply system, when such system is within 500 feet of the
premises on which the building is located, measured along a street,
alley, or right-of-way, and a connection may lawfully be made
thereto.
(4) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained to provide
at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices, and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable them to function satisfactorily.
(5) Hot water shall be supplied in sufficient quantity at all times
commensurate with the number of occupants and the normal
usage. Water heaters or central water-heating equipment shall be
maintained in operating condition.
§ 182-28 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-29
182:355
(6) Hot-water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
designed to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
(7) Mechanical fittings shall be required for all CPVC water line
installations. [Added 4-14-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
C. Sewage and stormwater drainage systems shall be maintained so as to
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(1) Sewage drainage.
(a) Plumbing fixtures shall drain to a sewage system connected to
a public sewer or approved system of sewage disposal.
(b) The means of sewage disposal shall be a public sanitary sewer
when it is available, and connection to such sewer shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 242,
Sanitary Sewers, of the City of Auburn Municipal Code.
(c) No sewage from a plumbing system shall be discharged into
the waters of the State of New York (as defined in state law)
unless specifically approved by the authority having
jurisdiction, under and in accordance with state law.
(d) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that
the pipes may be readily cleaned.
(e) Four banded extra-heavy couplings shall be required for all nohub
cast-iron pipe and fittings used above ground and for
sewer laterals. [Added 4-14-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
(2) Storm drainage.
(a) An approved system of stormwater disposal shall be provided
for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and paved areas,
yards and courts and other open areas on the premises.
(b) The means for stormwater disposal shall be in accordance with
all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(c) No stormwater shall be drained into sewers intended for
sewage only or be discharged onto public sidewalks or streets.
(3) Plumbing facilities.
(a) Buildings and structures shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and
to furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and hot
and cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub, and shower
required therein.
§ 182-29 AUBURN CODE § 182-29
182:356
(b) In one- and two-family dwellings, not wholly owner-occupied,
and in all multiple dwellings hot water shall be furnished
within a temperature range of 110° F. to 120° F.
(c) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least one kitchen sink, one water
closet, one bathtub or shower, and one lavatory. With every
water closet there shall be a lavatory within the same room.
(d) In multiple dwellings, each communal kitchen shall contain at
least one kitchen sink, as provided in Table I.44
(e) In multiple dwellings, where hotel units or lodging units are
not provided with sanitary facilities therein, for each multiple
of six male or six female occupants to be accommodated, or
fractions thereof, there shall be provided, in separate rooms
for each sex, plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water
closet, one bathtub or shower, and one lavatory.
(f) In multiple dwellings, where sleeping accommodations are
arranged as dormitory units, for each multiple of 10 male or
eight female occupants to be accommodated, or fractions
thereof, there shall be provided, in separate rooms for each
sex, plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water closet,
one bathtub or shower, and one lavatory.
(g) Urinals may be substituted in a men's toilet room for not more
than 1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(h) Privies are prohibited on residential premises.
D. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent material,
and free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be spaced to be readily accessible for their
intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted, and ventilated.
E. Swimming pools.
(1) Swimming pools shall be designed and maintained in accordance
with generally accepted standards.
(2) Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing, and auxiliary equipment shall be adequate to
maintain the sanitary quality of water during each period the pool
44.Editor's Note: See § 182-37C.
§ 182-29 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-29
182:357
§ 182-30. Fuel gas.
is in use. Equipment containing gases or disinfectants capable of
giving off irritating, toxic, or flammable fumes shall be located in
ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be designed and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand, or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
(5) An approved enclosure, at least four feet in height, shall be
provided around outdoor swimming pools so that such pools are
inaccessible to small children. The enclosure may surround either
the pool area or the property.
F. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be maintained watertight, verminproof,
rodentproof and resistant to corrosion.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be maintained in
proper working condition.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be maintained to furnish water in
sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be maintained gastight, safe, and
operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of gas-burning equipment
and appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) In one- and two-family dwellings, gas piping systems shall have at
least one accessible valve for shutting off all gas supply, except that
systems supplied with gas at pressures exceeding one psi gage
shall have at least two accessible valves for shutting off all gas
supply. Where two valves are required, one valve shall be located
outside at a safe distance from the building and shall be suitably
protected against unauthorized use, and the other shall be located
ahead of the meter and as close as practicable to the point of
service entrance.
§ 182-29 AUBURN CODE § 182-30
182:358
§ 182-31. Fuel oil.
(2) In multiple dwellings, gas piping systems supplied from utility
mains shall have at least two accessible valves for shutting off all
gas supply. One valve shall be located outside and at a safe distance
from the building and shall be suitably protected against
unauthorized use, and the other shall be located ahead of the meter
and as close as practicable to the point of service entrance.
(3) An easily accessible shutoff valve, or cock, shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to, and ahead of, every gas appliance or
outlet for a gas connection.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains.
(1) Gas meters shall be located in spaces that are dry, ventilated, and
accessible. Gas meters shall be located near the point of entry of
the gas service and remote from open flame, heat-producing
equipment, or other heat sources.
(2) Gas services, gas meters, and gas pressure regulators shall be
located so that they are protected from damage and tampering by
unauthorized personnel.
D. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one psi gage shall be provided with a device to reduce such
pressure to not more than 1/2 psi gage prior to entering the meter.
E. Liquefied petroleum gas containers and tanks. Liquefied petroleum gas
containers and tanks are subject to the regulations contained in Part
1163 of Chapter C of the Uniform Code, Sections 1163.3 to and
including 1163.5.
A. General. Fuel oil shall be received, stored, and conveyed by means of
fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Fuel oil storage tanks shall rest on noncombustible supports that
are maintained in a structurally sound condition.
(2) Tanks subject to traffic shall be protected against vehicle damage.
(3) Storage tanks inside buildings shall not be in a damaged or leaking
condition.
(4) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served.
C. Storage tanks inside buildings.
(1) Fuel oil storage tanks inside buildings shall be provided with liquidlevel
indicating devices of fixed vaportight construction.
§ 182-30 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-31
182:359
§ 182-32. Prohibited fuel.
Gasoline shall be prohibited as fuel for heating and cooking except for
camping and outdoor use.
§ 182-33. Heating.
(2) The maximum capacity of an individual fuel oil storage tank
unenclosed inside a building shall be 550 gallons, and such tank
shall be not less than five feet horizontally from any fuel-burning
equipment.
(3) Unenclosed fuel oil storage tanks shall not be located in garages
exceeding 1,000 square feet in area.
D. Piping.
(1) Means for shutting off fuel flow shall be accessible and maintained
in safe operating condition. Automatically operated boilers and
furnaces using fuel oil shall be provided with remote control to stop
the flow of oil during fire or other emergency. Such control shall be
located outside the boiler room, or inside the boiler room at the
entrance.
(2) Filling, emptying, and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
(3) Pipes for fuel oil entering buildings shall be protected from damage
by settlement or corrosion.
A. General. In addition to the requirements of Section 1163.8 of Chapter C
of the Uniform Code, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Except in one-family dwellings, heating equipment shall be
maintained so as to provide an indoor temperature of 68° F.,
measured at a distance of two feet and more from exterior walls,
and at a level of five feet above the floor. Residential premises
intended for occupancy between the 15th day of September and the
31st day of May of the following year shall be provided with
adequate heat to maintain the indoor temperature as set forth
above, in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet
rooms. [Amended 10-3-1991]
(2) Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall not be located in
exits.
(3) Fuel-burning water heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms,
bathrooms, or toilet rooms.
B. Air pollution. Contaminants emitted into the atmosphere from fuelburning
equipment shall not violate air pollution control regulations
§ 182-31 AUBURN CODE § 182-33
182:360
promulgated pursuant to state law nor those of any other governmental
authority having jurisdiction.
C. Warm air heating. Ducts and air-handling equipment used for heating
shall conform to the requirements of Subsections E, F and G(3) of
§ 182-39.
D. Portable heaters. Portable heaters are governed by Section 1191.3d of
Chapter C of the Uniform Code.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal or approved
appliance connector.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing or cooking
equipment is installed on, or adjacent to, combustible materials, the
adjacent combustible surface temperature shall not exceed 175° F.
G. Air supply.
(1) Fuel-burning heating equipment and the enclosure in which it is
located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by one or more openings to the exterior or by fixed
openings to interior spaces which open to the exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
(2) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue,
or gas vent. Where a gas vent is used, a permanent sign stating the
type of heating equipment which may be connected to the gas vent
shall be provided and located where the gas vent passes through
the wall or ceiling.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with devices to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
(a) When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off.
§ 182-33 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-33
182:361
§ 182-34. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(b) When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded,
the input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a
safe rate.
(c) When the water level in a steam boiler drops below a
predetermined level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
(d) When failure or interruption of pilot light or main burner of
liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel supply to
each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
(3) Fuel-burning space heaters located in bathrooms or toilet rooms
less than 100 square feet in area, or in sleeping rooms, shall be
provided with controls to cut off the fuel supply upon the failure or
interruption of the flame or ignition, or whenever a predetermined
temperature or pressure is exceeded.
J. Expansion tanks. Hot-water heating systems shall be provided with
expansion tanks or other means to allow for the expansion of water in
the system.
K. Heating of garages.
(1) Fuel-burning equipment for garages shall be located in heater
rooms, except that equipment burning gas or liquid fuel, located in
the vehicle storage space, shall be permitted in stories at or above
grade where elevated as follows:
(a) Suspended heaters shall be at least eight feet above the floor
level.
(b) Floor-mounted heaters shall be installed on a noncombustible
platform not less than 18 inches above the floor level and shall
be protected against physical damage.
(2) Garages heated by recirculated air shall be provided with a
mechanical means of air handling designed to introduce a sufficient
quantity of fresh air to prevent the accumulation of vapors or gases
near the floor. Recirculated air shall not be taken from stories
below grade level. For stories above grade level, openings for
return air shall be at least 18 inches above floors.
A. General.
(1) Chimneys, smokestacks, flues, gas vents, smoke pipes, and
connectors shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight, and
noncombustible. Supports shall be structurally safe and of
noncombustible construction.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
§ 182-33 AUBURN CODE § 182-34
182:362
§ 182-35. Incinerators.
(3) Masonry chimneys shall have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Chimneys and metal smokestacks shall have sufficient clearance
from building construction, in accordance with generally accepted
standards.
(5) No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(6) Fireplaces and fuel-burning equipment located in different
dwelling units shall not be connected to the same flue.
(7) A single-wall metal smoke pipe or connector shall not pass through
a floor, attic, inside wall, partition, or concealed space.
(8) A single-wall metal smoke pipe or connector passing through an
exterior wall or a roof shall be guarded at the point of passage by a
suitable metal collar.
(9) Incinerator flues equipped with service openings shall not be used
as flues for other fuel-burning equipment.
(10) Chimneys and flues connected to equipment burning solid or liquid
fuel shall have a suitable soot pocket and cleanout door at the base.
B. Draft. Chimneys, flues, and gas vents shall be installed and maintained
to provide sufficient draft.
C. Firesafety. Chimneys, flues, and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that the surface temperature of adjacent combustible
construction does not exceed 175° F.
D. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator, and a
chimney or flue which emits sparks, shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General.
(1) Contaminants emitted into the atmosphere from incinerators shall
not violate air pollution control regulations promulgated pursuant
to state law nor those of any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction.
(2) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(3) Flue-fed incinerators are not permitted.
(4) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
§ 182-34 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-35
182:363
§ 182-36. Electrical standards.45
(5) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack, or flue.
(6) Incinerator flues used also for dropping refuse shall be vertical and
of noncombustible construction, shall have a smooth finish on the
inside, and shall be arranged to provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Service openings shall be equipped with metal, self-closing
charging devices. An incinerator flue used also for dropping refuse
shall have charging devices constructed so that openings to the flue
are closed while the charging devices are in the open position. No
part of the charging devices shall project into a refuse chute or
incinerator flue.
(3) Durable signs, with plainly legible letters, shall be conspicuously
posted at service openings, stating: "Throwing lighted matches,
cigars or cigarettes, carpet sweepings, naphthalene, camphor balls
or flakes, floor scrapings, oil-soaked rags, paint cans, aerosol
containers, or any other flammable or highly combustible or
explosive substance into incinerator chutes is unlawful and
subjects the offender to a penalty."
C. Incinerator rooms and refuse rooms. In incinerator rooms and refuse
rooms, openings for charging refuse directly into incinerators shall be
provided with charging doors, designed to minimize the heat
transmitted to the incinerator or refuse rooms, and equipped with locks
or safety devices to prevent tampering by unauthorized persons.
A. General.
(1) The electrical system shall be properly installed, connected to an
approved source of supply, and maintained free of hazards.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment in damp or wet locations, or
exposed to explosive or flammable gases or excessive
temperatures, shall be of an approved type for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by approved, properly rated overcurrent
45.Editor's Note: See Art. V of Ch. 125 for electrical inspections.
§ 182-35 AUBURN CODE § 182-36
182:364
protection devices. Overcurrent protection devices, of ratings
higher than the ampacities of the conductors to be protected,
shall not be used, except where expressly permitted by generally
accepted standards. Where a circuit has been overfused, the
Edison-base plug fuse shall be replaced with a Type S plug fuse, of
the proper rating, with a suitable fuse adapter.
(5) Electrical service equipment and overcurrent protection devices
shall be installed in a readily accessible location, and access to
such location shall be kept unobstructed.
(6) Electrical equipment shall be grounded or otherwise protected by
insulation, isolation, or guarding.
(7) Parts of electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produce
arcs or sparks shall be enclosed, unless separated and isolated
from combustible material.
(8) Flexible cord shall not be run through holes in walls, ceilings, or
floors; or run through doorways, windows, or similar openings; or
attached to building surfaces; or concealed behind building walls,
above ceilings, or under floors or floor coverings.
B. Facilities.
(1) A dwelling unit shall be supplied with at least one fifteen-ampere
lighting branch circuit for each multiple of 400 square feet of floor
area, or fraction thereof.
(2) Hotel units, lodging units, and dormitory units shall be supplied
with at least one fifteen-ampere lighting branch circuit for each
multiple of 600 square feet of cumulative floor area, or fraction
thereof.
(3) Habitable spaces, except kitchens, shall be provided with at least
one receptacle outlet for each multiple of 20 feet, or fraction
thereof, of the total distance around the room, measured
horizontally along the wall at the floor line. An electric light outlet
and fixture may be substituted for only one receptacle outlet.
(4) Kitchens and kitchenettes shall be provided with at least two
receptacle outlets served by at least one fifteen-ampere small
appliance branch circuit. In addition, one electric light outlet and
fixture shall be provided.
(5) Bathrooms, toilet rooms, and laundry rooms shall be provided with
at least one electric light outlet and fixture and one receptacle
outlet. Furnace rooms, storage rooms, workshops, and similar
service rooms shall be provided with at least one electric light
outlet and fixture.
§ 182-36 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-36
182:365
(6) Light switches or other devices for controlling lights which
illuminate entrances shall be provided at points of entrance to
dwelling units, hotel units, lodging units, and dormitory units.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs, visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in an apartment house, or in those
portions of a multiple dwelling where exit from dwelling units,
hotel units, lodging units, or dormitory units is directly to the
outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the word
"Exit" for exit signs and the words "To Exit" with a suitable pointer
or arrow indicating the direction of exit for directional signs.
(4) Any door, passageway, stair, or other means of communication that
is not an exit, or that is not a way to an exit, but is so located as to
be mistaken for an exit shall be identified with a sign reading "Not
An Exit," or identified by a sign indicating its use or purpose, or
provided with a directional sign.
(5) Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible, and at
least six inches high with three-fourths-inch strokes.
(6) Signs shall be illuminated either externally or internally by electric
lights and be kept illuminated at all times when the building is
occupied. Such electric lights shall be supplied with current from a
separate circuit, or circuits which supply no other outlets.
D. Overhead conductors.
(1) Overhead electrical conductors, rated 600 volts or less, shall clear
on-premises areas as follows:
Location
Clearance
(feet)
Above streets, driveways, parking spaces and other
use areas where motor vehicles are permitted
18
Above areas accessible to pedestrians only 10
Above buildings and structures 8
Horizontal clearance from any window, door, porch,
balcony or other similar point of access
6
(2) Metal fences, enclosures, or railings which enclose a swimming
pool and which could become energized through accidental contact
with overhead electrical conductors shall be properly grounded.
§ 182-36 AUBURN CODE § 182-37
182:366
§ 182-37. Cooking and refrigeration.
A. General.
(1) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit approved-type
cooking and approved-type refrigeration equipment located in a
kitchen or kitchenette. If the landlord does not provide cooking or
refrigeration equipment, approved hookup fixtures shall be
provided in convenient locations.
(2) Approved-type cooking shall be of the stationary type.
(3) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be properly
connected to the electrical system.
(4) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be
connected to the gas supply system with pipe or tubing of solid
metal or approved appliance connectors.
(5) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
B. Ranges and gas refrigerators.
(1) Ranges shall be installed with clearance for ventilation.
(2) Water-cooled gas refrigerators shall be prohibited.
(3) Air-cooled gas refrigerators shall be installed and maintained so
that the burner operates properly, there is no emission of excessive
heat or odors, there is no discharge of carbon monoxide, the flue is
not internally clogged, the flue outlet is free of obstructions, and
the refrigerator is not otherwise defective.
(4) Air-cooled gas refrigerators shall be equipped with:
(a) An integral flue which is resistant to the corrosive action of flue
gases;
(b) A dust-incinerating gas burner, gas pressure regulator, gas
supply filter, and thermostat; and
(c) A device to automatically shut off the gas supply to the burner
when the pilot flame is extinguished.
C. Communal kitchens. Communal kitchens shall be provided with kitchen
equipment complying with the requirements of Table I. Clear working
space in front of such equipment shall be at least four feet.
§ 182-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-37
182:367
§ 182-38. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and
two-family dwellings.
Air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation equipment and systems shall
conform to the requirements of § 182-39, except that concealed spaces
within the structure may be used for return air, in accordance with
generally accepted standards.
§ 182-39. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in multiple
dwellings.
Table I Communal Kitchen Equipment Requirements
Equipment
Number of
Occupants
Served 12 and
Fewer 13 or More
Sink 24-inch front Additional 24-inch unit for each
multiple of six occupants, or
fraction thereof
Range 4 burners Additional 4-burner unit for
each multiple of six occupants,
or fraction thereof
Oven* 6 cubic feet Additional 6-cubic-foot unit for
each multiple of six occupants,
or fraction thereof
Refrigerator 12 cubic feet Additional 1 cubic foot per
occupant
Storage
cabinets
42 cubic feet Additional 1 1/2 cubic feet per
occupant
NOTES:
*May be separate unit or part of range unit.
A. Refrigeration.
(1) Mechanical refrigeration equipment shall be installed and
maintained so as not to be a hazard from excessive pressure or
refrigerant leakage.
(2) Refrigerating equipment shall not be located in exits, except that
self-contained refrigerating units may be permitted in lobbies,
corridors or passageways, provided that they do not obstruct or
diminish the width of exits.
B. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants shall be normally nontoxic and nonflammable.
§ 182-37 AUBURN CODE § 182-39
182:368
(2) The amount of refrigerant contained in each direct refrigerating
system shall not exceed the amount that in case of leakage may be
contained safely, in accordance with generally accepted standards,
in the space in which the equipment is located, or in the spaces in
which the refrigerant would be dissipated.
(3) Systems containing refrigerants exceeding the limit stated in
Subsection B(2) shall be of the indirect type.
(4) Refrigerating equipment shall not be located in exits, except that
self-contained refrigerating units may be permitted in lobbies,
corridors or passageways, provided that they do not obstruct or
diminish the width of exits.
C. Safety controls. Refrigerating equipment shall be provided with devices
to relieve excessive pressures safely.
D. Cooling towers. Cooling towers shall be installed and maintained so
that when in operation noise, fog, or water spray will not cause a
nuisance.
E. Mechanical ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame, or smoke through the system will be
prevented.
(2) Shafts, other than those designed for ventilating purposes,
stairways, passageways, exits, hoistways, or attics shall not be used
as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately fire
stopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(7) Ducts passing through fire walls shall be equipped with a fire
damper or shutter on each side of the fire wall. Ducts passing
through other fire separations shall be equipped with a single fire
damper or shutter.
(8) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality controlled, including an amount of exterior air equal to
not less than one air change per hour.
§ 182-39 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-39
182:369
(9) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit, or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes, or vapors, shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit or to other spaces within the building.
F. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake openings shall be installed, located, and maintained to
prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes, or foreign matter
being drawn into the system.
(2) Air exhaust openings shall be installed, located, and maintained so
that exhaust air will not constitute a hazard or nuisance.
(3) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide for air to be received from an
uncontaminated source.
(4) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
G. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors, or odors
accumulate and may become a hazard or nuisance shall be
provided with mechanical ventilation to remove such excess.
(2) Cooking equipment in central kitchens shall be provided with
mechanical exhaust systems which are not connected with any
other exhaust system. Such systems shall be provided with
equipment or filters to prevent the entry of flammable materials
into ducts. Openings shall be provided to permit easy inspection
and cleaning. System shall be installed and maintained so that in
the event of fire the danger of spread to other parts of the building
is minimized.
(3) Mechanical ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained
so that the temperature and velocity of the air coming into contact
with occupants does not constitute a health hazard.
(4) Required mechanical ventilation shall be provided in accordance
with Table II.
Table II Mechanical Ventilation Requirements
Space Minimum Ventilation
Shower rooms, locker rooms
and dressing rooms
6 air changes per hour
Recreation rooms 2 air changes per hour
§ 182-39 AUBURN CODE § 182-39
182:370
§ 182-40. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
Table II Mechanical Ventilation Requirements
Space Minimum Ventilation
Lounges, reception rooms,
dining rooms and meeting
rooms
4 air changes per hour
Workshops, service rooms,
paint storage rooms and
utility service rooms
1 air change per hour
Laundry rooms 2 air changes per hour
Central kitchens 4 air changes per hour
Hoods for cooking
equipment in central
kitchens
100 cfm per square foot of hood
Central dining rooms 4 air changes per hour
Garage areas
Above grade exceeding
1,000 square feet
4 air changes per hour
Below grade 6 air changes per hour
Passageways, hallways,
corridors and stairways
Above grade 1/2 air change per hour
Below grade 1 air change per hour
H. Safety controls. Safety controls shall conform to Section 1004.2e of the
Uniform Code.
A. General.
(1) Fire-protection equipment, including fire alarm, fire detecting,
watchman, sprinkler, and standpipe systems and portable fire
extinguishers, shall be maintained in proper operating condition at
all times.
(2) Sprinkler and standpipe systems shall have an adequate water
supply available at all times.
(3) Fire Department connections shall be conspicuously identified and
maintained readily accessible for Fire Department use.
B. Fire alarm and fire detecting systems. Fire alarm and fire detecting
systems shall be suitable for their respective purposes. Equipment and
devices comprising such systems shall be of the approved type and
conform to generally accepted standards.
C. Sprinkler systems.
§ 182-39 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-40
182:371
§ 182-41. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
(1) Sprinkler systems shall be maintained in good condition, free from
mechanical injury. Sprinkler heads shall be maintained clean, free
of corrosion and paint, and not bent or damaged.
(2) Unsupervised valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be
secured in the open position.
(3) Supports for piping and equipment shall be structurally sound.
(4) Portions of the system subject to freezing shall be appropriately
protected.
(5) Storage of materials shall not interfere with the effective discharge
of water from the sprinkler heads.
(6) Water supply for the sprinklers shall be adequate to effectively
extinguish the fire or confine it without spread.
D. Standpipe systems.
(1) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(2) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry, and free of
deterioration.
(3) Hose stations shall be conspicuously identified, located for easy
accessibility, and installed to provide for the quick and easy use of
equipment. Cabinets shall have keyless doors.
(4) Valves in the water supply pipe for the standpipe system shall be
open at all times.
E. Portable fire extinguishers.
(1) Portable fire extinguishers shall be of the following types: approved
multipurpose dry chemical type, classified for use on Class A
(combustible), Class B (flammable liquids), and Class C (electrical)
fires; and approved water type, classified for use on Class A fires.
Extinguishers shall have at least a two-unit rating, in accordance
with generally accepted standards.
(2) Portable fire extinguishers shall be maintained in an efficient and
safe operating condition.
(3) Portable fire extinguishers shall be in their designated location and
clearly visible, except that they may be located in an enclosure or
recess conspicuously identified as containing a fire extinguisher.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators shall be designed, installed,
and maintained to safely sustain the loads to which they are subject, to
operate properly, and to be free of physical and fire hazards.
§ 182-40 AUBURN CODE § 182-41
182:372
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs, in conspicuous locations within such cars, on which the
rated capacity, in pounds, is stated. Signs in passenger elevators shall
also state the total number of passengers permitted, determined by
dividing the rated capacity by 150.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency, in accordance with
generally accepted standards.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of rubbish or other debris.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease, including oily
and greasy clothes, rags, and other such materials, and shall not be
used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. Safety devices and electrical protective devices shall be operative at all
times, except during tests, inspections, or repairs.
§ 182-41 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-41
182:373

ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 182-42. General requirements.
§ 182-43. Open areas.
§ 182-44. Buildings and structures.
A. Residential premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary
condition.
B. Areas devoted to the common use of occupants and users shall be kept
broom clean at all times.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent ponding.
B. Fences, walls, and other minor constructions shall be maintained in
safe, good, and substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces, and similar paved areas shall
be maintained to afford safe and convenient passage.
D. Yards, courts, and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of hazards.
E. Ground cover shall be properly established to prevent undue soil
erosion due to the elements.
F. Heavy undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health or safety shall be eliminated.
G. Open fires shall not be permitted, unless authorized and approved
pursuant to local law and in conformity with state air pollution control
regulations.
A. Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Surfaces not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective
coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, including windows and doors, ceilings, and other interior
surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, and sanitary condition.
Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other
defective surface conditions shall be eliminated.
C. Paint containing more than 1/2 of 1% of metallic lead, based on the total
nonvolatile content of the paint, shall not be used to paint any interior
wall, ceiling, window, door, or other interior surface. Where such paint
on interior surfaces is peeling or otherwise presents a health hazard, it
shall be promptly removed and the surface safely and appropriately
refinished or resurfaced. Walls and all interior surfaces shall be treated
with a protective coat of paint or other suitable covering or preservative
§ 182-42 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-44
182:375
§ 182-45. Infestation and screening.
§ 182-46. Garbage and refuse.
§ 182-47. Junk equipment and vehicles. [Amended 1-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-1999]
and maintained in such a manner that the appearance is attractive and
not shabby.
A. Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin, and rodent harborage and infestation.
B. Where rodent infestation exists, windows and other openings in
basements and cellars shall be screened to prevent entrance of rodents.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings and
structures shall be provided with self-closing doors, devices, or screens,
and windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be
appropriately screened, except that screens shall not be required in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings which are free of mosquitoes, flies,
and other flying insects.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling, and disposal of garbage and refuse.
Storage containers shall be of an approved flame-resistant waterproof
type.
B. The accumulation or storage of garbage or refuse in public halls or
stairways shall be prohibited.
A. Refrigerators, and similar equipment with locking mechanisms, shall
not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises accessible to
children without first removing the locking devices or the hinges of the
doors.
B. Equipment and materials shall not be stored in open areas of premises.
C. It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave in the open or to abandon a
junk vehicle upon private property except as permitted pursuant to
General Municipal Law § 136, unless the same is necessary for the
operation of a business enterprise lawfully upon said premises.
(1) The Building Inspector and/or designee or any police officer may
serve written ten-day notice upon the owner of such private
property to remove or shelter such junk vehicle in a fully enclosed
building. Such ten-day notice shall be served personally on such
property owner or, if the owner cannot be found, by sending a
certified letter to the owner of record of the real property as
designated upon the assessment rolls of the City. A single notice
shall be sufficient for any number of such vehicles on one parcel of
§ 182-44 AUBURN CODE § 182-47
182:376
§ 182-48. Domestic animals and pets.
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner, so as not
to constitute a hazard or nuisance, and under control.
§ 182-49. Energy efficiency.
property. In addition thereto, a notice shall be posted conspicuously
on each junk vehicle on such property.
(2) Upon expiration of a ten-day time period after notice, the Building
Inspector and/or designee or any police officer shall cause such
junk vehicle to be removed to such area as may be designated for
storage and there held for a period of 10 days. Within such ten-day
time period, the owner and/or agent may claim such junk vehicle
upon payment of the towing or removal charges therefor. Such
owner and/or agent shall immediately remove such junk vehicle at
his own expense to a fully enclosed storage area. Upon the
expiration of such ten-day time period, no claim having been made,
ownership of said junk vehicle shall be deemed to be forfeited and
such vehicle may be disposed of by the City in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1224.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an owner who occupies the
property from retaining one unlicensed vehicle, provided that the
vehicle is able to be moved under its own power and is in a
condition which would render it roadworthy under the New York
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to encourage energy efficiency
and conservation in the City of Auburn. The City finds that this
enactment will encourage the conservation of a finite public resource;
the quality of life for all residents by generating more affordable
housing, more comfortable dwellings and a cleaner environment; and
landlords to make energy improvements for utility-paying tenants and
will reduce the flow of energy dollars out of the local economy.
B. Compliance. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
shall be issued for any dwelling unit six months after the effective date
of this section unless there is full compliance with this section.
C. Requirements.
(1) All dwelling units shall have two of the following:
(a) Attic or roof insulation with a minimum R value of R-30;
(b) Permanently or seasonally mounted storm windows, as a
second covering, on all exterior primary windows of habitable
spaces from November 1 to April 1 of each heating season.
Windows with two or more layers of glazing are acceptable.
Other acceptable alternatives are interior treatments,
§ 182-47 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-49
182:377
including polyethylene or acrylic systems. The use of LexanTM
for storm windows is unacceptable; or
(c) Heating system(s) with a verified minimum annualized fuel use
efficiency (AFUE) of 65% or combustion efficiency of 75% as
verified within the preceding two years. This alternative does
not apply to any dwelling unit whose primary heating system is
electrical; such units shall meet the requirement of Subsection
C(1)(a) and (b) above.
(2) Actions to meet the foregoing requirements must be consistent
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
D. Verification. Evidence of storm windows can be verified by visible
inspection by the Housing Code Inspector or the owner's affidavit of
compliance with this section. Other items can be verified by the public
utility serving the City, or comparable audit report on building or
dwelling unit, or receipts for completed tests, work or materials. In the
absence of the foregoing verifications provided to the Housing Code
Inspector, dwelling units will be assumed to be not in compliance.
E. Failure to comply; effect. Notwithstanding any other law to the
contrary, failure to comply with this section shall be punishable only by
the nonissuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance for the dwelling unit. This provision shall not remove or
diminish any requirement for obtaining a certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance or any penalty which can be imposed for
failing to obtain a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of
compliance.
F. Waivers. Waivers for exemptions from these requirements may be made
in writing to the Housing Code Inspector. Exemptions may be granted
under the following demonstrated conditions:
(1) Financial hardship;
(2) The measures are not cost effective; or
(3) The measures create unsafe conditions.
G. Energy audit. The public utility serving this City or a similarly qualified
agency shall, within six months after the effective date of this section,
make an energy audit of all buildings subject to this chapter, and a copy
of the same shall be filed forthwith with the Housing Code Inspector.
§ 182-49 AUBURN CODE § 182-49
182:378
Part 2
Administration And Compliance
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 182-50. Title.
This Part 2 shall be know and referred to as "Administration and
Compliance Provisions."
§ 182-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide the basic method for uniform
administration of, and compliance with, applicable housing standards and
to establish the responsibilities of those concerned therewith.
§ 182-52. Applicability.
§ 182-53. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The designated representative of an owner, lessor, operator,
occupant, or person, as filed with the agency.
LESSOR — The grantor of a lease interest in premises.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, or in possession, or in control of
premises, or using premises.
OPERATOR — The person engaged in the activity of renting or providing
space or premises for occupancy or use by others.
OWNER — The person exercising dominion or control over, or vested with
title in, premises; a proprietor (legal owner, joint owner, part owner, record
A. This Part 2 shall apply to the provisions and to premises within the
scope of Part 1.
B. Notwithstanding any of the requirements of Part 1, for premises,
buildings, or structures which do not conform thereto, in whole or in
part, on the effective date and which require substantial alterations or
installations to satisfy any such requirements, although in violation
thereof, the Housing Code Inspector may grant a reasonable period of
time, up to one year after the effective date, within which the premises,
buildings, or structures are to be made to conform, except if a building
or structure is found to be dangerous and unsafe, in which event,
prompt compliance with the requirements herein provided shall be
undertaken and carried out. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to extend compliance with any or all the provisions of the
Uniform Code.
§ 182-50 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-53
182:379
owner, equitable owner, reputed owner, or their successors in interest); or
the respective agent of any of them.
PERSON — The owner, lessor, operator, or occupant of premises or any firm
or corporation directly or indirectly in control of premises.
PREMISES — The land (improved or unimproved), place, property,
buildings, structures, equipment, facilities, and improvements, if any.
§ 182-53 AUBURN CODE § 182-53
182:380
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 182-54. Enforcement officer.
The Housing Code Inspector shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 182-55. Powers and duties of Housing Code Inspector.
A. The Housing Code Inspector shall be charged with the duty of
administering the housing standards and securing compliance
therewith and shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations
necessary for securing such compliance. Such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the housing standards or with any provision
of law.
B. The Housing Code Inspector shall be empowered to:
(1) Prescribe, and secure compliance with, housing requirements for
mobile homes used as temporary relocation housing in connection
with an urban renewal, public improvement, or other publicly aided
program.
(2) Request, and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the
discharge of his duties, the cooperation of other officials or
agencies of the municipality.
(3) Require the registration of premises and to issue certificates of
compliance with respect to the use and occupancy of premises, or
to issue temporary certificates, limited to premises or parts thereof
before or during the performance of any work to eliminate or
correct violations or deficiencies, for an initial period of 90 days,
renewable for additional ninety-day periods.
(4) Require independent inspections and tests of equipment and
systems used in connection with premises.
(5) Conduct surveys to determine the condition of premises, extent of
deterioration, lack or adequacy of facilities, adequacy of
maintenance, existence of unsafe and insanitary conditions, extent
of overcrowding, land use, and other relevant factors affecting
safety, health, or welfare.
C. It shall be the duty of the Housing Code Inspector to:
(1) Make or cause to be made inspections of premises within the scope
of the housing standards;
(2) Cause an investigation of complaints of alleged violations of the
housing standards;
§ 182-54 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-55
182:381
§ 182-56. Registration.
§ 182-57. Independent inspections.
(3) Issue written orders for the elimination or removal of conditions
affecting or found to exist in, on, or about premises in violation of
the housing standards and, where appropriate, order the cessation
of an unlawful use or nuisance or the vacation, demolition, or repair
of premises found dangerous or unsafe and to state in the violation
order a reasonable time limit for compliance therewith and the
time within which an appeal may be taken;
(4) Request the Corporation Counsel to take appropriate legal action
upon failure to comply with a violation order or orders;
(5) Keep official records of actions and activities;
(6) Cause studies in cooperation with the Planning Board to be made of
housing and environmental conditions for the purpose of
community improvement;
(7) Cooperate with other public and private agencies engaged in the
study and improvement of housing and environmental conditions;
and
(8) Publish an annual report including a summary of actions, activities,
results, accomplishments, and studies, as well as current and
proposed programs.
A. Owners and lessors of premises, or their respective agents, shall, within
90 days from the date of mailing of registration forms by the Housing
Code Inspector, file with the Housing Code Inspector on the registration
forms provided by the Housing Code Inspector the following
information:
(1) The names and addresses of the owner and lessor, and of their
respective agents, upon whom violation orders may be served;
(2) A description of the property, by street and number or otherwise, as
will enable the Housing Code Inspector to locate the same; and
(3) Such other appropriate information as may be requested, including
but not limited to use of premises, available facilities, number of
units, and number and size of rooms, together with a schematic
diagram showing the typical floor layout of the units and rooms
with appropriate designations and identifications.
B. Nonresident owners of premises, who are not employed or engaged in
business within the municipality and do not customarily and regularly
come into the municipality to attend a business office, shall designate
an agent who resides within the municipality or customarily and
regularly engages in and attends a business in the municipality.
§ 182-55 AUBURN CODE § 182-57
182:382
§ 182-58. Certificate of compliance.
Commencing with the third anniversary of the effective date of this Part 2:
§ 182-59. Inspections.
A. As scheduled by the Housing Code Inspector, or as required by this
chapter or other provisions of law, owners and lessors of premises shall
be responsible for the inspection and testing of plumbing, heating, gas,
and electrical equipment and systems, sprinkler, standpipe, fire
detecting, and fire alarm systems, and elevators, dumbwaiters, and
escalators used in connection with such premises.
B. Inspections and tests shall be made by qualified persons who, because
of experience or education, are recognized as competent by the
Housing Code Inspector.
C. If any equipment or system is found to be defective or not in proper
operating condition upon inspection or test, the owner or lessor shall
promptly remedy such defect or condition.
D. Reports of inspections and tests, signed by the tester and a witness,
together with a statement of any remedial measures to be taken, shall
be filed with the Housing Code Inspector within 10 days after each
inspection and test. A duplicate of the report shall be kept on the
premises, available for examination by the Housing Code Inspector or
his or her representatives.
A. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any premises unless and until a
certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Housing Code
Inspector certifying that such premises conforms to the housing
standards, except that a temporary certificate may be issued upon a
showing, to the satisfaction of the Housing Code Inspector, that
remedial action is being taken to correct violations.
B. A certificate of compliance shall be valid for three years from the date
of issue, except a new certificate shall be required for every premises,
improved or unimproved, if the use or occupancy is changed, a building
or structure is altered, or vacant premises are reoccupied; a certificate
may be revoked, by written notice thereof, if upon an inspection
premises are found to be in violation of the housing standards.
A. The Housing Code Inspector and his or her representatives shall be
authorized, in the performance of their duties, to conduct inspections of
premises, or parts of premises, at such times and in such manner as the
Housing Code Inspector may find convenient or necessary, with the
consent of the person in possession or occupancy.
B. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the person in
possession or occupancy, the Housing Code Inspector or his or her
representatives shall be authorized to obtain a warrant to make an
inspection, provided reasonable or probable cause is shown.
§ 182-57 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-59
182:383
§ 182-60. Power to act in emergencies.
Whenever the Housing Code Inspector, at any stage of the proceedings
instituted under the provisions of this chapter, finds that a violation of this
chapter exists which, in his or her opinion, requires immediate action to
abate a direct hazard, or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals,
or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public, he or she may,
without prior notice or hearing, issue an order citing the violation and
directing that such action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the
hazard or danger. Such order may include an order to vacate as provided
in § 182-62. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such an
order shall be effective immediately upon service and shall be complied with
immediately or as otherwise provided.
§ 182-61. Abatement of hazard or danger.
Whenever any violation of this chapter which, in the opinion of the Housing
Code Inspector, causes a direct hazard or immediate danger to the health,
safety, morals, or welfare of the occupants of a building or the public has
not been corrected in the time specified by the order issued under § 182-60
of this chapter, the Housing Code Inspector may take such direct action
as is necessary to abate the hazard or danger. Expenses incurred in the
execution of such orders shall be recovered as provided in § 182-68 of this
chapter.
§ 182-62. Order to vacate.
Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in § 182-67 of this chapter,
has not been complied with, the Housing Code Inspector may order the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit to be vacated. A
copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator,
and the occupant, as provided in § 182-67 of this chapter.
§ 182-63. Transfer of ownership.
No owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
or premises upon whom any notice or order pursuant to this chapter has
been served shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose
of such property to another until compliance with the provisions of such
notice or order has been secured or until such owner shall furnish to the
purchaser, transferree, grantee, mortgagee, or lessee, prior to such sale,
transfer, grant, mortgage or lease, a true copy of such notice or order and,
at the same time, give adequate notification to the Housing Code Inspector
of his intent to sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, or lease and the name and
address of such person, persons, or firm to whom or to which the sale,
C. In case of an emergency, the Housing Code Inspector or his or her
representatives may, without a warrant, enter any premises, or parts of
premises, to inspect the same, at any time, without the permission of
the person in possession or occupancy.
§ 182-59 AUBURN CODE § 182-63
182:384
transfer, grant, mortgage, or lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee,
grantee, mortgagee, or lessee who has been informed of the existence of
any notice or order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be bound thereby.
§ 182-64. Unfit dwelling units.
Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit having any of
the defects found in Subsections A through C herein may be designated by
the Housing Code Inspector as unfit for human habitation and may be so
placarded.
§ 182-65. Vacation of unfit dwellings.
§ 182-66. Vacated dwellings to be made secure.
The owner, agent, or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation and vacated shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, or rooming unit safe and secure in whatever manner the Housing
Code Inspector shall deem necessary. Any vacant building, open at the
doors and windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life
and a nuisance within the meaning of this provision.
§ 182-67. Violation orders.
A. The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat, or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
the public.
B. The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe, or
vermin infested in such a manner as to create a serious hazard to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public.
C. The structure, because of the location, general conditions, state of the
premises, or number of occupants, is so insanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded, or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it
creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public.
A. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit designated
as unfit for human habitation and ordered vacated shall be vacated
within such reasonable time as the Housing Code Inspector shall direct.
B. No such dwelling, unit or house shall be used again for human
habitation or the placard removed until written approval is secured
from the Housing Code Inspector.
C. No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit against
which a notice of violation has been served and which is vacant at the
time of such notice shall be occupied or rented until written approval is
secured from the Housing Code Inspector.
§ 182-63 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-67
182:385
A. Whenever the Housing Code Inspector finds that there has been a
violation of the housing standards, the Housing Code Inspector shall
issue a violation order to the person or person responsible. The Housing
Code Inspector shall also issue a violation order to the person or
persons responsible for failure to file or maintain reports, or for the
furnishing of a false statement, or for interference with an inspector
lawfully authorized to enter premises, or in connection with the
occupancy of premises for which no certificate of compliance has been
obtained as required, or when a building or structure has been found to
be or is deemed to be dangerous or unsafe hereunder. The order shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Identify the premises;
(3) Specify the violation and remedial action to be taken;
(4) Provide a reasonable time limit for compliance; and
(5) If the violation constitutes a public nuisance or renders the
premises dangerous or unsafe, include, in the order, a statement
that if the violation is not remedied within the time limit specified in
the order the Housing Code Inspector may remedy the violation.
B. A violation order may be served as follows:
(1) By personal service;
(2) By mailing, by registered or certified mail, to the person whose
name has been filed with the Housing Code Inspector, in
accordance with this Part 2, to his or her address as therewith filed,
or to the occupant, of a copy of such order; or
(3) If the owner, lessor, or their respective agent cannot be served by
registered or certified mail as provided in Subsection B(2) above,
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises
and by mailing another copy thereof to the last known address of
the owner, lessor, or their respective agent as shown on the
assessment roll of the City of Auburn, or records in the office of the
Housing Code Inspector, on the same day as posted, enclosed in a
postpaid wrapper addressed to the owner, lessor or their respective
agent.
C. In case the owner, lessor, occupant, or the agent of any of them shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to remove, eliminate, or abate the violation
within the time specified, the Housing Code Inspector shall request the
Corporation Counsel to take appropriate legal action.
D. If the violation constitutes a public nuisance or renders the premises
dangerous or unsafe and the violation order has been served but the
violation has not been remedied within the time limit specified in such
violation order, the Housing Code Inspector may proceed as provided in
§ 182-67 AUBURN CODE § 182-67
182:386
§ 182-68. Recovery of costs.
Costs incurred by the Housing Code Inspector in eliminating or removing
nuisances and dangerous or unsafe conditions shall be paid for by the
municipal treasury upon certification of the Housing Code Inspector. Such
costs shall be charged against the premises and shall constitute a lien
thereon in favor of the municipality, and the amount of such costs shall be
entered on the tax rolls as being due and payable. Such costs may also be
recovered in any other lawful manner and, in particular, Chapter 125 of this
Municipal Code.
§ 182-69. Records.
The Housing Code Inspector shall keep official records of, but not limited
to, registrations and reports filed, certificates issued, complaints received,
inspections made, violations found, orders issued, and actions taken. Such
records shall be public records, open to inspection during business hours.
Copies or transcripts of such records shall be furnished upon written
application and payment of any and all lawful fees.
Article VII of Chapter 125, Building Construction and Fire Prevention,
of this Municipal Code.
§ 182-67 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-69
182:387

ARTICLE IX
Compliance
§ 182-70. Responsibilities of owner, operator or agent.
The owner, operator or agent in control of the building shall be responsible
for the following:
§ 182-71. Responsibilities of occupants.
With respect to that part of the building which the occupant occupies,
controls or uses, the occupant shall be responsible for the following:
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum number of persons permitted and
prohibiting unlawful uses.
B. Posting required statements of the maximum number of occupants
permitted.
C. Maintenance of the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
D. Maintenance and operation of service facilities in good order and
condition.
E. Maintenance of plumbing, heating, and electrical equipment and
systems, appliances, and fixtures, as well as other building equipment
and facilities, in an appropriate, good, operative, clean, and sanitary
condition.
F. Maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings in public places in a clean and
sanitary condition.
G. Keeping exits free and clear.
H. Disposing of garbage, refuse and junk in a safe and sanitary manner
and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom and broom clean.
I. Extermination of insects, vermin, rodents, and pests and elimination of
harborage.
A. Occupancy limitations and its lawfully permitted use.
B. Maintenance in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
C. Maintenance of plumbing, cooking and refrigeration equipment,
appliances, fixtures and facilities in a clean and sanitary condition and
providing reasonable care in the operation and use thereof.
D. Keeping exits free and clear.
E. Disposing of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a sanitary
manner and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom.
§ 182-70 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-71
182:389
F. Keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
§ 182-71 AUBURN CODE § 182-71
182:390
ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 182-72. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent, or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the City
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter, shall be defended by the Corporation Counsel until the
final determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 182-73. Duties of Corporation Counsel.
The Corporation Counsel shall, upon complaint of the Housing Code
Inspector, or upon his own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain,
prevent, enjoin, abate, correct, or remove such violation and take such other
legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
§ 182-74. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law, and all
remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of
any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right
to pursue any and all of the others.
§ 182-75. Judicial review.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final order of
the Housing Code Inspector may seek to have such order reviewed by the
Supreme Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules and as otherwise provided for in the laws of the State of New
York.
§ 182-76. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the
violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine for
the first offense in the amount not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 15 days or by both said fine and imprisonment for each
offense. For a second offense committed within 12 months, the fine
shall not exceed $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both
said fine and imprisonment for each offense. For a third and subsequent
violation committed within 12 months, the fine shall not exceed $1,000
or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both said fine and
imprisonment for each offense. Each day that such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 182-72 HOUSING STANDARDS § 182-76
182:391
B. The penalties heretofore prescribed shall not be imposed upon a person
who by operation of law acquires premises containing violations for
which a violation order has been issued for a period of six months after
the date of such acquisition of the premises. Nevertheless, the penalties
provided shall attach and apply either upon the expiration date of such
six-month period or upon transfer of title to the premises before the
expiration of such period, whichever first occurs.
§ 182-76 AUBURN CODE § 182-76
182:392
Chapter 183
VACANT BUILDING REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Neighborhood and Housing
Commission — See Ch. 11, Art. VI.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
§ 183-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Vacant Building
Registry of Auburn, New York."
§ 183-2. Legislative findings and purpose.
It is the finding of the Auburn City Council that vacant buildings are
unsightly, unsafe, and have a negative effect on the community.
Unfortunately, many buildings, once vacant, remain that way for years.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for identifying and
registering vacant buildings, to set forth the responsibilities of owners of
vacant buildings, and to speed the rehabilitation of vacant buildings.
§ 183-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms will, for the purpose
of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Where the condition of a building, structure,
or any part thereof is an imminent, immediate, and substantial danger to the
health or safety of occupants, emergency responders, and/or the general
public. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, fire hazards, falling
or dilapidated buildings, structures, or any part thereof, loss of significant
water, heat, ventilation, or a lack of sanitary conditions.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any duly authorized City of Auburn employee
of the Code Enforcement or Fire Chief's office, or designated persons from
those offices.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity shown to be the owner or owners
on the records of the City of Auburn Assessor's office, those identified as
the owner or owners on a vacant building registration form, a mortgagee
in possession, a mortgagor in possession, or an assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, other person, firm or corporation
in control of the premises. Any such person will have joint and several
obligations for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 182-76 HOUSING STANDARDS § 183-3
182:393
SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by
means other than those used in the design and approved plans for the
building.
UNOCCUPIED — A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by an enforcement officer. In
determining whether a building is unoccupied, the enforcement officer may
consider these factors, among others:
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT BUILDING — A building, a portion of a building, or a structure
which is any one or more of the below:
§ 183-4. Vacant building registration.
A. Whether lawful residential or business activity has ceased;
The percentage of the overall square footage of the occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied
units;
B.
The building is substantially devoid of contents or the minimal value of
fixtures or personal property in the building;
C.
D. The building lacks utility services;
E. The building is subject to a foreclosure action;
F. Duration of vacancy; and/or
G. The presence or reoccurrence of code violations.
A. Unoccupied and unsecured;
B. Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
Unoccupied and an unsafe building as determined by an enforcement
officer;
C.
Unoccupied and an enforcement officer has issued an order to correct
code violations;
D.
E. Illegally occupied; or
F. Unoccupied for a period of time over 30 days.
A. The owner of a vacant building will register with the Code Enforcement
or Fire Chief's office no later than 30 days after any building becomes a
"vacant building," as defined above, or not later than 30 days after
being notified by a code enforcement officer of the requirement to
register. A code enforcement officer or Fire Department officer may
identify vacant buildings through his/her routine inspection process as
§ 183-3 AUBURN CODE § 183-4
182:394
well as through notification by residents, neighborhood associations
and other community groups that a building may be eligible for
inclusion on the registry. Notice will be served upon, or sent by mail to,
the owner, and any registered property manager, and to the property
address. Notice will be deemed received by the owner, property
manager, or an occupant, as the case may be, upon personal delivery
or three days in Cayuga County or five days for other locations after
service by first-class mail. The City may also post notices on the City's
website to provide additional notice to the public. However, the City's
failure to post such violations on the City's website will not constitute a
defense to any enforcement proceeding or collection of fines.
B. As part of the notice to register, the code enforcement officer may
provide the owner with a written referral to the Office of Planning for
information outlining programs available which may be useful to
implement a rehabilitation plan.
C. The registration will be submitted on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement/Fire Chief's office and will include the following
information:
(1) A description of the premises, i.e., square footage, number of
stories, age of the building, and most-recent use of the building.
(2) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner or
owners; if the owner is a corporation, limited liability company or
partnership, the address for each director, manager, or partner, as
the case may be. The address must include a street address; a post
office box is not acceptable.
(3) If the owner does not reside in Cayuga County or any adjoining
New York county, the name and address of the registered property
manager as required by § 182-56, registration of rental housing
units; certificates of compliance. The address must include a street
address; a post office box is not acceptable.
(4) The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building. Each address
must include a street address; a post office box is not acceptable.
(5) A name, address, and telephone number of a responsible natural
person (not a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company) who can be reached at all times during business and
nonbusiness hours. The address must include a street address; a
post office box is not acceptable.
(6) A vacant building plan as described in Subsection D below.
D. The owner will submit a vacant building plan which must meet the
approval of the Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office. The plan, at a
minimum, must contain information from one of the following three
proposals for the property:
§ 183-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 183-4
182:395
(1) If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan indicating the
proposed time frame for demolition;
(2) If the building is to remain vacant, a plan for the securing of the
building in accordance with standards provided below, along with
the procedure that will be used to maintain the property, and a
statement of the reason(s) why the building will be left vacant; or
(3) If the building is to be returned to appropriate occupancy or use,
rehabilitation plans for the building must be submitted to the Code
Enforcement office. The rehabilitation plans will not exceed 365
days from the date of submission and will include progress
benchmarks at least every four months, unless the Code
Enforcement/Fire Chief's office grants an extension for good cause
shown, upon receipt of a written statement from the owner
detailing the reasons for the extension. Any repairs, improvements
or alterations to the property must comply with any applicable
zoning, housing, historic preservation or building codes. The
building must be secured in accordance with § 182-66 of the
Auburn City Code.
E. The owner will comply with all applicable laws and codes. The owner
will notify the Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office of any changes in
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration within
30 days of the change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant building is
revised in any way, the revisions must be in writing and must meet the
approval of the enforcement officer.
F. The owner and any subsequent owner will keep the building secured
and safe and the building and grounds properly maintained as provided
in § 182-66 of the Auburn City Code.
G. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owner to maintain the building
and premises as required herein will be grounds for the City:
(1) To remediate the building and bill the costs of same to the owner as
provided in § 125-47 of the Auburn City Code, Determination of
unsafe conditions;
(2) To revoke the rehabilitation plans; and
(3) The owner will be subject to fees and penalties as provided herein.
H. The owner will notify the Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office of any
transfer of ownership within 15 days of transfer. The new owner will
comply with the approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous
owner until any proposed changes are submitted and approved by the
Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office.
I. Vacant building registration fees.
(1) The owner of a vacant building will pay a registration fee as
determined annually by the fee schedule adopted by City Council or
§ 183-4 AUBURN CODE § 183-4
182:396
by separate resolution of the City Council at any time during the
course of a fiscal year. The registration fee is due and payable
upon registration; to wit: no later than 30 days after any building
becomes a "vacant building," as defined above, or no later than
30 days after being notified by an enforcement officer of the
requirement to register.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant, then the owner will also pay an
annual vacant building fee. The amount of said fee shall be
determined annually pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the
Auburn City Council or by separate resolution of the City Council.
Said fee schedule shall provide for differing amounts dependent
upon the number of years that the building is vacant.
(3) If the building is to be returned to a permitted use, the
rehabilitation plan will not exceed 365 days and will include
progress benchmarks at least every four months, unless the
enforcement officer grants an extension for good cause shown upon
receipt of a written statement from the owner detailing the reasons
for the extension. If the rehabilitation has not been completed or
extended, then the owner will pay an annual vacant building fee
until the building is properly demolished or rehabilitated. The
annual vacant building fee is payable either on each anniversary of
the payment of the initial registration fee in Subsection I(1) above
or no later than 15 days after being notified by an enforcement
officer that the owner has failed to meet a required benchmark,
whichever date is earlier, and on each anniversary thereafter until
the building is demolished or rehabilitated.
(4) If the owner of a vacant building fails to register and pay the fees in
a timely manner, then the owner will be subject to the penalty set
forth in § 125-59 of the Auburn City Code.
(5) All delinquent fees will be paid by the owner prior to any transfer of
an ownership interest in any vacant building. The owner will give a
purchaser written notice that the building in question is a vacant
building under this section.
(6) The vacant building registration fees and annual vacant building
fees as set forth in the annual fee schedule or by separate
resolution are to be delivered, by mail or in person, to the
Treasurer's office, Memorial City Hall, 24 South Street, Auburn,
New York, 13021. A late charge of 2% per month, or any part
thereof, will be assessed on any invoice which is unpaid after 30
days from the date of the demand for payment or an invoice. A
processing fee will be charged for each check returned by the bank
due to insufficient funds or other reason. A replacement payment
must be made in cash, money order, or bank or certified check and
must include the processing fee and any applicable late charges.
Invoices and any additional fees that remain unpaid will be added
to the property owner's tax bill and will include an additional fee.
§ 183-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 183-4
182:397
§ 183-5. Maintenance.
J. The Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office will include in the file any
property-specific written statements from community organizations,
other interested parties or citizens regarding the history, problems,
status or blighting influence of a vacant building.
A. The owner of a vacant building will take such steps and perform such
acts as may be required of him or her from time to time to ensure that
the building and its grounds remain safe and secure and do not present
a hazard to the adjoining property or the public. Owners will be
responsible for maintaining their buildings and structures so that they
do not become an unoccupied hazard. In any building or floor area that
is vacant or about to become vacant, there will be at least one access
which meets the approval of the code enforcement officer.
B. The owner will protect and maintain the exterior of the building as
follows:
(1) Exterior walls, including foundations, will be maintained so that
water does not penetrate into basements, cellars, or other interior
areas. All exterior walls and foundations must be free of holes and
crevices.
(2) Exterior doors, windows, skylights and similar openings will be
maintained weathertight.
(3) Exterior stairs, porches, entrance platforms, fire escapes and the
railings thereon shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition.
(4) Roofs shall be maintained in a weathertight condition.
(5) Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Surfaces
not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
(6) The coverings for windows and doors with glass may not consist of
any substance sprayed onto the glass doors or windows. All
enclosures shall be properly fitted and be of such material and
surface that they are neither unsightly nor will materially detract
from the general appearance of the building or the neighborhood
and, when possible, secured by normal means.
(7) The covering for broken doors and cracked or broken windows may
consist of replacement glass, plexiglass, boards, plywood or similar
materials finished and maintained in a manner recommended and
approved by the code enforcement officer. The materials will be
designed and of such color to blend in with the finish of the
building.
(8) Windows that are not cracked or broken may be covered with
interior blinds, curtains, shades, or decorative paper.
§ 183-4 AUBURN CODE § 183-5
182:398
(9) The premises will be kept free of insects and vermin and will be
treated if necessary.
(10) Any excavations, swimming pools, or other attractive nuisances
must be filled in or properly closed.
C. In addition to the standards prescribed above, vacant commercial and
retail buildings shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Any and all first-floor windows will be replaced by glass, plexiglass,
an approved mural, or an announcement sign. Such coverings must
be maintained.
(2) All exterior signs, awnings and lighting systems, if not removed,
shall be maintained in a nondeteriorated and safe condition.
D. The owner will protect and maintain the interior of the building as
follows:
(1) Structural members will be maintained to resist and prevent
deterioration.
(2) Unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs, and crawl spaces will be
ventilated to minimize deterioration.
(3) Ceilings, walls, floors and stairways will be maintained in a safe
and sound condition.
E. The owner will maintain the premises as follows:
(1) The owner will not permit garbage and refuse to accumulate.
(2) Buildings and structures will be maintained free of insects, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation.
(3) Refrigerators and similar equipment with locking mechanisms will
not be discarded, abandoned or stored without first removing the
locking devices or the hinges of the doors.
(4) Junked vehicles will not be stored at the premises.
(5) Chimneys, smokestacks, flues, gas vents, smoke pipes and
connectors will be maintained structurally safe and smoketight.
(6) If the building is to be demolished or remain vacant, then, within 10
days of registering the building as a vacant building, all fuel gas,
water, and utilities must be disconnected at the mains and water
pipes drained. If the building is going to be rehabilitated, then the
building must be heated to avoid freezing pipes, fuel gas pipe
systems must be maintained gastight, in a safe and operative
condition, and water pipes must be maintained to avoid leaks and/
or breakage.
§ 183-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 183-5
182:399
§ 183-6. Exemptions.
A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme
weather conditions will be exempt from the registration requirement for
a period of 90 days after the date of the fire or extreme weather event
if the property owner submits a request for exemption in writing to the
Code Enforcement/Fire Chief's office. This request will include the following
information supplied by the owner:
(7) Fuel tanks will be maintained so as not to be a hazard or will be
discontinued in a manner consistent with Chapter C of the State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (9 NYCRR).
(8) The domestic water supply system of the building will be connected
to an approved source, will not be subject to contamination and will
not be connected to unsafe water supplies, or the system will be
disconnected at the main and completely drained.
(9) Stormwater drainage systems will be maintained so as to function
properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
Sewage systems will be similarly maintained or will be sealed so as
to prevent accumulation of sewage gases in buildings.
(10) Electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and systems will be maintained
in safe working condition in a manner which will avoid a potential
source of ignition or shock, or service will be discontinued at the
supply.
(11) Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators will be maintained or taken
out of service.
(12) The owner will provide for snow removal.
(13) The owner will maintain yards and vacant lots trimmed and
mowed, with the height of grass and weeds being no more than 10
inches, and clean and free of physical hazards, rodent harborage
and infestation.
F. Whenever the owner of a vacant building fails to comply with a notice
from a code enforcement officer to take steps and perform acts as are
required of him or her to ensure that a building and its adjoining yards
remain safe and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining
property in violation of Subsection B above, the City may enter onto the
building and the property and take steps and perform acts to render the
building and its adjoining yards safe, secure and free from hazards to
adjoining property and the public. These acts will include but not be
limited to removal of dangerous conditions, properly replacing or
boarding up windows and doors, shutting off utilities, capping plumbing
to prevent leakage of water or sewer gas, or removing flammable or
otherwise hazardous material and debris. A bill for the expenses
incurred above will be presented to the owners of the building.
§ 183-5 AUBURN CODE § 183-6
182:400
§ 183-7. Inspections.
By registering a vacant building, an owner consents to a code enforcement
officer inspecting the premises for the purpose of enforcing and assuring
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon the request of the code
enforcement officer, an owner will provide access to all interior portions
of a vacant building in order to permit a complete inspection. Nothing
contained herein, however, will diminish the owner's right to insist upon
the procurement of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction
by the enforcement officer or his or her designee in order to enable such
inspection, and the enforcement officer will be required to obtain a search
warrant whenever an owner refuses to permit a warrantless inspection of
the premises after having been advised of his or her constitutional right to
refuse entry without same. In the case of an emergency, this section will not
apply.
§ 183-8. Annual reports.
Once a year, the Office of Buildings and Construction or Code Enforcement/
Fire Chief's office will send to the Mayor and to the Auburn City Council a
list of all buildings in the City declared vacant under the provisions of this
chapter, as well as a list of all previously declared vacant buildings which
are no longer subject to the provisions of this chapter. This information may
be published on the City's website.
§ 183-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this vacant building registry or
providing false information to the code enforcement officer will be subject
to the following fines:
A. A description of the premises.
B. The reason for an exemption.
C. The names and addresses of the owner or owners. A post office box is
not acceptable.
D. A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner or the intent to demolish the building.
A. Such person will be subject to a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. The term "person," as used in this section, will include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of the
building or part thereof.
C. Each day of violation will be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 183-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 183-9
182:401
Chapter 195
LAUNDRIES, SELF-SERVICE
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LAUNDRY — A launderette or laundromat.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — Any building, room, place or space in the City
in which self-service automatic or coin-operated individual units, washing
machines or other apparatus for the washing, cleaning and drying of clothes
are installed and rented out to the public on the payment of certain rentals.
§ 195-2. Operation regulations.
§ 195-3. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of the Municipal Code.
Chapter 200
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement centers — See Ch. 100.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 109.
Collateral loan brokers — See Ch. 140.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 157.
Self-service laundries — See Ch. 195.
Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 248.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 273.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
D. Fines levied will constitute civil forfeitures to the City of Auburn.
A. Operation without attendant. Self-service laundries may be opened on
any day, including Sundays, without a supervising attendant or
attendants between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
B. Operation with attendant. Self-service laundries shall not be opened on
any day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless there
shall be a supervising attendant or attendants present at all times.
C. Amusement devices prohibited. No other automatic coin-operated
devices as defined in Chapter 100, Amusement Centers, § 100-1 for the
amusement of the customers shall be permitted at any self-service
laundry.
§ 183-9 AUBURN CODE § 195-3
195:402
§ 200-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Licensing and Regulation of Businesses Ordinance."
§ 200-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HEARING OFFICER — The person appointed by competent authority to
conduct a hearing to determine whether a license issued under this Code
should be suspended or revoked.
ISSUING OFFICER — The City official who has the authority to issue, deny,
suspend or revoke a license under the provisions of this Code.
§ 200-3. Suspension and revocation of license.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any license issued under this Code
may be suspended or revoked by the issuing officer or hearing officer as
hereinafter provided.
A. Revocation. Whenever the issuing officer shall determine that a
licensee is violating any applicable provisions of the City of Auburn
Municipal Code or any applicable state or county law, rule or
regulation, the issuing officer or hearing officer designated by the
Council may revoke such license.
B. Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall
be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at his or her last known address at least 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing.
C. Authority of hearing officer. The issuing officer or any hearing officer
appointed by the Council may administer oaths, subpoena witnesses
and take testimony in respect to any matter properly before him or her
and may accept affidavits in lieu of oral testimony.
D. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the issuing officer in the
denial of an application for a license or in the decision of the issuing
officer or hearing officer with reference to the revocation of a license as
provided for in this section shall have the right to appeal to the Council.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Clerk within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been
mailed to such person's last known address, together with a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council
shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal, and notice of such
hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at his or her last known address
§ 195-3 LICENSING § 200-3
200:403
Chapter 210
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 104.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 157.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Public conduct — See Ch. 234.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 210-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Noise
Ordinance."
§ 210-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public health, peace, welfare
and good order by suppressing the making, creation or maintenance of
excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are
prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use and which
are detrimental to the environment.
§ 210-3. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the community or which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, rest, health, peace or safety of
others within the City of Auburn.
§ 210-4. Enumeration of unlawful acts.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary and
disturbing and a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community
at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Any person or
persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Council
may apply to the Supreme Court for relief by a proceeding under Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. Suspension. In case of an emergency or a serious threat to public safety,
health or welfare, the issuing officer may suspend a license until such
time as a final determination can be had on the revocation of a license
under this section. For good cause, the Council may remove such
suspension pending final determination subject to such terms and
conditions as it deems appropriate or necessary to safeguard the public
safety, health or welfare.
§ 200-3 AUBURN CODE § 210-4
210:404
and its people in violation of § 210-3, but the enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:
§ 210-5. Presumptions.
A. Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio,
television, hi-fi, stereo, phonograph, CD player or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any persons in the vicinity. The
operation of any of the devices set forth in this subsection in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 15 feet from the
building, structure, device or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. A person who causes
the production of said sound through the operation of the machines or
devices enumerated herein may be deemed a violator of this chapter.
[Amended 6-6-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
B. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of loud or
disturbing noises by the use of clappers, bells, horns, musical
instruments or similar devices at any time or place so as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or rest of any person
in any residence, hospital, school, place of business, street or public
place.
C. The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity.
D. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck or vehicle operated in
such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
E. The operation or use of any power lawn mower, chain saw, fence post
driller or other similar devices between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
F. Any of the following activities when occurring in close proximity to
residents between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: the warming up or idling
of buses, trucks or tractors and the unnecessary or unreasonable or
repeated idling, acceleration or deceleration or starting and stopping of
automobiles or motorcycles.
G. The operation of construction equipment between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day or at any time on Sunday. Such
equipment includes, but is not limited to, pile drivers, pneumatic
hammers, derricks, dredges, tractors, earth-moving equipment and
other similar construction equipment.
H. The use, by any vehicle, of engine driven braking system (such as "Jake
Brakes®") within the Cty limits. [Added 3-8-2007 by Ord. No.
4-2007]
§ 210-4 NOISE § 210-5
210:405
§ 210-6. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the following:
§ 210-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, alone or in concert with others, who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 210-8. Enforcement.
A. Where the source of the prohibited noise is a portable noise-producing
or noise-reproducing device, and where such device is present in or
being transported through a public street, highway area or access area,
or is present on any private property, the person or persons in
possession of the device shall be presumed to have permitted the noise
violation of this chapter in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
B. Where the source of the prohibited noise is located in a building or
other structure, the owner, occupant, resident, manager or other
person in possession of the premises shall, if present, be presumed to
have permitted the noise in violation of this chapter in the absence of
evidence to the contrary.
A. The production of music in connection with any military or civic parade,
funeral procession or religious service or school activities or functions.
B. Use of any organ, bell, chimes or any other similar device by any
church, synagogue or school on or within its own premises in
connection with religious rites or ceremonies of such church or
synagogue or in connection with a school education program.
C. Sounds created by any governmental agency by the use of public
warning devices, including but not limited to police and fire vehicles.
D. Sounds connected with sporting events of any public or private school,
burglar alarms or other warning devices when properly installed on
publicly or privately owned property, provided that the cause for such
alarm or warning device producing the sound is investigated and
turned off within a reasonable period of time.
E. Emergency construction work, upon permission of the City Manager,
which is necessary for the protection of life or property.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City of
Auburn or any other law enforcement officer.
B. A police officer shall have the authority to issue an appearance ticket in
conformance with Chapter 5 of this Code.
§ 210-5 AUBURN CODE § 210-8
210:406
Chapter 213
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 104.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Solid waste — See Ch. 254.
Protection of water — See Ch. 294.
§ 213-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Auburn Abatement of
Nuisances Ordinance."
§ 213-2. Legislative findings and purpose.
A. The City Council finds that public nuisances exist in the City of Auburn
in the operation of certain establishments in the use of property in
flagrant violation of state and local laws pertaining to possession, sale
and use of controlled substances and dangerous drugs, illegal use or
possession of weapons, possession of stolen property and laws relating
to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, all of which
substantially and seriously interfere with the interest of the public and
the quality of life and total community environment, commerce in the
City, property values and the public health, safety and welfare,
particularly as it affects our children and young adults.
B. The City Council further finds that the continued occurrence of such
activities and violations is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the City of Auburn and of the businesses thereof and
the visitors thereto and that the public nuisances frequently exist in
properties where the owner is not in residence.
C. It is the purpose of the Council to create and to empower a Nuisance
Abatement Committee to impose appropriate sanctions and
proportional penalties as may serve to eliminate such public nuisances,
and it is further intended that the exercise of such powers as are given
to the Nuisance Abatement Committee pursuant to this chapter may be
exercised either in conjunction with, or apart from, the powers
contained in other laws, without prejudice to the use of procedures and
remedies available under such laws. The Council further finds the
sanctions and penalties which may be imposed by the Nuisance
Abatement Committee pursuant to this chapter constitute an additional
and appropriate method of law enforcement in response to the
proliferation of the above-described public nuisances within the City of
Auburn. The sanctions and penalties which may be imposed are
§ 210-8 NOISE § 213-2
210:407
§ 213-3. Definitions. [Added 5-27-2004 by Ord. No. 7-200446 ]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure used or occupied as an adjunct of,
or in conjunction with, the use or occupancy of premises, or a building or
buildings thereon, and which is located on the premises or adjacent thereto.
ADVERSE IMPACT — Includes, but is not limited to the following: any
search warrants served on the property where controlled substances and/or
weapons were seized; investigative purchases of controlled substances on
or near the property by law enforcement agencies or their agents; arrests
for violations of controlled substance law and/or possession of weapons;
loitering for the purposes of engaging in illegal activity; an increase in
the volume of traffic associated with property; complaints made to law
enforcement officials of illegal activity associated with the property, finding
of illegal weapons, as defined in § 265 of the Penal Law, or controlled
substances, as defined in Articles 220 and 221 of the Penal Law, on or near
the property by law enforcement officials and their agents.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior and party walls and a roof. The term "building" shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof" unless otherwise
indicated by the text.
BUSINESS — An activity, occupation, employment or enterprise which
requires time, attention, labor and material and wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or services offered.
BUSINESS OFFICE — Any office use not satisfying the definition of
"professional office" or "medical office" shall be considered a business office
for purposes of this chapter.
CONVICTION — A conviction for an offense in a court of competent
jurisdiction or an administrative bureau shall not be required. Instead, the
City shall prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the violations
have occurred. However, a conviction as defined and applied in accordance
with the provisions of § 1.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law, in any court of
competent jurisdiction, or a plea of guilty shall constitute conclusive proof
of a violation.[Amended 11-3-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005]
KNOWLEDGE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE — The presumption of knowledge
provided by Subdivision 1 of § 235.10 of the Penal Law shall be applicable
to this chapter. Notice, by mail or personal service, of activities relating
to a public nuisance, to the property owner of record shall be evidence of
knowledge of the public nuisance.
reasonable and necessary in order to promote the health and safety of
the people of the City of Auburn and to promote the general welfare.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 213-3 through 213-9 as 213-4
through 213-10, respectively.
§ 213-2 AUBURN CODE § 213-3
210:408
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation
thereof, together with such open spaces as are required by this chapter, and
having frontage on a public street.
PENAL LAW — New York State Penal Law.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — For purposes of this chapter, the following are
declared to be public nuisances: any building, structure, lot, site or
separately identifiable portion thereof where violations of any of the
following provisions of law are occurring and where two or more violations
of such provisions result in two or more criminal convictions, within a
twelve-month time period prior to the commencement of a proceeding
pursuant to this chapter, and activities which create an unreasonable
interference with a person's lawful use and enjoyment of their own property
due to excessive noise and general disturbance of the peace.[Added
11-3-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005; amended 10-7-2010 by Ord. No.
11-2010]
Penal Law articles:
Article 220 (offenses dealing with possession and sale of controlled
substances).
(1)
Article 221 (offenses dealing with sale and possession of
marijuana).
(2)
Article 225 (offenses dealing with promoting gambling and
possession of gambling records).
(3)
(4) Article 230 (offenses dealing with prostitution).
Article 265 (offenses dealing with firearms and possession of other
dangerous weapons).
(5)
(6) Article 158 (offenses dealing with welfare fraud).
(7) Article 263 (offenses dealing with sexual performance by a child).
Article 178 (offenses dealing with criminal diversion of prescription
medications and prescriptions).
(8)
A.
Penal Law sections:
Sections 165.15(4), (6), (7) and (8), 165.40, 165.45, 165.50, 165.52,
165.54, 165.71, 165.72 and 165.73 (criminal possession of stolen
property).
(1)
(2) Sections 260.20 and 260.21 (unlawfully dealing with a child).
Sections 240.36 and 240.37 (loitering in the first degree and
loitering for the purpose of engaging in a prostitution offense).
(3)
(4) Section 170.65 (forgery of vehicle identification numbers).
B.
§ 213-3 NOISE § 213-3
210:409
(5) Section 170.70 (possession of vehicle identification numbers).
(6) Section 175.10 (falsifying business records).
Other sections:
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 415-a, illegal dismantling of junk and/or
salvaged vehicles.
(1)
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law § 123, illegal manufacture, sale or
distribution of liquor, wine or beer.
(2)
Tax Law Article 18, possession, use, sale or offer for sale of any
alcoholic beverage.
(3)
Tax Law Article 20, possession, use, sale or offer for sale of any
cigarette or tobacco products.
(4)
(5) Social Services Law § 147, food stamp program fraud.
(6) Public Health Law § 3383, imitation controlled substances.
(7) Agriculture and Markets Law.
C.
Miscellaneous:
Suffering or permitting the premises to become disorderly,
including suffering or permitting fighting or lewdness.
(1)
Operating a business at the premises in a manner which causes it
to be a source of disruption for the neighborhood and/or a focal
point of police attention.
(2)
Activities which result in numerous police investigations within
a six-month period of time. [Added 10-7-2010 by Ord. No.
11-2010]
(3)
Permitting situations or conditions which allow rodents, insects
and other vermin to live on or in real property and/or failing to take
reasonable actions to abate, eliminate and/or exterminate rodents,
insects, and other vermin when the landowner, occupant or user
of such real property becomes aware or should have known of
the existence of such rodents, insects and vermin infestation. It is
the intention of this section to declare rodent, insect, and vermin
infestation as a public nuisance and to take whatever actions are
permitted to declare those persons responsible for the infestation,
including but not limited to occupants, owners, or any other entity
occupying said real property. [Added 10-17-2013 by Ord. No.
11-2013]
(4)
D.
It shall be prima facie evidence that violations are occurring where an
arrest for a violation of any of such provisions has been made within 30
days prior to the issuance of notice pursuant to this chapter.
E.
§ 213-3 AUBURN CODE § 213-3
210:410
SITE — A place, location, or piece of property set aside for a specific use.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TESTIMONY — Oral, written or other documented evidence tending to
show or prove the truth of the matter asserted.
VIOLATION — Conduct, or evidence of conduct, prohibited under the City
of Auburn Nuisances Law. A violation does not require criminal prosecution
and conviction, but only a preponderance of evidence that the prohibited
conduct is occurring or has occurred. Evidence of prohibited conduct may
include, but is not limited to, police reports, investigative reports, execution
of search warrants, research of search warrants, results of police
surveillance, arrest and/or conviction of local and state and federal laws,
activities associated with trafficking of controlled substances, finding of
weapons and/or controlled substances on or near the property, increased
volume of traffic associated with the property.
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, on the same
lot with a building or a group of buildings, which open space lies between
the principal building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 213-4. Evidence and presumptions. [Added 11-3-2005 by Ord. No.
15-200547]
A. Evidence. In any action under this subsection, evidence of the common
fame and general reputation of the building, structure or place, of the
inhabitants or occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto shall be
competent evidence to prove the existence of a property or building
nuisance.
B. Scienter. If evidence of the general reputation of the building, structure
or place, or of the inhabitants or occupants thereof, is sufficient to
establish the existence of the nuisance, it shall be prima facie evidence
of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and
responsibility for the nuisance, on the part of the owners, lessors,
lessees, and all those in possession of or having charge of, as agent or
otherwise, or having any interest in any form in the property, real or
personal, used in conducting or maintaining the property or building
nuisance.
C. Presumptions for the purposes of this section.
(1) Any building, building accessory, business office, lot, or yard,
wherein, within the period of one year prior to the commencement
of an action under this chapter, there have occurred two or more
convictions, as defined in § 213-3 of the chapter, on the part of the
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 213-4, Public nuisances, as amended.
See now the definition of "public nuisance" in § 213-3.
§ 213-3 NOISE § 213-4
210:411
§ 213-5. Administrative remedies for property and building
nuisances. [Amended 11-3-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005]
lessees, owners, operators, or occupants shall be prima facie
evidence that a public nuisance exists at said location.
(2) Any building, building accessory, business office, lot, or yard,
wherein, within a one=year period prior to the commencement of
an action under this chapter, there have occurred four or more
violations as defined in § 213-3 of this chapter, on the part of the
lessees, owners, operators, or occupants, shall be prima facie
evidence that a public nuisance exists at said location.
(3) Any building, building accessory, business office, lot, or yard,
wherein, within the period of one year prior to the commencement
of an action under this chapter, there has been presented a
preponderance of evidence of repeated criminal activity which has
an adverse impact, as defined in § 213- 3 of this chapter, on such
property or neighborhood shall be prima facie evidence that a
public nuisance exists at said location.
A. There is hereby established, for the purpose of administratively
implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, a Nuisance
Abatement Committee (hereinafter referred to as "Committee") which
shall consist of the following members: the Chief of Police, Fire Chief
and City Manager.
B. In addition to enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the
Committee, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, shall be
authorized:
(1) To order the discontinuance of such activity at the building,
structure, lot, site and/or separately identifiable portion thereof
where such public nuisance exists; and/or
(2) To order the closing of the building, structure, lot and/or separately
identifiable portion thereof necessary to abate the nuisance; and/or
(3) To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a
period of one year a certificate of occupancy issued for such
premises, and to prevent the owner from obtaining a new
certificate of occupancy for another location for the period of
suspension or revocation; and/or
(4) To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a
period of one year any occupational license or permit issued by the
City related to the conduct of a business or trade at the premises,
which suspension or revocation shall also apply to any other
locations operated by the holder for which the license or permit is
required; and/or
§ 213-4 AUBURN CODE § 213-5
210:412
§ 213-6. Service of notice.
§ 213-7. Posting of orders.
(5) To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a
period of one year eligibility to secure grants or loans from the City
of Auburn; and/or
(6) Any combination of the above.
A. Prior to the issuance of orders by the Committee, the Committee shall
give notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner, lessor, lessee
and the mortgagee of a building, structure, lot, site and/or separately
identifiable portion thereof wherein the public nuisance is being
conducted, maintained or permitted. Such notice shall be served upon
an owner pursuant to Article 3 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon
a lessor or lessee pursuant to § 735 of the Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law, and upon a mortgagee by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, sent to the mortgagee's last known address,
provided that any service other than delivery to the person to be served
shall be complete immediately upon delivering, mailing or posting
without the necessity of filing proof of service with the clerk of any
court before the hearing. The person in whose name the real estate
affected by the order of the Committee is recorded in the office of the
County Clerk shall be presumed to be the owner thereof.
B. The lack of knowledge, acquiescence or participation in or
responsibility for a public nuisance on the part of the owners, lessors,
lessees, mortgagees and all those persons in possession or having
charge of, as agent or otherwise, or having any interest in the property,
real or personal, used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance
shall not be a defense by such owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees and
other persons.
A. Orders of the Committee issued pursuant to this section shall be posted
at the building, structure, lot, site and/or separately identifiable portion
thereof where a public nuisance exists or is occurring in violation of law
and shall be mailed to the owner of record thereof within one business
day of the posting.
B. Five business days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to this
section, upon the written direction of the Committee, the Police
Department of the City of Auburn is hereby authorized to act upon and
enforce such order. Where the Committee closes a building, structure,
lot, site and/or separately identifiable portion thereof pursuant to this
section, such closing shall be for such period as the Committee shall
direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of more than one
year from the posting of the order pursuant to this section. If the owner,
lessor, lessee or mortgagee shall file a bond in an amount determined
by the Committee, but which may not exceed the value of the property
ordered to be closed, and submits proof satisfactory to the Committee
§ 213-5 NOISE § 213-7
210:413
§ 213-8. Civil remedies for property and building nuisances. [Added
11-3-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005]
that the nuisance has been abated and will not be created, maintained
or permitted for such period of time as the building, structure, lot, site
and/or separately identifiable portion thereof has been directed to be
closed by the order of the Committee, then the Committee may vacate
the provisions of the order that directed the closing thereof.
C. A closing directed by the Committee pursuant to this section shall not
constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the City of the
closed premises.
D. The Committee may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out and
give full effect to the provisions of this section. [Added 11-3-2005 by
Ord. No. 15-2005]
E. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this section and the
applications of such provisions to other persons and circumstances
shall not be rendered invalid thereby. [Added 11-3-2005 by Ord. No.
15-2005]
A. The Corporation Counsel may bring and maintain a civil proceeding in
the name of the City of Auburn for the following types of relief:
(1) Permanent injunction.
(2) Temporary closing order.
(3) Temporary restraining order.
(4) Temporary injunction.
(5) Civil penalties.
B. Procedure.
(1) The summons. The Corporation Counsel shall name as defendants
the building, structure or place wherein the public nuisance is
being conducted, maintained or permitted, by describing it by Tax
Map number and/or street address and at least one of the owners of
some part of or an interest in the property.
(2) The complaint.
(a) The Corporation Counsel shall bring and maintain a civil
proceeding in the name of the City of Auburn in any court of
competent jurisdiction to permanently enjoin the public
nuisance and the persons conducting, maintaining or
permitting the public nuisance, as defined in § 213-3 of this
chapter, from further conducting, maintaining, or permitting
the public nuisance in the manner provided within. The owner,
§ 213-7 AUBURN CODE § 213-8
210:414
operator, and/or lessee of a building, structure or place
wherein the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or
permitted may be made defendants in the action.
(b) The venue of such action shall be in the county where the
public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted.
(c) The existence of an adequate remedy at law shall not prevent
the granting of temporary or permanent relief pursuant to this
chapter.
(d) The civil action shall be commenced by the filing of a summons
and complaint alleging the facts constituting the nuisance.
(e) The complaint shall name as defendants the building, structure
or place wherein the nuisance is being conducted, maintained
or permitted, by describing it by Tax Map number and/or street
address and at least one of the owners who possess some part
of or an interest in the property.
(f) Any complaint filed under this chapter shall be verified or
accompanied by affidavit(s) for purposes of showing that the
owner or his/her agent has notice of the nuisance and has had
an opportunity to abate the nuisance.
(g) The complaint or affidavit shall contain a description of the
attempts by the applicant to notify and locate the owner of the
property and/or the owner's agent.
(h) The complaint or affidavit shall describe the adverse impact
associated with the property on the surrounding
neighborhood.
(3) In rem jurisdiction over building, structure, or place. In rem
jurisdiction shall be complete over the building, structure or place
wherein the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or
permitted by affixing the summons to the door of the building,
structure or place and by mailing the summons by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to one of the owners who
possesses some part of or an interest in the property. Proof of
service shall be filed within two days thereafter with the Clerk of
the court designated in the summons. Service shall be complete
upon such filing.
(4) Service of summons on other defendants. Defendant(s), other than
the building, structure or place wherein the public nuisance is
being conducted, maintained or permitted, shall be served with the
summons as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(5) Notice of pendency. With respect to any action commenced or to be
commenced pursuant to this chapter, the Corporation Counsel may
§ 213-8 NOISE § 213-8
210:415
file a notice of pendency pursuant to the provisions of Article 65 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(6) Presumption of ownership. The owner of the real estate affected by
the action shall be presumed to be the person in whose name the
real estate is recorded in the office of the City of Auburn Assessor
and/or the office of the Clerk of the County of Cayuga.
(7) Presumption of employment or agency. Whenever there is
testimony that a person was the manager, operator, supervisor, or
in any other way in charge of the premises at the time a public
nuisance was being conducted, maintained or permitted, such
evidence shall be presumptive that he or she was an agent or
employee of the owner or lessee of the building, structure or place
considered to be a nuisance.
(8) Penalty. If, upon the trial of an action under this chapter, or upon a
motion for summary judgment in an action under this chapter, a
finding is made that the defendant has conducted, maintained or
permitted a public nuisance defined in this chapter, a penalty may
be awarded in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each day it is
found that the defendant conducted, maintained or permitted the
public nuisance after notice to abate has been given by the City.
Upon recovery, such penalty shall be paid into the general fund of
the City.
(9) Enforcement. A judgment pursuant to this chapter shall be
enforced by the City of Auburn Police Department and the Office of
Corporation Counsel.
C. Judgment awarding permanent injunction.
(1) A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this
chapter, may direct the Auburn Police Department to seize and
remove from the building, structure or place all material,
equipment and instrumentalities used in the creation and
maintenance of the public nuisance and shall direct the sale by the
Auburn Police Department of such property in the manner provided
for the sale of personal property under execution pursuant to the
provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The net proceeds of
any such sale, after deduction of the lawful expenses involved, shall
be paid into the general fund of the City.
(2) A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this
chapter may authorize agents of the City to forthwith remove and
correct construction and structural alterations in violation of the
City housing code. Any and all costs associated with these repairs
or alterations shall become a lien against said property and shall
have priority before any mortgage or other lien that exists prior to
such filing except tax and assessment liens and any nuisance
abatement lien.
§ 213-8 AUBURN CODE § 213-8
210:416
(3) A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this
chapter, may direct the closing of the building, structure or place
by the Auburn Police Department, to the extent necessary to abate
the nuisance, and shall direct the Auburn Police Department to post
a copy of the judgment and a printed notice of such closing
conforming to the requirements of § 213-8J of this chapter.
(4) The closing directed by the judgment shall be for such period as the
court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of
more than one year from the posting of the judgment provided for
in this subsection.
(5) If the owner shall file a bond in the value of the property ordered to
be closed and submits proof to the court that the nuisance has been
abated and will not be created, maintained or permitted for such
period of time as the building, structure or place has been directed
to be closed in the judgment, the court may vacate the provisions of
the judgment that directed the closing of the building, structure or
place.
(6) A closing by the Auburn Police Department pursuant to this
subsection shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or
control by the Auburn Police Department of the closed premises.
(7) Upon the request of the Corporation Counsel or the City Manager,
the City of Auburn Police Department shall assist in the
enforcement of a judgment awarding a permanent injunction
entered in an action brought pursuant to this chapter.
(8) A judgment rendered awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to
this chapter shall be and become a lien upon the building, structure
or place named in the complaint in such action, such lien to date
from the time of filing a notice of liens pending in the office of the
Clerk of the county wherein the building, structure or place is
located. Every such nuisance abatement lien shall have priority
before any mortgage or other lien that exists prior to such filing
except tax and assessment liens.
(9) A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this
chapter shall provide, in addition to the costs and disbursements
allowed by the Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon satisfactory
proof by affidavit or such other evidence as may be submitted, the
actual costs, expenses and disbursements of the City in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
D. Preliminary injunction.
(1) Generally.
(a) Pending an action for a permanent injunction as provided for in
this article, the Court may grant a preliminary injunction
enjoining a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter
§ 213-8 NOISE § 213-8
210:417
and the person or persons conducting, maintaining or
permitting the public nuisance from further conducting,
maintaining or permitting the public nuisance. An order
granting the preliminary injunction shall direct a trial of the
issues at the earliest possible time. Where preliminary
injunction has been granted, the court shall render a decision
with respect to a permanent injunction at its earliest
convenience after the conclusion of the trial. A temporary
closing order may be granted pending a hearing for a
preliminary injunction where it appears by clear and
convincing evidence that a nuisance within the scope of this
chapter is being conducted, maintained or permitted and that
the public health, safety or welfare immediately requires the
granting of a temporary closing order. A temporary restraining
order may be granted pending a hearing for a preliminary
injunction where it appears by clear and convincing evidence
that a nuisance within the scope of this chapter is being
conducted, maintained or permitted.
(b) Motion papers for preliminary injunction. The Corporation
Counsel shall show, by affidavit and such other evidence as
may be submitted, that there is a cause of action for an
injunction abating a nuisance within the scope of this chapter.
(c) A preliminary injunction shall be enforced by the Corporation
Counsel and the City of Auburn Police Department, If the court
grants a preliminary injunction, the provisions of this article
shall be applicable.
E. Temporary closing order.
(1) If, on a motion for a preliminary injunction pursuant to this section,
the Corporation Counsel shall show by clear and convincing
evidence that a nuisance within the scope of this chapter is being
conducted, maintained or permitted and that the public health,
safety or welfare immediately requires a temporary closing order, a
temporary order closing such part of the building, structure or
place wherein the nuisance is being conducted, maintained or
permitted may be granted without notice, pending order of the
court granting or refusing the preliminary injunction and until
further order of the court. Upon granting a temporary closing
order, the court shall hold a hearing for the preliminary injunction.
(2) Service of temporary closing order. Unless the court orders
otherwise, a temporary closing order together with the papers
upon which it was based and a notice of hearing for the preliminary
injunction shall be personally served, in the same manner as a
summons as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
F. Temporary restraining order.
§ 213-8 AUBURN CODE § 213-8
210:418
(1) A temporary restraining order may be granted pending a hearing
for preliminary injunction where it appears by clear and convincing
evidence that a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter is
being conducted, maintained, or permitted and that the public
health, safety, or welfare immediately requires the granting of a
temporary restraining order. This order shall restrain the
defendants and all persons from removing or transferring off the
property or in any manner interfering with the fixtures and
movable property used in conducting, maintaining or permitting
the public nuisance and from further conducting, maintaining or
permitting the public nuisance. A temporary restraining order may
be granted without notice, pending order of the court granting or
refusing the preliminary injunction and until further order of the
court, Upon granting a temporary restraining order, the court shall
direct the holding of a hearing for the preliminary injunction.
(2) Service of temporary restraining order. Unless the court orders
otherwise, a temporary restraining order and the papers upon
which it was based and a notice of hearing for the preliminary
injunction shall be personally served in the same manner as a
summons as provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
G. Temporary closing order; enforcement of temporary restraining order.
(1) If, on motion for a preliminary injunction, the Corporation Counsel
submits evidence warranting both a temporary closing order and a
temporary restraining order, the court shall grant both orders.
(2) Enforcement of temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders. Temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders shall be enforced by the Corporation Counsel
and the City of Auburn Police Department.
H. Inventory upon service of temporary closing orders and temporary
restraining orders. The officers serving a temporary restraining order
shall forthwith make and return to the court an inventory of personal
property situated in and used in conducting, maintaining or permitting
a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter and shall enter upon
the building, structure or place for such purpose. Such inventory shall
be taken in any manner which is deemed likely to evidence a true and
accurate representation of the personal property subject to such
inventory, including, but not limited to, photographing such personal
property.
I. Closing of premises pursuant to temporary closing orders and
temporary restraining orders. The officers serving a temporary
restraining order shall, upon service of the order, command all persons
present in the building, structure or place to vacate the premises
forthwith. Upon the building, structure or place being vacated, the
premises shall be securely locked and all keys delivered to the officers
serving the order, who thereafter shall deliver the keys to the fee owner,
§ 213-8 NOISE § 213-8
210:419
§ 213-9. Temporary restraining order; defendant's remedies. [Added
11-3-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005]
lessor or lessee of the building, structure or place involved. If the fee
owner, lessor or lessee is not at the building, structure or place when
the order is being executed, the officers shall securely padlock the
premises and retain the keys until the fee owner, lessor or lessee of the
building is ascertained, at which time the officers shall deliver the keys
to such owner, lessor or lessee, if such individual resides within Cayuga
County.
J. Posting of temporary closing orders and temporary restraining orders.
Upon service of a temporary restraining order, the officer shall post a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the
principal doors at entrances of such premises where the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted. In addition,
where a temporary restraining order has been granted, the officers
shall affix, in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the principal
doors at entrances of such premises, a printed notice that shall state
that certain described activity is prohibited by court order and that
removal of property is prohibited by court order. If the temporary
restraining order directs that the premises are to be closed by court
order, the notice shall contain the legend "Closed by Court Order" in
block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone intending or
likely to enter the premises, the date of the order, the court from which
issued and the name of the office or agency posting the notice.
K. Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction bond required. A
temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction shall not issue
under this chapter, except upon the giving of a bond or security by the
applicant, in the amount of $1,000, for the payment of such costs and
damages as may be incurred or suffered by any party who is found to be
wrongfully restrained or enjoined. A bond or security shall not be
required of the State of New York, municipal corporations, or political
subdivisions of the State of New York.
A. Temporary restraining order to be vacated; inspection provision.
(1) A temporary restraining order shall be vacated, upon notice to the
Corporation Counsel, if the defendant shows by affidavit and such
other proof as may be submitted that the public nuisance within the
scope of this chapter has been abated. An order vacating a
temporary closing order or a temporary restraining order shall
include a provision authorizing agencies of the City to inspect the
building, structure or place, which is the subject of an action
pursuant to this chapter, periodically without notice, during the
pendency of the action, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or
not the public nuisance has been resumed. Intentional
disobedience of, or resistance to, an inspection provision of an
order vacating a temporary restraining order, in addition to any
other punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on
§ 213-8 AUBURN CODE § 213-9
210:420
§ 213-10. Temporary receiver. [Added 11-3-2005 by Ord. No.
15-200548
conviction, by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
not exceeding six months, or by both. The Police Department shall,
upon the request of the Corporation Counsel, or upon the direction
of the City Manager, assist in the enforcement of an inspection
provision of an order vacating a temporary restraining order.
(2) A temporary restraining order may be vacated by the court, upon
notice to the Corporation Counsel, when the defendant gives an
undertaking and the court is satisfied that the public health, safety
or welfare will be protected adequately during the pendency of the
action. The undertaking shall be in an amount equal to the assessed
valuation of the building, structure or place where the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted or in such
other amount as may be fixed by the court. The defendant shall pay
to the City, in the event a judgment of permanent injunction is
obtained, its actual costs, expenses and disbursements in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
B. Vacating a temporary injunction or a temporary restraining order. When
the defendant gives an undertaking in the amount of the civil penalty
demanded in the complaint together with costs, disbursements and the
projected annual costs of the prosecution of the action to be determined
by the court, upon a motion on notice to the Corporation Counsel, a
temporary injunction or a temporary restraining order shall be vacated
by the court. The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
governing undertakings shall be applicable to this chapter.
A. Appointment, duration and removal. In any action wherein the
complaint alleges that the nuisance is being conducted or maintained in
the residential portions of any building or structure or portion thereof,
which are occupied in whole, or in part, as the home, residence or
sleeping place of one or more human beings, the court may, upon
motion on notice by the plaintiff, appoint a temporary receiver to
manage and operate the property during the pendency of the action, in
lieu of a temporary closing order. A temporary receivership shall not
continue after final judgment unless otherwise directed by the court.
Upon the motion of any party, including the temporary receiver, or on
its own initiative, the appointing court may remove a temporary
receiver at any time.
B. Powers and duties. The temporary receiver shall have such powers and
duties as the court shall direct, including, but not limited to, collecting
and holding all rents due from all tenants, leasing or renting portions of
the building or structure, making or authorizing other persons to make
necessary repairs or to maintain the property, hiring security or other
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 213-8 through 213-10 as
§§ 213-11 through 213-13, respectively.
§ 213-9 NOISE § 213-10
210:421
§ 213-11. Additional notice; release of information; proceeding to
remove tenant.
personnel necessary for the safe and proper operation of a dwelling,
prosecuting or defending suits flowing from his or her management of
the property and retaining counsel therefor, and expending funds from
the collected rents in furtherance of the foregoing powers.
C. Oath. A temporary receiver, before entering upon his or her duties,
shall be sworn or shall affirm faithfully and fairly to discharge the trust
committed to such receiver. The oath or affirmation may be waived
upon consent of all parties.
D. Undertaking. A temporary receiver shall give an undertaking, in an
amount to be fixed by the court making the appointment, that such
receiver will faithfully discharge his or her duties.
E. Accounts. A temporary receiver shall keep written accounts itemizing
receipts and expenditures, and describing the property and naming the
depository of receivership funds, which shall be open to inspection by
any person having an apparent interest in the property. Upon motion of
the temporary receiver, or of any person having an apparent interest in
the property, the court may require the keeping of particular records, or
direct or limit inspection, or require presentation of a temporary
receiver's accounts. Notice of motion for the presentation of a
temporary receiver's accounts shall be served upon the sureties on the
temporary receiver's undertaking as well as upon each party.
A. Upon the arrest and/or conviction of an individual for any of the aboveenumerated
offenses, the Police Department of the City of Auburn shall
notify the legal owner of record of the arrest and/or conviction by
regular mail to the address on file with the Assessor of the City of
Auburn.
B. In the event that the owner of any building, structure, lot, site and/or
separately identifiable portion thereof commences a summary
proceeding pursuant to Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law
§ 711, Subdivision 5, to remove a tenant arrested and/or convicted of
any of the above-enumerated offenses, the City of Auburn shall, if
requested by the owner of record in writing, provide to the court having
jurisdiction any and all releasable information in its possession which
may support the owner's summary proceeding to evict the offending
tenant.
C. In the event that the owner of any building, structure, lot, site and/or
separately identifiable portion thereof, upon notice from the City of
Auburn of an arrest and/or conviction, commences and concludes a
summary proceeding to remove the tenant so arrested and/or
convicted, whether the proceeding is successful or not, the arrest and/
or conviction shall not be deemed a conviction pursuant to § 213-3.
§ 213-10 AUBURN CODE § 213-12
210:422
§ 213-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-3-2005 by Ord. No.
15-2005]
§ 213-13. Regulations; quarterly report.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy or to permit
any other person to use or occupy any building, structure, lot, site and/
or separately identifiable portion thereof ordered closed by the
Committee, Corporation Counsel or a court of competent jurisdiction.
Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the Committee, Corporation
Counsel or a court of competent jurisdiction while it remains in effect,
in addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or both, provided that such order contains therein a
notice of such penalty. The Auburn Police Department shall, upon the
request of the Office of Corporation Counsel, or upon the direction of
the City Manager, assist in the enforcement of this subsection.
B. Any intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the
orders and/or injunctions issued by the Committee, Corporation
Counsel or a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to this chapter, in
addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who receives notice
of commencement of a summary proceeding pursuant to the Real
Property Actions and Proceeding Law issued by an owner of a building,
structure, lot, site or separately identifiable portion thereof in response
to notification from the City of Auburn of an arrest or conviction of any
of the enumerated offenses herein thereafter intentionally to cause
damage or intentionally allow others to damage any property, real or
personal, of the owner. Such conduct shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
D. Violations of this chapter may also be referred to the Code Enforcement
Office or any other appropriate municipal department and be
prosecuted pursuant to the Code of the City of Auburn.
A. The Committee may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out and
give full effect to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Committee shall prepare a quarterly report to be submitted to City
Council summarizing the actions taken under this chapter and
indicating the results of such actions.
C. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this section and the
applications of such provisions to other persons and circumstances
shall not be rendered invalid thereby. [Added 5-27-2004 by Ord. No.
7-2004]
§ 213-12 NOISE § 213-14
210:423
§ 213-14. Chapter not exclusive remedy. [Added 11-3-2005 by Ord.
No. 15-2005]
This chapter shall not be construed to exclude any other remedy provided
by law for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people of
the City of Auburn.
Chapter 221
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 109.
Collateral loan brokers — See Ch. 140.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Public conduct — See Ch. 234.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 273.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 221-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddlers and
Solicitors Ordinance of the City of Auburn, New York."
§ 221-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Includes, except as hereinafter expressly
provided, any person, either principal or agent, who from any public street
or public place or by going from house to house or place of business to place
of business, on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for
sale or barters, or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares
or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or any other item or items
of value, except milk, newspapers and food distributed on regular customer
routes.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from place to place or house
to house or stands in any street or public place taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or
any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk), or for services
to be performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing, or repairing
any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The term "solicitor"
shall, however, also mean and include any person taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or
any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk), or for services
to be performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing, or repairing
any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery at the home or residence
§ 213-14 AUBURN CODE § 221-2
210:424
of any person who has been solicited prior thereto by telephone or has
responded to any type of advertising media requiring an appointment or
consultation or sales presentation in the home or place of residence of such
person.
§ 221-3. Exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to:
(1) Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
(3) Merchants or their employees delivering orders to customers at
their residence or place of business.
(4) Persons under the age of 18 years.
(5) Peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities.
(6) Any honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces or any
other person who has procured a license issued by the County
Clerk as provided by § 32 of the General Business Law of the State
of New York.
B. Nonprofit organizations and persons working for such organizations
shall also be exempt. However, such organizations shall register
annually with the City Manager in the event they plan to engage in
vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting and shall indicate the type of
activities to be undertaken and the time when they will be performed. It
shall be the responsibility of such organizations to furnish identification
for their representatives which must be exhibited upon demand.
C. Interstate commerce; certificate of compliance.
(1) This chapter shall not apply so as unlawfully to interfere with
interstate commerce, and to that end all persons claiming to be
engaged in interstate commerce shall apply to the City Manager for
a certificate of compliance, using the form of application described
in § 221-5. The applicant shall also submit to the City Manager
satisfactory evidence that he or she is engaged in interstate
commerce.
(2) When the applicant shall have established to the satisfaction of the
City Manager that he or she is engaged in interstate commerce, the
City Manager shall issue to him or her, without charge, a certificate
of compliance stating, among other things, that such person has
complied with the requirements of this section and has
satisfactorily established that he or she is engaged in interstate
commerce. Such certificate shall be carried with the person
exercising it and shall be exhibited upon demand. Each such
§ 221-2 NOISE § 221-3
210:425
§ 221-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City
to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined or assist the same
without first having obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a
license therefor.
§ 221-5. Application for license.
§ 221-6. Cash deposit or bond.
An application for a license as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall also be
accompanied by a cash deposit of $5,000 or a surety company bond of
$5,000 or other bond secured by sufficient collateral, said bond to be
approved by the Corporation Counsel as to form and surety conditioned
certificate shall be invalid after one year from its date of issue.
The securing of any such certificate by fraud or misrepresentation
by any person not in fact engaged in interstate commerce shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the City Manager a written application upon a form furnished by
the City Manager and shall file at the same time satisfactory proof of
good character. Such application shall give:
(1) The number and kind of vehicle to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the license is desired.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he or she desires to sell
or the kind of service he or she desires to perform.
(3) The method of distribution.
(4) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor
or felony and, if so, the date of conviction, nature of the offense,
penalty imposed and name and address of the court.
(6) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he or she
represents.
(7) The length of time the applicant desires the license.
(8) Such other information as may be required by the City Manager to
substantiate the above items.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Director of Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing
and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined
and approved.
§ 221-3 AUBURN CODE § 221-6
210:426
for making a final delivery of the goods, wares, or merchandise ordered or
services to be performed in accordance with the terms of such order or,
failing therein, that the advance payment on such order be refunded. Any
person aggrieved by the action of any licensed solicitor shall have right by
action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such
bond shall remain in full force and effect and, in case of a cash deposit,
such deposit shall be retained by the City for a period of 90 days after the
expiration of any such license, unless sooner released by the Council.
§ 221-7. Investigation; issuance of license; appeals. [Amended
8-20-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015; 4-20-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 221-8. License not assignable.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who permits
it to be used by any other person, and any person who uses such license
A. Upon the filing of the application, bond and certificate as provided in
the preceding sections, the City Manager shall, upon his or her
approval of such application, issue to the applicant a license as
provided in § 221-4, License required. Except as hereinafter provided,
no license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
B. Before issuing a license, the applicant shall be referred to the Auburn
Police Department Identification Bureau for the purpose of scheduling
an appointment for submission of civilian fingerprints.
C. The applicant's fingerprints and any applicable fees shall be forwarded
to the Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) in the form and
manner as prescribed by DCJS for a complete criminal background
check. Applicants are responsible for all fees associated with the
fingerprint submission. Applicants may contact the Auburn Police
Department I.D. Bureau for a fee schedule.
D. Before issuing a license, the City Manager shall refer the application to
the Chief of Police for investigation. The Chief of Police or his
authorized designee shall review all information provided by DCJS in
connection with the applicant's criminal background and investigation
and will either "Approve" or "Disapprove" said application.
E. If the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which is
determined to render the applicant unfit to carry on the aforesaid
operation, proper consideration will be given to New York State
Correction Law §§ 701 through 703-b (or Correction Law Article 23)
and §§ 751 through 753 (or Correction Law Article 23-A) in making any
such determination.
F. Appeal to Council. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the
City Manager may apply to the Council therefor, and the same may be
granted or refused by the Council.
§ 221-6 NOISE § 221-8
210:427
granted to any other person, shall each be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 221-9. Replacement of lost or damaged license.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder
or his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the
original application and bond may be issued by the City Manager upon
the filing with him or her by the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the
circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for its
recovery.
§ 221-10. Form and contents of license.
All licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper
reference stubs kept for that purpose, numbered in the order in which they
are issued, and shall state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind
of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the
number of the license, the date of issuance and expiration of the license, the
fee paid and the name and address of the licensee.
§ 221-11. Expiration of license.
Such licenses shall automatically expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance of such license, but such licenses may specifically state and
provide for an earlier expiration date.
§ 221-12. Restrictions; exhibition of license.
§ 221-13. License fees.
A. Such license shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying
on the business for which the person is licensed. No license shall be
granted to a person under 18 years of age. No applicant to whom a
license has been refused or who has a license which has been revoked
shall make further application until a period of at least six months shall
have elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation, unless he
or she can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
B. Every licensee, while exercising his or her license, shall carry the
license with him or her and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
A. The license fee for each person licensed as a hawker, peddler or
solicitor shall be $100 per annum, or fraction thereof.
B. The license fee for each person licensed to assist a hawker, peddler or
solicitor shall be $50 per annum, or fraction thereof. For the purpose of
this chapter, a person who assists a hawker, peddler or solicitor shall be
deemed to be any person who participates in delivering merchandise or
any other items sold, performs any services in or about the customer's
§ 221-8 AUBURN CODE § 221-13
210:428
§ 221-14. Revocation of license.
The City Manager may, at any time, for a violation of this chapter or any
other provision of this Code or any law, suspend or revoke any license issued
hereunder as provided by law.49 When a license shall be revoked, no refund
of any unearned portion of the license shall be made.
§ 221-15. Prohibited acts.
premises or otherwise generally renders aid or assistance, except
participation in selling or soliciting orders.
C. A license fee shall not be required of any honorably discharged veteran
of World War I, World War II, the Korean War or the Vietnam War.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private property for
the purpose of peddling or soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of any
day or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. of any day except upon the invitation
of the householder or occupant.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his or her trade
to ring the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is
painted or otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign
containing any or all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors," "No Agents," or other wording, the purpose of which
purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises.
C. No peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend, or sell his or her goods or
wares within 200 feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or
private school or for school purposes, nor shall he or she permit his or
her cart, wagon or vehicle to stand on any public highway within said
distance of such school property.
D. No peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale. No person
shall by any trick or device or by any false representation obtain or
attempt to obtain admission to the house or garage of any person or
corporation in the City.
E. No peddler or solicitor shall blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other
noisy device to attract public attention to his or her wares, or shout or
cry out his or her wares.
F. It shall be unlawful to create or maintain any booth or stand or place
any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or
public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Licensing.
§ 221-13 NOISE § 221-15
210:429
§ 221-16. Orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing
made in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in
advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the
deposit is paid to the solicitor.
§ 221-17. Records.
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep a record of all applications
and of all licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter giving the
number and date of each license, the fee paid and the date of suspension
and/or revocation of all licenses suspended or revoked.
§ 221-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Code.
G. No peddler or solicitor shall represent or state or otherwise indicate
that he or she is not intending to sell or otherwise enter into a contract
with any person in the household.
H. Entry on private residential premises.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, no person
shall enter upon any private residential property in the City of
Auburn for the purpose of vending, peddling or soliciting an order
for any merchandise, device, work, services, book, periodical or
printed matter whatsoever; nor for the purpose of soliciting alms or
a subscription or a contribution to any church, charitable or public
institution; nor for the purpose of distributing in person any
handbill, pamphlet, tract, notice or advertising material; nor for the
purpose of selling or distributing any ticket or chance whatsoever
without the consent of the occupant of said premises previously
given.
(2) Exception. This Subsection H shall not apply to organizations the
principal beneficiaries of which are minors, volunteer fire
departments, and the solicitation of members of an organization,
society or church by its own members.
I. Any contract or sale made in violation of Subsection D, G or H shall be
null and void and of no effect as to the person solicited, and the
merchandise delivered shall be forfeited and any sums paid by the
person so solicited shall become immediately due and payable jointly
and severally by the peddler or solicitor and his or her principal.
§ 221-15 AUBURN CODE § 221-19
210:430
§ 221-19. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the foregoing, the court may also suspend or revoke any
license of any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 225
PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Business improvement districts — See Ch.
129.
Fees — See Ch. 164.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 178.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Water service — See Ch. 297.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 221-19 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 221-19
225:431

Part 1
[Adopted 3-28-1991 By L.L. NPol.a 2n-n1i9n9g1 As Ch. 8 Of The 1991 Code]
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 225-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Planning
Ordinance."
§ 225-2. Conflicts with state law.
In case of conflict between any provisions in this Part 1 and Article 3 of the
General City Law, the provisions of Article 3 of the General City Law shall
control. It is intended by the enactment of this Part 1 that the procedures
set forth herein shall be in addition to and complementary to Article 3 of the
General City Law.
§ 225-3. Planning Board established.
There shall be a City Planning Board appointed by the Mayor.
§ 225-4. Membership; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
§ 225-5. Rights of members who are municipal officials.
The municipal officials on the Planning Board shall not, by reason of
membership thereon, forfeit their right to exercise the powers, perform the
duties or receive the compensation of the municipal office held by them
during such membership.
A. Terms. The Board shall consist of seven members, two of whom may be
officials of the City. The City Engineer shall also be an ex officio member
of the Planning Board without the right to vote. The respective terms of
the members, other than officers of the City, first appointed shall be
one, two and three years from and after appointment, and their
successors shall be appointed for a term of three years from and after
the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. The terms of
municipal officers shall expire upon the expiration of the term of the
Mayor.
B. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Any member may
be removed by the appointing authority for cause and after a public
hearing.
C. Compensation. The members of the Planning Board shall receive no
payment for their services as members thereof.
§ 225-1 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-6
225:433
§ 225-6. Chairman.
The Chairman of the City Planning Board shall be designated by the Mayor
at the beginning of each calendar year for a one-year term, but upon his or
her failure to do so, said Chairman shall be elected from and by the Board
members.
§ 225-7. Employment of personnel.
The City Manager shall have the power and authority to employ experts and
a staff upon request of the City Planning Board and to approve such other
expenses of the Board as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all
the appropriation that may be made for such Board by the Council.
§ 225-8. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The City Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations in respect to
procedure before it and in respect to any subject matter over which it has
jurisdiction under this Part 1 or any other statute, ordinance or law, after
public hearing by the City Planning Board and subject to the approval of the
Council.
§ 225-6 AUBURN CODE § 225-8
225:434
ARTICLE II
Master Plan and Approval of Plats
§ 225-9. Master Plan.
§ 225-10. Report by Planning Board on certain actions.
§ 225-11. Recording of plats.
No plat of a subdivision of land showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without
streets or highways, shall be filed or recorded in the office of the County
Clerk of Cayuga County until it has been approved by the City Planning
Board or a certificate has been issued by the City Clerk of the failure of the
City Planning Board to take action within the time specified in this Part 1.
A. Preparation, contents and purpose. The City Planning Board shall
prepare and may change a Comprehensive Master Plan for the
development of the entire area of the City, which Master Plan shall
show existing and proposed streets, bridges and tunnels and
approaches thereto, viaducts, parks, public reservations, roadways in
parks, sites for public buildings and structures, zoning districts,
pierhead and bulkhead lines, waterways and routes of public utilities
and such other features, existing and proposed, as will provide for the
protection and improvement of the City and its further growth and
development and will afford adequate facilities for the public housing,
transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, public health, safety
and general welfare of its population.
B. Approval. The Master Plan and modifications thereon shall be
submitted to the Council for its final approval. When so approved the
Master Plan and all its modifications thereof shall be on file in the office
of the City Planning Board, and certified copies thereof shall be filed in
the offices of the City Engineer and the City Clerk.
A. Prerequisite to final action. The board, commission or agency having
final jurisdiction over any matter in which the City Planning Board also
has jurisdiction shall not proceed to such final action until after referral
to the City Planning Board and the City Planning Board has made its
final report thereon to such board, commission or agency.
B. Time for making report. If the City Planning Board shall not have made
its final report thereon within 45 days from the date of reference
thereto, the board, commission or agency having final jurisdiction may
proceed to final action.
C. Extension of time. This section shall not be construed to prevent the
Council from granting, in any specific case, such longer period as it may
fix within which the City Planning Board may make its final report, and
if such longer period is granted, the board, commission or agency
having final jurisdiction shall not, in the absence of such report,
proceed to final action until that longer period shall have elapsed.
§ 225-9 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-12
225:435
§ 225-12. Procedure for approval of plats.
The procedure for approval of subdivision plats is set forth in Part 2,
Subdivision of Land, Article IV, Procedure, of this chapter.
§ 225-13. Refusal to approve plat.
Grounds for refusal to approve a plan, plat or description shall be set out in
the records of the City Planning Board.
§ 225-14. Duration of approval; duties of City Clerk.
§ 225-15. Minimum requirements for approved plats.
A. Duration. The approval by the City Planning Board or the certificate of
the City Clerk as to the date of submission of the plat and the failure of
the City Planning Board to take action thereon within 45 days shall
expire 90 days after the date of such approval or of such certificate,
unless within such ninety-day period such plat shall have been duly filed
or recorded by the owner in the office of the County Clerk of Cayuga
County.
B. Duty of City Clerk. The City Clerk is hereby authorized and charged
with the duty of filing in the office of the County Clerk of Cayuga County
a certificate showing that the City Planning Board has been so
authorized to approve plats, and the City Clerk shall issue the
aforementioned certificate of failure to take action as aforementioned.
A. Contents. Before the approval by the City Planning Board of a plat, such
plat shall show, in proper cases and when required by the City Planning
Board, a park or parks suitably located for playground or other
recreational purposes. In approving such plats the City Planning Board
shall require that the streets and highways shall be of sufficient width
and suitable grade and shall be suitably located to accommodate the
prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and air, to facilitate fire
protection, and to provide access of fire-fighting equipment to buildings
and to be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system
conforming to the Master Plan; that the land shown on such plats shall
be of such a character that it can be used safely for building purposes
without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace; that
suitable monuments have been placed at such block corners and other
necessary points as may be required by the City Planning Board and the
location thereof shall be shown on the map of such plat; that the parks
shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other
recreational uses; that all streets or other public places shown on such
plats shall be suitably graded and paved; and that sidewalks,
streetlighting standards, curbs, gutters, street trees, water mains,
sanitary sewers and storm drains or combined sewers shall be installed
in accordance with standards, specifications and procedures acceptable
to the appropriate municipal departments.
§ 225-12 AUBURN CODE § 225-15
225:436
§ 225-16. Bond in lieu of improvements; terms and conditions.
§ 225-17. Character of development to be considered.
In making any determination hereunder regarding streets, highways, parks
and required improvements, the City Planning Board shall take into
B. Performance bond in lieu of improvements. Alternatively, a
performance bond sufficient to cover the full cost of the same as
estimated by the City Planning Board or other appropriate municipal
department designated by the City Planning Board may be filed as
hereinafter provided.
C. Waiver of requirements. The City Planning Board may waive, subject to
appropriate conditions and guaranties, for such period as it may
determine, the requirements of any or all such improvements as in its
judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat or plats are
not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
A. Approval. The performance bond provided for in § 225-15 shall be
issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the Corporation
Counsel as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution.
B. Duration. Such performance bond shall run for a term to be fixed by the
City Planning Board but in no case for a longer term than three years;
provided, however, that the term of the performance bond may be
extended by the City Planning Board with the consent of the parties
thereto.
C. Reduction in bond. If the City Planning Board shall decide at any time
during the term of the performance bond that the extent of the building
development that has taken place in the subdivision is not sufficient to
warrant all the improvements covered by such performance bond or
that required improvements have been installed as provided in this
article and required by the City Planning Board in sufficient amount to
warrant reduction in the face amount of such bond, the City Planning
Board, after due notice and public hearing, may modify its
requirements for any or all of such improvements, and the face value
will cover the cost in full of the amended list of improvements required
by the City Planning Board, and any security deposited with the bond
may be reduced proportionately.
D. Default. In the event that any required improvements have not been
installed within the term of the performance bond, the Council may
thereupon declare the performance bond in default and collect the sum
remaining payable thereunder, and upon receipt of the proceeds
thereof the City shall install such improvements as are covered by such
performance bond and commensurate with the building development
that has taken place in the subdivision, but not exceeding in cost the
amount of such proceeds.
§ 225-15 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-17
225:437
consideration the prospective character of the development, whether dense
residence, open residence, business or industrial.
§ 225-18. Authority to confirm or change zoning regulations.
The City Planning Board is authorized and empowered, simultaneously with
approval of such plats provided for in this article, to confirm the zoning
regulations of land so platted as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the
City and to make such reasonable changes therein as may be necessary or
proper to improve or protect the interests of the City in its public health,
safety and general welfare in accordance with § 37 of the General City Law.
§ 225-17 AUBURN CODE § 225-18
225:438
Part 2
[Adopted 3-28-1991 By LS.uLb. dNiov.i s2io-1n9 O91f LAasn Cdh. 32 Of The 1991 Code]
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 225-19. Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Auburn."
§ 225-20. Scope and purpose.
§ 225-21. Conflicts with state law.
Should any of these regulations conflict or be inconsistent with any
provision of the General City Law, the provision of the General City Law
shall apply.
§ 225-22. Word usage and definitions.
A. Generally. It is declared to be the policy of the City Planning Board and
the City of Auburn to consider land subdivision as part of a plan for the
orderly, efficient and economical development of the City. Land to be
subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building
purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other
menace. Proper provision shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage,
and other needed improvements.
B. Streets. The proposed streets shall compose a convenient system
conforming to the Official Map, as it may be adopted, and shall be
properly related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan of the City,
as it may be adopted. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location
as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and
air, and to facilitate fire protection.
C. Park areas. In proper cases, park areas of suitable location, size and
character for playground or other recreational purposes shall be shown
on the subdivision plat.
D. Purpose of provisions. In order that land may be subdivided in
accordance with this policy, these regulations are hereby adopted.
A. Generally. As used in these regulations, words in the singular include
the plural, and those in the plural include the singular. The word
"person" includes a corporation, unincorporated association and a
partnership, as well as an individual. The word "building" includes
"structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part
thereof." The word "street" includes "avenue," "boulevard," "court,"
"expressway," "highway," "lane," "arterial" and "road." The word
"watercourse" includes "channel," "creek," "ditch," "drain," "dry run,"
§ 225-19 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-22
225:439
"spring" and "stream." The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory, subject, however, to the provisions of § 225-38
hereof.
B. Specific terms. As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to
the side or rear of two or more properties.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Auburn.
CITY ENGINEER — The Auburn City Engineer.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of street right-of-way lines.
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street intersecting another street at one end
and terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATION — The deliberate dedication of land by its owner for any
general and public uses, reserving to himself or herself no other rights
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the
public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot of which the front and rear property
lines abut on streets.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for
a public or quasi-public purpose.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET — A street, generally parallel and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally
required for satisfactory improvement and use of the street.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership, use
or improvement.
PAVEMENT — That portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular
use.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared for
official recording as required by statute, to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail
than a final plan, showing approximate proposed streets and lot layout
as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
§ 225-22 AUBURN CODE § 225-22
225:440
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to scale, indicating
salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general
layout of the proposed subdivision.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on a major traffic street and a minor street and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk,
or for other public purpose.
SETBACK OR BUILDING LINE — The line within a property defining
the required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the
adjacent right-of-way.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended
for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Classes of
streets are as follows:
STREET, PUBLIC — A street dedicated to public use.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more
lots, plots, sites or other divisions of land for immediate or future sale
or for building development, with or without streets or highways. The
term "subdivision" shall not include the sale, transfer or development
of land or any alteration of lot lines or dimensions of any lots or sites
for open space or conservation.[Amended 12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
44-1994]
Major traffic streets are those serving large volumes of
comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic and include
facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the New
York State Department of Transportation and include streets
classified as arterial thoroughfares or primary streets in the traffic
plan adopted by the Planning Board.
(1)
Collector streets are those which, in addition to giving access to
abutting properties, intercept minor streets and provide routes,
carrying considerable volumes of traffic, to community facilities
and to major traffic streets and include streets classified as
secondary streets in the traffic plan adopted by the Planning Board.
(2)
Minor streets are those used primarily to provide access to
abutting property.
(3)
Marginal access streets are minor streets, parallel and adjacent to
major traffic streets, providing access to abutting properties and
control of intersections with the major traffic streets.
(4)
§ 225-22 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-22
225:441
YARD — An open space as may be required by this Part 2 of uniform
width or depth on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
which open space lies between the principal building or group of
buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, excluding trees and shrubbery.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the
lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward.
(1)
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the
lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward.
(2)
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to
the rear yard between a building and the nearest side lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
(3)
§ 225-22 AUBURN CODE § 225-22
225:442
ARTICLE IV
Procedure
§ 225-23. Applicability.
The following procedures shall be observed by all subdividers.
§ 225-24. Submission of plans; general procedure.
§ 225-25. Preliminary plan.
A. Filing with Planning Board. Preliminary and final plans for all proposed
subdivisions of land lying within the City limits shall be filed with the
Planning Board for approval.
B. Consideration of plans and data. Subdivision plans and supporting data
submitted to the Planning Board will be considered at the Planning
Board's next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that they are
received at least 10 calendar days in advance of said meeting. The date
of submission shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled City
Planning Board meeting.
C. Authority of Planning Board. The initial plan filed with the Planning
Board for review shall be considered the official preliminary plan.
However, the Planning Board may proceed to final action at the first
consideration of a plan for a small subdivision containing no new streets
if the plan and supporting data comply with all of the requirements for
final plans. (See §§ 225-36 and 225-37.)
D. Sketch plan; purpose and scope. The subdivider may prepare a sketch
plan for informal discussion with the Planning Board prior to submitting
the official preliminary plan for review. This plan shall be for the
purpose of establishing in advance, if possible, the extent to which the
proposed subdivision conforms to the design standards of this Part 2.
A. Plan requirements. Preliminary plans and supporting data shall comply
with the provisions of this Part 2.
B. Number of copies required. Six copies of the preliminary plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Board by the subdivider.
C. Filing fee. A fee of $10 to defray the cost of subdivision review shall be
paid to the order of the City of Auburn at the filing of the preliminary
plan.
D. Disposition of copies. The Planning Board Secretary shall transmit
copies of the preliminary plan for review and recommendation by the
following officials within 10 days:
(1) City Engineer, two copies.
(2) Chief of Police, one copy.
§ 225-23 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-25
225:443
§ 225-26. Final plan.
(3) Chief of the Fire Department, one copy.
E. Action by Planning Board. Within 45 days after the meeting at which
the preliminary plan is reviewed, the Planning Board shall notify the
subdivider of the changes and modifications, if any, which must be
incorporated on the final plan before it shall be approved.
F. Conditional approval. Approval of the preliminary plan, subject to
conditions, revisions and modifications as stipulated by the Planning
Board, shall constitute conditional Planning Board approval of the
subdivision as to the character and intensity of the development and the
general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other
proposed features.
G. Waiver of requirements. Should the proposed plan be constituted of
four or fewer lots and involve no new streets, the Planning Board may
waive the general procedure requirements of the preliminary plan.
A. Time for submission. A final plan with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for final approval within one year after
Planning Board action on the preliminary plan, provided that an
extension of time may be granted by the Planning Board upon written
request. Otherwise, the plan submitted shall be considered as a new
preliminary plan.
B. Conformity to preliminary plan. The final plan shall conform in all
important respects to the preliminary plan as previously reviewed by
the Planning Board and shall incorporate all modifications and revisions
specified by the Planning Board in its conditional approval of the
preliminary plan. Otherwise the plan shall be considered as a revised
preliminary plan.
C. Submission in sections. The Planning Board may permit submission of
the final plan in sections, each covering a portion of the entire proposed
subdivision as shown on the preliminary plan.
D. Action by Planning Board; public hearing required. The Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of the official submission date
and must approve or otherwise act on the plan within 45 days of the
submission date according to General City Law § 32. The official
submission date shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting to follow receipt of the plat (complete and with
all supporting data required by the Planning Board in its action on the
preliminary layout), if received by the Planning Board through its
Secretary or receiving agent at least 10 days prior to such Planning
Board meeting.
E. Notice of hearing required. Upon the official submission of a final plan
for consideration at a regular meeting, the City shall give notice that a
public hearing will be held upon such plan. Public notice of the hearing
§ 225-25 AUBURN CODE § 225-26
225:444
shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at
least five days before such hearing.
F. Compliance with plan requirements. The final plan and supporting data
shall comply with the provisions of §§ 225-36 and 225-37 of this Part 2.
Failure to do so shall be cause for tabling the plan.
G. Number and disposition of copies. Six copies of the final plan with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the
subdivider. The Planning Board Secretary shall transmit copies to:
(1) Council, one copy.
(2) City Engineer, two copies.
(3) Chief of Police, one copy.
(4) Chief of the Fire Department, one copy.
H. Notice of approval or disapproval. Within 45 days after the public
hearing on the final plan, the Planning Board shall notify the subdivider,
in writing, of its approval or disapproval.
I. Recording after approval. Within 90 days after final approval, the
subdivider shall file for recording a copy of the final plan, or sections
thereof, bearing the approval of the Planning Board in writing. If the
final plan is not recorded within such period, the Planning Board's
approval shall expire and become null and void.
J. Copy of plan filed for recording. The copy of the final plan filed for
recording in the office of the County Clerk shall be a clear and legible
white print on linen, in accordance with the requirements of said office.
§ 225-26 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-26
225:445

ARTICLE V
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 225-27. Applicability.
The design standards listed below shall be incorporated in all proposed
plans.
§ 225-28. Suitability of land.
Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be subdivided.
In general, the Planning Board shall take the following factors into
consideration prior to the approval of any subdivision plan:
§ 225-29. Streets.
A. Safeguards against flooding.50 Subdivisions laid out on land subject to
periodic flooding shall not be approved unless adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided by the plan. The following criteria
shall be followed in making this decision:
(1) All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as not to increase the exposure to
flood hazards of adjacent lands.
(4) All public utilities and facilities are located, elevated and
constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage, these
utilities and facilities to include sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems.
B. Certain areas not to be subdivided. Areas characterized by steep slopes,
rock formations or other features shall not be subdivided into
residential lots.
A. Generally.
(1) Dimensions and design standards. Street dimensions and design
standards shall be in accordance with the prevailing standards as
established by the City Engineer.
(2) Location of major streets. The location of all major streets in the
proposed subdivision shall conform in general alignment to the
traffic plan adopted by the Planning Board.
(3) Projection of existing streets. The proposed street layout shall
provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets in the
50.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 169, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 225-27 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-29
225:447
surrounding area unless the Planning Board deems such extension
undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design.
(4) Relation to topography. Streets shall be logically related to the
topography to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
(5) Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through
traffic, but provision for street connections into and from adjacent
areas will generally be required.
(6) Access to property required. Proposed streets shall be extended to
provide access to adjoining property where necessary.
(7) Provision for street rights-of-way. Adequate street rights-of-way
shall be provided as necessary where lots in the proposal are large
enough to permit resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not
subdivided.
(8) Provision for access streets, service alleys, reverse frontage lots,
etc. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major traffic street, the Planning Board may require marginal
access streets, rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots or such
other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with the major street, and
separation of local and through traffic.
(9) New half or partial streets. New half or partial streets will not be
permitted, except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a
tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards
contained herein and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
(10) Tracts bordering existing half or partial street. Wherever a tract to
be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other
part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
(11) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as
stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts or
when designed as culs-de-sac.
(12) Reserve strips. New reserve strips, including those controlling
access to streets, shall be avoided.
B. Street intersections.
(1) Angle of intersections. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect another
at an angle of less than 60°.
(2) Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving the junction
of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this proves
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care
for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
§ 225-29 AUBURN CODE § 225-29
225:448
§ 225-30. Lots and lot sizes.
(3) Size of clear-sight triangles. Clear-sight triangles of 40 feet
measured along street lot lines from their point of junction shall be
provided at all intersections, and no building shall be permitted
within such sight triangles.
(4) Distance between intersections. To the fullest extent possible,
intersections with major traffic streets shall be located not less
than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
(5) Streets entering opposite sides of another street. Streets entering
opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly
opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125 feet between
their center lines.
(6) Curb radii. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15
feet for intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet for
intersections involving other type streets, or such greater radius as
is suited to the specific intersection.
(7) Inadequate right-of-way width. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width,
additional right-of-way width shall be required.
(8) Leveling area required. Where the grade of any street at the
approach to an intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be
provided having not greater than four-percent grades for a
distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line of
the intersecting street.
C. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Length. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not
exceed 500 feet in length and shall furnish access to not more than
20 dwelling units.
(2) Turnaround. A cul-de-sac street shall be provided at the closed end
with a paved turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer
pavement edge or curbline of 40 feet.
(3) Provision for future extension. Unless future extension is clearly
impractical or undesirable, a turnaround right-of-way of the same
width as the street shall be carried to the property line in such a
way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining
tract.
A. Compliance with Chapter 305, Zoning. Lot sizes and dimensions shall
be not less than those specified in Chapter 305, Zoning, of this
Municipal Code.
B. Tests of adequacy of lots. Where either or both water supply and
sanitary sewage disposal are provided by individual on-lot facilities and
§ 225-29 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-30
225:449
§ 225-31. Easements.
evidence indicates that the requirements of Chapter 305, Zoning, are
not adequate, the Planning Board may require tests, in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the State Departments of Health
and Environmental Conservation, undertaken at the expense of the
developer, to determine the adequacy of the proposed lot size and
existing grade and soil conditions. In all such cases where the tests
indicate a larger lot size to be necessary, the Planning Board may
employ the services of a registered and qualified independent sanitary
engineer for advice as to the minimum lot size and/or facilities
necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and hazards to the public
health. In such cases, the cost of retaining the services of a qualified
engineer shall be borne by the developer.
C. Review to prevent health hazards in commercial subdivisions. Where
commercial subdivisions are proposed to be served by either or both onlot
sanitary sewage disposal and water supply facilities, the lot area and
dimensions required to prevent health hazards shall be subject to
individual review and determination by the Planning Board, New York
State Departments of Health and Environmental Conservation and/or
County Board of Health.
D. Frontage. All lots shall front upon a public street.
E. Ratio of depth to width. The ratio of the depth of any lot to its width
shall not be greater than 21/2 to one, except as may be specified in
Chapter 305, Zoning.
F. Angle of side lot lines to street lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially
at right angles or radial to street lines.
G. Remnants of land; disposition. If remnants of land exist after
subdividing, they shall be incorporated in existing or proposed lots or
dedicated to public use if acceptable to the City.
H. Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where
employed to prevent vehicular access to major traffic streets.
I. Parcels for nonresidential use; depth and width. Depth and width of
parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential use shall be sufficient to
provide satisfactory space for off-street parking and unloading as
required by the provisions of Chapter 305, Zoning.
A. Dimensions. Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet plus the width
of any required pipe or other improvement shall be provided as
necessary for utilities.
B. Location. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on
or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
§ 225-30 AUBURN CODE § 225-31
225:450
§ 225-32. Blocks.
§ 225-33. Storm drainage.
§ 225-34. Community facilities and Master Plan requirements.
C. Effect of watercourse in subdivision. Where a subdivision is traversed
by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or rightof-
way conforming substantially to the line of such watercourse and of
such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
A. Dimensions generally. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to the following:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Zoning requirements.
(3) Topography.
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Length. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 750 feet and a maximum
length of 1,200 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet,
special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory
fire protection.
C. Depth of residential blocks. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient
depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage
lots are used.
D. Pedestrian interior walks; purpose and dimensions. Pedestrian interior
walks may be required where necessary to assist circulation or provide
access to community facilities. Such walks shall have a width of not less
than 10 feet and a paved walk of not less than four feet.
A. Layout and grade of lots. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide
positive drainage away from buildings.
B. Sewers and culverts; standards. Storm sewers, culverts and related
installations shall be as specified in accordance with prevailing
standards of the City Engineer.
A. Duty of Planning Board. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Planning
Board will consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community
facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
B. Reservation for public use. Where a proposed park, playground, school
or other public use shown in the Master Plan is located in whole or in
part in a subdivision, the Planning Board may require the reservation of
such area as may be deemed reasonable. Where said area is not
§ 225-31 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-34
225:451
§ 225-35. Required improvements.
dedicated, it shall be reserved for acquisition by the City for a period of
three years.
C. Adequacy of areas provided or reserved. Areas provided or reserved for
such community facilities should be adequate to provide for building
sites, landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use
proposed.
D. Layout to conform to Master Plan. The layout of the proposed
subdivision shall be in general conformity with the features or
developments proposed in the Master Plan of the City.
A. Scope of provisions.
(1) Streets. Every street shown on a plat that has obtained Planning
Board approval and has been recorded within 90 days of such
approval in the office of the County Clerk shall be deemed to be a
private street until such time as it has been formally offered for
cession to the City and formally accepted as a public street by
ordinance of the City Council or condemned by the City as a public
street. No public municipal utility or improvement shall be
constructed by the City on any street, unless by easement, until it
has become a public right-of-way and is duly placed on the Official
Map or plan.
(2) Standards. Minimum improvements and construction standards
required of all subdivisions shall be as set forth in this section.
Where not set forth, they shall be in accordance with the prevailing
standards of the City Engineer. Alternate improvement standards
may be permitted if the City Engineer deems them equal or
superior in performance characteristics to the specified
improvements. Additional or higher type improvements may be
required in specific cases where the Planning Board believes it
necessary to create conditions essential to the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
(3) Examination. Design standards and required improvements may be
examined at the City Engineer's office.
(4) Expense of improvements. Nothing in this Part 2 or in the approval
of a subdivision by the Planning Board shall be construed to
obligate the City to bear the expense of the installation of off-site
improvements unless approved by the Council.
B. Monuments and markers.
(1) Placement. Monuments shall be placed by the subdivider so that
the score or marked point shall coincide exactly with the
intersection of the lines to be marked and shall be set so that the
§ 225-34 AUBURN CODE § 225-35
225:452
top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of
surrounding ground.
(2) Location and specifications of monuments. Monuments shall be set
at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
subdivision. Monuments may be of the following two types:
(a) Cut stone five inches by five inches by three feet zero inches
long with a drill hole in the center.
(b) Concrete five inches by five inches by three feet zero inches
long with a one-half-inch round brass pin in the center.
(3) Location and specifications of markers. Markers shall be set at the
beginning and ending of all curves along street property lines, at all
points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear, and at
all angles in property lines of lots; at all corner lots, markers shall
consist of steel bars at least 15 inches long and not less than 3/4
inch in diameter.
C. Streets.
(1) Standards. Required improvements shall be in accordance with the
prevailing standards of the City Engineer.
(2) Grading, surfacing and improving. Streets and alleys where
provided shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the grades,
profiles and cross sections approved by the City Engineering
Department.
D. Public water supply.
(1) System available. Where public water supply, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, as advised by the City Engineer, is reasonably
accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete and
adequate water distribution system, including a connection for
each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants.
(2) System not available. Where public water supply is not in
reasonable distance, an alternate supply, approved by the State
Department of Health, shall be furnished.
E. Public sanitary sewer system.
(1) System available. Where the public sanitary sewer system, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, as advised by the City Engineer, is
reasonably accessible, sanitary sewers shall be installed to
adequately serve all lots with connections to the public system.
Stormwater shall be excluded from sanitary sewers.
(2) System not available. Where lots cannot be served by the extension
of an existing public sanitary sewer, the subdivider shall obtain
approval of lot sizes as provided in § 225-30B. In addition,
§ 225-35 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-35
225:453
individual septic tanks and disposal fields and/or neighborhood
disposal systems shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
F. Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be installed when, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, as advised by the City Engineer, they are deemed
necessary to provide adequate drainage for the subdivision.
§ 225-35 AUBURN CODE § 225-35
225:454
ARTICLE VI
Plan Requirements
§ 225-36. Preliminary plan.
A. Scale. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet
to the inch.
B. Plan information. The preliminary plan shall show the following
information:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Name of the owner of the property.
(4) Name of the registered engineer, surveyor or architect responsible
for the plans.
(5) Tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
(6) Contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of relatively
level tracts, at such lesser interval as may be necessary for
satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
(7) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to known, established elevations.
(8) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant natural
features.
(9) All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, petroleum or
petroleum product lines, fire hydrants and other significant manmade
features.
(10) All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and pavement width.
(11) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
(12) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions; and
playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use. Proposed
streets shall be named by the Mayor and Council.
(13) Wherever practicable, the preliminary plan shall show the names of
owners of all abutting unplotted land and the names of all abutting
subdivisions.
§ 225-36 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-36
225:455
§ 225-37. Final plan. [Amended 12-8-1994 by Ord. No. 44-1994]
C. Sketch of street layout. Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of
the subdivider's entire holdings, a sketch shall be submitted of the
prospective street layout for the remainder.
D. Proposed deed restrictions. Copies of the proposed deed restrictions, if
any, shall be attached to the preliminary plan.
E. Affidavit. The surveyor or engineer shall submit an affidavit that the
survey presented is a true and correct transit boundary and
topographic survey conducted on the site by that surveyor or engineer.
F. Preliminary grading plan. A preliminary grading plan of the site shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat submission.
A. Legibility. The subdivision plan submitted for final approval shall be a
clear, legible white print of an ink drawing.
B. Plan scale and required information. Where necessary, final plans may
be drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the sections. The final plan shall be at a
scale of not more that 100 feet the inch and shall include the following
information:
(1) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale, and date.
(3) Name of the record owner and subdivider.
(4) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(5) Boundaries of the tract.
(6) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements, and areas
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(7) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot, and boundary line and to reproduce such
lines on the ground.
(8) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and tangent
bearings for each street.
(9) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of
each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(10) The proposed building setback line for each street.
(11) Location and width of private driveways emanating from corner
lots.
(12) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and in hundredth of a foot.
§ 225-36 AUBURN CODE § 225-37
225:456
(13) Lot numbers or letters.
(14) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(15) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown and shall be as
specified by the City Engineer.
(16) Wherever practicable, names of any adjoining subdivision shall be
shown.
(17) Wherever practicable, names of the owners of any unplotted land
shall be shown.
(18) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
(19) Certificate for approval by the Planning Board.
C. Accompanying documents. The final plan shall include thereon or be
accompanied by:
(1) An affidavit that the applicant is the subdivider of the land
proposed to be subdivided.
(2) Certification by the City Engineer that the installation of water,
sewer and street facilities is both practical and feasible.
(3) Certification by the State Department of Health and/or
Environmental Conservation when individual sewage disposal or
water systems are to be installed as required by § 225-35,
Subsections B through F of this Part 2.
(4) Certification by the City Engineer that the subdivider has met the
requirements of § 225-35A of this Part 2.
(5) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording.
D. The subdivider shall tender offers of cession in a form certified as
satisfactory by the Corporation Counsel of all land included in streets,
highways or parks, not specifically reserved by him or her, but approval
of the plan by the Planning Board shall not constitute an acceptance by
the City of the dedication of any street, highway or park or other open
public areas.
§ 225-37 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-37
225:457

ARTICLE VII
Modifications and Variances
§ 225-38. Authority to grant variances.
§ 225-39. Large-scale developments.
The standards and requirements of this Part 2 may be modified by the
Planning Board in the case of plans for complete communities or
neighborhood units or other large-scale developments which, in the
judgment of the Planning Board, achieve substantially the objectives of
the regulations contained herein and which are further protected by such
covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and
achievement of the plan.
§ 225-40. Reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Planning Board may request and receive an opportunity to appear before
the Planning Board, present additional relevant information, and request
reconsideration of the original finding, decision or recommendation.
§ 225-41. Application procedure.
A. Grounds. The Planning Board may grant a variance to the provisions
contained herein where by reason of the exceptional shape of a specific
piece of property, or where by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions, the strict application of this Part 2 would result in extreme
practical difficulties and undue hardship upon the owner of such
property; provided, however, that such relief may only be granted
without detriment to the public good and without substantially
impairing the intent and purposes of this Part 2.
B. Imposition of conditions. In granting such variances or modifications,
the Planning Board may require such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so
varied or modified.
A. Application for modification or variance. Applications for modifications
and variances shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the
time the preliminary plan is filed with the Planning Board. The
application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied upon by
the applicant.
B. Application for reconsideration. Applications for reconsideration shall
be submitted in writing by the subdivider not less than 10 calendar days
in advance of the meeting at which reconsideration is desired.
§ 225-38 PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION § 225-42
225:459
§ 225-42. Recording of modification or variance.
In grating a modification or variance, the Planning Board shall record its
actions and the grounds for granting the modification or variance in its
minutes. A statement showing the date that such modification or variance
was granted shall be affixed to the final plan.
§ 225-42 AUBURN CODE § 225-42
225:460
Chapter 227
PRIVATE SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
§ 227-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Private
Security Alarm System Ordinance."
§ 227-2. Purpose.
In order to further provide police, fire, and other emergency services to
protect the lives and property of its citizens and businesses the City's public
safety departments customarily respond to burglar, robbery, and fire alarms
activated by private security alarm systems. In an attempt to reduce and
prevent the increasing number of false alarms generated by businesses and
residences within the City of Auburn and to insure that emergency services
providers are not unnecessarily dispatched to such false alarms, within the
City of Auburn, standards and regulations for responding to these types of
alarms must be established.
§ 227-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM USER — Any person or entity on whose premises a private security
alarm device is installed.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or his/her employees or agents, which results in
the unnecessary dispatch of Police or Fire Department personnel, whether
or not the security alarm user is aware of the malfunction.
PRIVATE SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical
device or system which is designed to transmit a signal to the Cayuga
County 911 Center or to a private central alarm station which, in turn,
notifies the Cayuga County 911 Center indicating or warning that a crime,
fire or other emergency situation warranting immediate police or fire
response has occurred, or is in the process of occurring.
§ 227-4. Rules and regulations.
§ 225-42 PRIVATE SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS § 227-4
227:461
§ 227-5. False alarms.
A. All alarms shall be installed in accordance with all applicable municipal
and governmental laws, ordinances, and requirements.
B. Every alarm system shall be maintained in proper working condition
and shall meet accepted industry-wide standards in order to ensure the
elimination of false alarm activations.
C. An alarm user or his/her representative shall immediately respond to
the source of an alarm after the notification of such alarm by the Police
or Fire Department. The alarm user or his/her representative shall
relieve the police/fire officer in charge whenever there is no apparent
fire or criminal activity at the scene of the alarm.
D. When requested the alarm user shall provide Chief of the respective
safety department a record of inspection and/or repair of an installed
alarm system.
E. An alarm user shall instruct the operators of the alarm systems in the
proper use and operation of the system in an effort to reduce the
activation of false alarms.
A. Any person having knowledge of a false alarm shall immediately notify
the Police or Fire Department where applicable. Upon such occurrence
the Police or Fire Department shall make an investigation.
B. The Police and Fire Departments shall keep a record of all false alarms
from all alarm systems within the City of Auburn.
C. Penalties in accordance with the following schedules shall be imposed
for the relay of a false alarm:
(1) First, second and third unintentional false alarm in any year: a
warning notice shall be issued;
(2) Fourth unintentional false alarm in the same year: an
administrative penalty of $50 will be imposed:
(3) Fifth unintentional false alarm in the same year: an administrative
penalty of $100 will be imposed;
(4) Sixth unintentional false alarm in the same year: an administrative
penalty of $200 will be imposed.
(5) For each false alarm knowingly or intentionally set off in any year
there shall be an administrative penalty of $200.
D. The security alarm user may appeal any of the above-referenced
determinations or penalties by requesting a hearing before the Chief of
the respective department within 10 business days from the date a
determination and/or the penalty was imposed. Said hearing shall be
§ 227-4 AUBURN CODE § 227-5
227:462
Chapter 230
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Solid waste — See Ch. 254.
Trees — See Ch. 277.
Protection of water — See Ch. 294.
Water service — See Ch. 297.
§ 230-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Property Maintenance
Ordinance of the City of Auburn, New York."
§ 230-2. Findings and purpose.
held within 15 business days of such request. A final decision shall be
rendered within 15 business days of the hearing.
E. All notices referred to in the local ordinance shall be served either
personally by a member of the City of Auburn Police or Fire
Department, or by certified mail.
A. In order to prevent blight and the spread thereof, it is hereby declared
that all property in the City, improved or unimproved, including but not
limited to residences, office buildings, shopping centers, supermarkets,
retail stores, discount houses, warehouses, manufacturing or
fabrication plants, factories, gasoline service stations, public garages,
motor vehicle repair shops or other business uses, whether occupied or
vacant, and accessory structures located in the City of Auburn shall be
maintained in conformity with the standards set out in this chapter so
as to assure that these structures and properties will not adversely
affect the neighborhood and the community at large.
B. It is found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration, certain structures and properties have the
further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and
that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid
conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the
expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein
contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the
neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
§ 227-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-2
230:463
§ 230-3. Conflicts with other regulations.
Chapter 182, Housing Standards, of this Municipal Code shall supersede
any provisions of this chapter which are in conflict therewith. All other
provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to residential premises.
§ 230-4. General standards.
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and
fostered.
A. Open areas.
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to
protect buildings and structures and to prevent the development of
stagnant ponds.
(2) No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing, and such baskets, carts or wagons shall be regularly
collected and removed to the interior of the building or buildings
from which they were taken by the person responsible for such
building or buildings.
(3) All fences shall be maintained by the person responsible for the
property. Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to the
replacement and/or repair of fences which may become in
disrepair.
(4) All landscaping shall be well maintained so that lawns, hedges,
bushes and trees shall be kept trimmed and free from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where
the same may constitute a blighting factor thereby depreciating
adjoining property. Compliance with Article VI of Chapter 259 of
this Municipal Code shall constitute the minimum standards that
must be met for grass and weeds.
(5) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similarly paved areas
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use
and weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist
shall be filled or necessary repairs or replacement carried out. All
off-street parking facilities shall be swept at least monthly.
(6) Yards, court and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical
hazards, rodent harborage and infestation. They shall be
maintained in a manner that will prevent rubbish from being blown
about the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be
securely closed or barricaded from access to the public.
(7) No person shall deposit, throw or scatter or suffer, permit or allow
the accumulation of any filth, dirt, ashes, junk, garbage,
wastepaper, dust, rubbish, sticks, stones, grass, wood, leaves,
paper or paper boxes, iron, tin, nails, bottles or glass or any other
§ 230-2 AUBURN CODE § 230-4
230:464
kind of rubbish or waste material, appliances, furniture, tires,
machinery and other bulk refuse upon any sidewalk, highway or
public place, or upon any vacant or improved lot, piece or parcel
of ground abutting upon any sidewalk, highway or public place, or
upon any private property within the City except as permitted by
City regulations for trash and garbage removal.
(8) No yard, lot, or part thereof shall be used for the storage or keeping
of construction equipment, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof,
building materials and/or supplies, except as hereinafter provided.
Such area, or space, shall be deemed to be a contractor's yard. This
subsection shall not apply to areas zoned industrial nor to
businesses with preexisting nonconforming uses in the keeping of
such items and/or equipment.
B. Buildings and structures.
(1) All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be repaired, coated, treated or sealed to protect
them from deterioration or weathering.
(2) Floors, walls, ceilings, stairs, furnishing and fixtures of buildings
shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Every
floor, exterior wall, roof and porch, or appurtenance thereto, shall
be maintained in a manner so as to prevent collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
(3) The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and be structurally sound.
(4) Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building
shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the
buildings. Materials which have been damaged or show evidences
of dry rot or other deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a workmanlike manner within a reasonable amount of
time. Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of the building shall be
free from loose and unsecured objects and material. Such objects
or materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
(5) The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform
such acts as may be required of him or her from time to time to
ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe and
secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or the
public.
(6) Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to
generally accepted practices.
§ 230-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 230-4
230:465
§ 230-5. Enforcement.
§ 230-6. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Code.
Chapter 232
PUBLIC ARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
(7) The owner and/or tenant of a residential premises will not cause or
allow the external placement of any upholstered furniture,
including mattresses, not designed or manufactured for said
exterior use. "Exterior use" shall include but not be limited to
unenclosed porches and/or decks. [Added 5-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2-2002]
A. The Housing Code Inspector shall be the enforcement officer of this
chapter.
B. The Housing Code Inspector may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent the violation of this chapter.
§ 230-4 AUBURN CODE § 230-6
230:466
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 232-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Public Arts."
§ 232-2. Intent and purpose.
§ 232-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PUBLIC ART — Public art that is not removed from the site
by the owner or artist within 60 days of the stated agreement, or upon
written notification from the City. The City is authorized to dispose of any
abandoned public art pieces that have been stored by the City.
ARTIST — A practicing fine artist, generally recognized by critics and peers
as a professional of serious intent and ability. Indications of a person's
status as a professional artist include, but are not limited to, income
realized through the sole commission of artwork, frequent or consistent art
exhibitions, placement of artwork in public institutions, receipt of honors
and awards, and training in the arts.
ARTWORK — See "public art."
DEACCESSION — The formal process used to permanently remove an
artwork owned by the City from the public art collection, usually through
sale or exchange or any other transaction by which title of the outgoing
artwork is transferred from the City to an individual, institution, agency,
gallery, vendor or dealer. Under certain conditions, it may also include
disposal by intentional destruction.
DEED OF GIFT — A formal, legal agreement that transfers ownership of and
legal rights in the property to be donated.
DONATION — A charitable contribution to the City, during lifetime or
testamentary transfer, whether whole or fractional interest, including, but
not limited to, cash and cash equivalents, real property, personal tangible
property, publicly traded equity and debt securities, closely held securities,
restricted securities, life insurance policies, intellectual property, artifacts
A. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate and encourage public art in
the City of Auburn by creating a streamlined application and review
process, and guidelines for siting, installation and maintenance of
public art.
B. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to public art that is
installed on publicly owned land within the City of Auburn including,
but not limited to, City parks, streets and sidewalks within the public
right-of-way, and any City-owned property. Murals on private property
shall be regulated by Chapter 305, Article V, Signs.
§ 232-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-3
230:467
and/or artworks which would contribute to the City's goals and priorities
outlined in the Public Art Plan.
EXTRAORDINARY ARTWORK MAINTENANCE — Any nonroutine repair,
restoration or conservation to the sound condition of artworks that requires
specialized services.
MURAL — A hand-painted, hand-tiled, or digitally printed image which is
on the exterior wall of a building located on public or private property and
is visible from a City park, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way. Murals on
private property are regulated by Chapter 305, Article V, Signs.
PERMANENT ARTWORK — Artwork exhibited with the expectation of
indefinite duration.
PUBLIC ART —
PUBLIC ART COMMISSION — The regulating entity appointed by the City
Council to establish policy and procedures to administer the Public Art Plan
and program.
PUBLIC ART PLAN — A comprehensive guidebook for public art in the City
which is intended to be the major tool by which the Public Art Commission
achieves its mission. The Public Art Plan is a working document that will
assist the Public Art Commission, City Common Council and other public
bodies in planning and funding for art-related projects and identifying key
sites for public art, and will provide artists guidance when responding to
proposals and projects.
Refers to all forms of visual art that are located within the City right-ofway
or on public land within the City of Auburn. Murals and artwork on
private property are not regulated by this chapter.
A.
The aforesaid forms of visual art include, but are not limited to, the
following mediums:
Paintings of all media including both portable and permanently
affixed works such as frescoes and murals;
(1)
A sculpture of any form and in any material or combination of
materials, including, but not limited to, statues, monuments,
fountains, arches, reliefs, mobiles, kinetic, electronic and neon
sculptures.
(2)
Other public art shall include inscriptions, stained glass, fiber
works, carvings, mosaics, photographs, drawings, collages, textile
works, prints and crafts, both decorative and utilitarian, in any
medium including, but not limited to, clay, fiber, wood, metal, glass,
stone, plastic and other materials; and
(3)
Artist-designed landscapes and earthworks, including the artistic
placement of natural materials or other functional art objects.
(4)
B.
§ 232-3 AUBURN CODE § 232-3
230:468
PUBLIC ART PROGRAM — All responsibilities and activities of the Public
Art Commission in accordance with this chapter (Ordinance No. 5 of 2017,
adopted December 21, 2017).
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All spaces owned by the City of Auburn, indoor or
outdoor, that are accessible and visible to the general public.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP) — A process in which artists are asked to
submit a detailed proposal for a specific site or project.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE — Regular routine inspection and care of
artwork, such as cleaning and applying protective surface coatings. A
trained technician, City employee or third party contracted by the City
trained to provide such services will carry out any required maintenance
procedures.
TEMPORARY ARTWORK — Artwork exhibited for a limited duration.
§ 232-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-3
230:469

ARTICLE II
PROCEDURE
§ 232-4. Design criteria.
There are no absolute criteria for acceptable public art, except for general
tenets which include:
§ 232-5. Approval process.
A. Artistic merit and quality as evidenced by an artist's past history of
exhibitions or sales, awards or other recognition, or an outstanding first
work; as well as the inherent quality in terms of timelessness, vision,
design, aesthetics, and excellence.
B. Intentionality of the artist concerning the meaning and proposed or
desired effect of the work as public art upon the viewing public.
C. Local significance and site-specificity by creating a sense of excitement
on public property and presenting fresh ways of seeing the community
and City, while also recognizing the historic and environmental context
of the site.
D. Representation of a variety of styles and tastes in the collection by
acknowledging existing works in the public art collection, striving for
cultural diversity of style, scale, and media, and representing the
eclectic tastes of the community.
E. Unrestricted public viewing, primarily the opportunity for public
access, but also suitability for public participation, social and political
attitudes, and functional considerations.
F. Safety and durability including the ability and structural integrity of the
artwork to withstand weather conditions, minimize the possibility of
injury, and protect against theft and vandalism.
G. Installation and maintenance of work from practicality of fabrication
and transport, to installation and long-term maintenance and
associated costs.
H. Compatibility with established patterns of use at the site by situating
artwork such that it is accessible, visible, and appropriately scaled to
the site, and such that it does not seriously disrupt the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or adversely alter the environmental
conditions of the selected site.
A. Prior to the installation of any artwork, a complete public art
application must be submitted electronically to the City Manager's
Office, including all requirements as detailed in Subsection B,
Application requirements.
B. Application requirements.
§ 232-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-5
230:471
(1) Project description, including purpose, artist's rationale and/or
intention for the proposed work; history and provenance of the
artwork; relationship of the project to other community interests
and activities; as well as potential materials and media.
(2) Illustrative and/or construction drawings of the proposed work. A
scale model of the proposed work is strongly recommended (if
applicable).
(3) For 3d artwork, scaled site plan and color images of the proposed
installation location and its context.
(4) Scaled illustrative drawings or model showing the artwork in
relation to the proposed site.
(5) Description of short- and long-term maintenance requirements and
costs. For temporary installations, a general liability insurance
certificate listing the City of Auburn as additionally insured with at
least $1,000,000 of general liability coverage must be included.
(6) Artist resume, annotated exhibition list, and digital images of other
works.
(7) Project timeline, including (as applicable) fabrication, delivery,
installation, maintenance schedule, and removal.
(8) Project budget, including both committed and anticipated funding
sources.
(9) General letters of support. Applicants are encouraged to include
letters of support, particularly from neighborhood groups. For
murals on nonresidential private property, a letter of support from
the private property owner is required.
C. Review procedures.
(1) Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the City Manager's
Office shall review the application for completeness.
(a) Shall the application be deemed incomplete, the City
Manager's Office shall provide the applicant with written
notification and a detailed description of the determination.
(b) If the proposed application is not complete, the applicant has
the right to change the proposed site or design of the public art
installation and have the application reconsidered.
(c) Once an application is deemed complete, the City Manager's
Office shall forward the application to the applicable City
departments, the Public Art Commission, and other related
agencies for approval of the installation's proposed site.
D. The Public Art Commission shall review the application at its next
regularly scheduled meeting to determine if the submission fulfills the
§ 232-5 AUBURN CODE § 232-5
230:472
design criteria and requirements detailed herein. Either the Public Art
Commission or, upon invitation, the artist may present the application
at a public meeting for comment and review.
E. Upon considering community input, economic feasibility, maintenance
requirements, and the appropriateness of the design, the Public Art
Commission shall either approve, approve with modifications, or deny
the application. Failure to act on an application does not result in a
default approval. An application may only be denied based upon
objective criteria as set forth in this chapter. If the Commission denies
the application, the Commission shall provide the applicant with
written reasons as to why the application was denied within 10 business
days of its decision.
§ 232-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-5
230:473

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Public Art Commission
§ 232-5.1. Public Art Commission.
A. Powers and duties.
(1) The Public Art Commission (herein referred to as the Commission)
shall provide leadership to enhance the experience of public space,
be an effective decision-making body to recommend and implement
approved Public Art policy and procedures, and maintain
thoughtful public participation, outreach, and communications
concerning public art.
(2) The Commission shall approve all public art applications and said
approval shall be necessary prior to the installation of public art in
the City of Auburn unless exempted by the terms of this chapter.
(3) The Commission shall initiate and develop proposals to receive
recommendations and to solicit contributions for additions to the
existing collection of public art.
(4) The Commission shall be responsible for the development and
oversight of a Public Art Plan including criteria and guidelines for
the selection, acquisition, exhibition, and display of new public art,
either temporary or permanent. The criteria and guidelines shall
relate but are not limited to economic feasibility, maintenance,
security, and aesthetics. No public art shall be acquired, loaned, or
installed, nor shall existing public art be deaccessioned or removed
from public places without prior review by the Commission.
(5) The Commission is authorized to establish a jury or advisory group,
or consult with public artists when reviewing an application or
acquiring a piece of public art.
(6) The Commission shall submit an annual report to the City Council
on its activities and shall report to the Mayor on a regular basis.
B. Membership.
(1) The Commission shall consist of a minimum of five voting members
who must be residents of the City of Auburn.
(2) The Commission shall be composed of the following members:
(a) When possible, two individuals chosen from the following
disciplines: landscape architecture, architecture, urban
planning, interior design, engineering, or a related design
discipline.
(b) Two professional artists.
§ 232-5.1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-5.1
230:475
(c) One citizen knowledgeable in the field of public art, education,
or community affairs.
(d) One citizen knowledgeable of the real estate and development
community.
(e) One at-large citizen.
(3) Nonvoting members of the Commission shall include at least one
representative from the Planning and Economic Development and a
member of the Department of Public Works.
(4) Members of the arts community may serve as nonvoting, at-large
members of the Commission to provide specific knowledge and
expertise.
(5) All members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of
Auburn.
C. Terms of office.
(1) The membership of the first term of the Commission shall be filled
by the City Council of the City of Auburn with the following
appointments:
(a) Two members to serve a two-year appointment;
(b) Two members to serve a three-year appointment;
(c) One member to serve a four-year appointment.
(2) Terms shall be two years in length with the exception of four
members of the first established Commission, staggered such that
not more than three of the two-year terms expire in any calendar
year.
(3) Once a person has served three full and consecutive terms on the
Commission, that person shall not be eligible for reappointment for
a length of time equal to one full term on the Commission.
(4) If any member shall fail to attend three consecutive meetings or
more than half of the meetings in one calendar year without just
cause as determined by the Commission, then that member shall be
replaced by the Chairperson of the Commission.
(5) Any vacancy that results from an expired term or resignation shall
be filled by the City Council.
D. Officers.
(1) The Commission shall have a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson,
as elected by a majority vote of the Commission.
E. Compensation of members.
§ 232-5.1 AUBURN CODE § 232-5.1
230:476
(1) The members shall receive no compensation for their services.
F. Meetings.
(1) The Commission shall meet for the purpose of organization as soon
as reasonably possible after January 1 of each year.
(2) The Commission shall meet at such times as it finds necessary
throughout the year, but not less often than once every quarter.
(3) All meetings of the Commission must be open to the public as
required by the New York Open Meetings Law. A quorum shall
consist of a majority of appointed voting members of the
Commission.
(4) Public notice of the time and place of a meeting scheduled at least
one week prior thereto shall be conspicuously posted in one or
more designated public locations at least 72 hours before such
meeting.
(5) The Commission shall establish and publish rules and regulations
governing the conduct of its meetings, the procedure and criteria
to be utilized in approving or denying public art applications and
any other matters within its power and duties, provided that the
rules and regulations are not contrary to the terms and intent of
this chapter.
G. Conflicts of interest.
(1) All members of the Public Art Commission shall abide by the
adopted City of Auburn Code of Ethics.
(2) Any conduct that creates an appearance of impropriety or may
otherwise impair a Commission member's judgment in the
selection of a project site, artist, or artwork is prohibited.
(3) Anyone in a position to receive financial gain from the selection of
sites, artists, or artworks shall abstain or recuse themselves from
the Commission.
(4) Committee members must declare any conflict of interest and
recuse themselves if a conflict of interest arises.
(5) A Committee member may not participate in discussion or voting
on an application submitted by said member.
§ 232-5.1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-5.1
230:477

ARTICLE IV
Standard of Review
§ 232-6. Public art guidelines and regulations.
A. Ownership of public art.
(1) All artwork commissioned and/or acquired by the City of Auburn
will be owned by the City of Auburn.
(2) Artwork loaned to the City will be covered by the City's insurance
for the duration of the loan.
(3) Acceptance of a gift or loan of artwork by the City of Auburn means
a commitment to its preservation, protection, and display for public
benefit within the reasonable resources of the City of Auburn.
B. Acquisitions.
(1) An acquisitions program is the most active and visible means of
promoting and enhancing the public art collection. By purposefully
acquiring individual works, the Commission can make a broad
variety of art available and distribute installation locations across
the City. Attending to site-specific themes will enhance sense of
place and strengthen community character while citizen
involvement will advance a greater appreciation for public art and
a high-quality physical environment.
(2) Acquisitions of public art shall be free of restrictive conditions by
the artist or donor unless, at the discretion of the Commission, such
conditions are reasonable and not detrimental to the City.
(3) The artist is the rightful owner with all power and authority to loan,
donate, or sell to the City and will indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any actions, claims, or proceedings challenging title
to ownership.
(4) All acquisitions of art work must be accompanied by the following
statement:
The donor or the artist, in cases where an artist loans or makes
a donation, or a piece is purchased by the City, represents and
warrants to the City of Auburn, New York, that it intends to loan,
donate, or sell (as the case may be) the artwork to the City. The
donor or artist also represents that he has not entered into any
agreement that may impair this agreement. The City recognizes
and respects artists' rights as set forth in the Visual Arts Rights
Act of 1990 (VARA) and Section 14.03 of the New York State Arts
and Cultural Affairs Law, including, but not limited to, the right
to claim authorship, the right to not have his name used on any
work not created by the artist, and the right not to have his work
intentionally distorted, mutilated or modified so as to prejudice the
§ 232-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-6
230:479
artist's reputation. However, the City expressly reserves the right,
in its sole discretion, to relocate or remove from display visual
art, and an artist shall sign a waiver to allow such relocation or
removal.
(5) Through the Public Art Plan, once established, the Commission and
community will identify potential locations for public artwork
across the City, as well as the highest priority sites. As resources
become available, individual acquisition efforts will focus on these
sites.
(6) Once specific site selection occurs, the Commission will select an
artist using one of the following methods:
(a) Open request for proposals. Artists submit proposals in
response to a public advertisement, which includes a detailed
project description and budget, explanation of honorarium,
and application requirements. Submissions will include, at a
minimum, the artist's resume and slides of his work. After
reviewing the responses, the Public Art Commission will
extend interview invitations to a number of the artists,
ultimately selecting one for the Commission.
(b) Limited invitational/curated pool of artists. A select group of
artists submits proposals in response to a direct invitation,
which includes a detailed project description and budget,
explanation of honorarium, and application requirements.
Submissions will include the artist's resume, slides of his work,
and a written narrative of his proposal. After reviewing the
responses, the Commission will extend interview invitations to
a small number of the artists, ultimately selecting one for the
Commission.
(c) Blind request for proposals. Artists submit proposals in
response to a public advertisement, which includes a detailed
project description and budget, explanation of honorarium,
and application requirements. Submissions will include
narrative and two-dimensional depictions of the proposed
concept, but not contain any artist information; each
submission will have an identification number for evaluation
purposes. After reviewing the responses, the Commission will
extend interview invitations to a number of the artists,
ultimately selecting one for the Commission.
(d) Direct invitation. A single artist submits a proposal in response
to an invitation, which includes a detailed project description
and budget, explanation of honorarium, and proposal
requirements. The Commission will interview the artist, who
will present his concept using both two- and three-dimensional
portrayals.
§ 232-6 AUBURN CODE § 232-6
230:480
(7) After the Commission agrees on the artist selection method, it will
prepare materials for advertisement and distribute them as
required. The Commission will review each submission to
determine if it is complete and responsive to the request. The
Commission will return incomplete submissions to the artist, noting
why the proposal is incomplete.
(8) The Commission will review complete submissions and, except
when using direct invitation, select artists for interviews. Given the
scope of some projects as well as the number of respondents, the
Commission may first establish a jury which will be responsible for
the selection of the public art. The Commission and/or jury may
develop a short list for consideration and subsequently identify
those to be interviewed. The Commission and/or jury may ask
interviewees, in addition to a formal meeting with the Commission
and/or jury, to make a public presentation regarding their body of
work and initial concepts for the Commission.
(9) Following the interviews and consideration of public comments and
compatibility with the design criteria set forth in § 232-5, the
Commission and/or jury will either approve or deny the submission.
Following approval, the selected artist will enter into a contract
with the City which will facilitate acquisition and will clearly
stipulate the rights and responsibilities of both parties.
(10) When the artist and the City have satisfied contractual
requirements, fabrication and installation can begin immediately.
The appropriate City agency will monitor all work. The Commission
will initiate any related marketing and outreach programs and will
encourage community dialogue regarding the commissioned
artwork.
C. Donations and unsolicited offers.
(1) The City may also obtain public art through donations, as well as
unsolicited offers. Gifts that artists or owners offer must conform to
the Public Art Plan's goals and objectives, and public participation
will help achieve community acceptance of a proffered piece.
(2) All costs for installation shall be negotiated by the City and the
donor at the time of donation.
(3) Should the City choose to remove a piece of donated artwork from
public display for a period of at least one year, the City shall make a
good faith effort to attempt one of the following actions:
(a) Negotiate with the donor an extended period of time for the
piece to remain out of public display; or
(b) Offer to return the piece, at donor expense, to the donor. If the
original donor cannot be contacted after reasonable efforts or
§ 232-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-6
230:481
§ 232-7. Siting, installation, and maintenance.
chooses not to accept the return of the piece, the City reserves
the right to sell, convey, or otherwise discard the piece.
(4) The City has the authority to decline gifts, donated pieces, and
unsolicited pieces of public art.
D. On-loan items.
(1) Displaying works that an artist or owner has loaned is an effective
way to expand public art in the community. The on-loan program
allows the City to complement or supplement the permanent pieces
in the collection for a limited time. It provides opportunities to
display well-known works and those that are new or unfamiliar, and
it offers the chance to highlight aspiring artists and experienced
masters alike.
(2) The Commission and artist shall agree upon a reasonable length of
time, not to exceed the negotiated agreement, for the art to be
displayed.
(3) At the end of the agreed time period, as contracted between the
City and the artist, the artist is responsible for removing the
installation.
(4) Should the artist fail to remove the installation within the
negotiated time period, the piece will be considered abandoned.
The City retains the right to remove the installation in accordance
with § 232-9 of this chapter.
A. Siting.
(1) The siting and location of all public artwork will be the
responsibility and right of the City. Decisions on siting will be made
by the Commission in consultation with appropriate City staff.
(2) Site selection for public art will be reviewed with the following
criteria, which may include, but is not limited to:
(a) The safety and security of the proposed site;
(b) Ease of access for routine maintenance using standard City
equipment;
(c) Visibility and accessibility by a broad public audience;
(d) The context of the proposed artwork at the proposed site as it
relates to social, cultural, historical, ecological, physical and
functional context; and
(e) Community support for the proposed site.
§ 232-6 AUBURN CODE § 232-7
230:482
(3) Public art shall be identified with suitably designed and sized
plaques approved by the Commission.
B. Installation.
(1) Installation, maintenance, alteration, refinishing, moving, and
removal of artwork in public places shall be done in consultation
with the artist.
(2) Installation of individual works will be through the combined
efforts of the artist and City staff, or other contractor as specificed
in the contract.
(a) The artist will be responsible for installation with the
appropriate City department(s) providing oversight. If the
artist is not able to direct the installation, then City staff shall
consult with an expert in art handling and maintenance to
assist in the installation at the expense of the artist.
(b) The artist will provide the City with detailed drawings of the
piece and descriptions of transportation, unpacking and/or
handling methods and scheduling.
(3) The Commission will encourage donors to cover installation costs
associated with proposed gifts. In all cases, donors must provide
sufficient information to generate accurate estimates of such costs.
C. Maintenance.
(1) The City of Auburn will be responsible for routine maintenance and
emergency response for all public art acquired, donated, or on-loan
to the City.
(2) For all acquired pieces, the artist will define techniques, methods,
materials, schedules and costs for regular repairs, and will provide
this information at or before installation. Donations and/or loans of
public art must include sufficient funding to adequately cover
maintenance.
(3) In some circumstances, the artist might elect to engage a
particular technician for repairs, and therefore must include
special provisions allowing the technical access to the piece in
contracts between the artist and the City. The City or Commission
reserves the right to require the artist (and/or donor or owner) to
assume all costs for specialized or extraordinary artwork
maintenance.
(4) When emergency repair of artworks is necessary, the City will
contact the artist regarding proposed remedies. Absent such
advice, recommendations from the Commission for routine
maintenance will serve as the principal guide for addressing
emergency conditions.
§ 232-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-7
230:483
(5) Artwork loaned or acquired by the City shall be insured by the
City's insurance to cover damage, vandalism, theft, fire, and
damage from natural disasters. Normal wear and tear are excluded
from insurance coverage by the City. Therefore, repairs and
maintenance for normal wear and tear of pieces acquired or loaned
by the City and put on public display shall be provided by the City
at its discretion. "Wear and tear" includes such things as normal
aging or exposure to the elements, or similar circumstances (e.g.,
rust, cracks, fading). The City shall make a good faith effort to
maintain the artwork, pedestal, and plaque in good condition, on
par with other art works on public display owned by or loaned to
the City.
(6) The City of Auburn Department of Public Works is responsible for
maintaining all files related to the installation, routine maintenance
and emergency response of public art pieces.
§ 232-7 AUBURN CODE § 232-7
230:484
ARTICLE V
Appeals Process
§ 232-8. Process.
The Public Art Commission recommends an appeals step as part of the
public art acquisition process. The intention is to ensure that public art
process and criteria are followed. Therefore, appeals would be based on
process issues only.
A. Information about the appeal and selection procedures will be shared
with the public at the start of each acquisition process in order to
promote understanding of public art and to ensure an open process. In
addition, should it be necessary, Commission decisions may be appealed
in writing based on the following criteria:
(1) The decision was based on something other than the established
review criteria;
(2) The required information or other pertinent supporting material
was not used during the review process; and/or
(3) Conflict of interest procedures were not followed.
B. Appeals should be submitted in writing after the appellant has first
consulted with the Commission to review the considerations that went
into the acquisition or donation process. Appeals should be submitted
to the Common Council in writing within two weeks of written
notification or public announcement of the selection, acquisition, or
donation.
C. Upon receipt of the appeal letter, the Common Council and the
Commission Chairperson will meet within two weeks with the appellant
to hear their grounds for reconsideration. The Common Council has the
authority to determine whether or not there are grounds for
reconsideration based on the appeal criteria listed above. If there are
grounds, the Common Council will review the process and decision.
After the reconsideration, a letter will be sent to the appellant.
D. Notice of appeals will be shared with the City Council.
E. All appeals will be reported in the annual report.
F. Since this is a City program, only City residents have the ability to
submit appeals.
§ 232-8 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-8
230:485

ARTICLE VI
Deaccession Policy and Procedure
§ 232-9. Deaccession of artwork.
A. The Commission will not plan to deaccession permanent artwork from
the public art collection, whether acquired by direct purchase or
through donation.
B. Deaccessioning public art should be an action seldom used and should
not be used due to fluctuations in taste.
C. After due consideration, the Commission can recommend such action,
however, in cases that meet one or more of the following criteria:
(1) The artwork has been abandoned;
(2) The Commission finds the artwork to be fraudulent or inauthentic;
(3) The artwork possesses substantial demonstrated faults in original
design or workmanship;
(4) The current condition of the artwork presents a public or
environmental hazard and repair/restoration is not feasible due to
physical conditions and/or the expense would be disproportionate
to the value of the artwork;
(5) The building housing the artwork or other architectural support
system for the piece is slated for demolition and relocation is not
feasible;
(6) The artwork encumbers the use of public property; and/or
(7) Public use and/or ownership of the site have or will change,
rendering the artwork incompatible with the property.
D. Should the Commission justify deaccessioning, it will seek opinions on
the disposition of the subject piece from the artist community and
general public.
E. The Commission will give priority consideration to returning works to
the artist or their heir, or in the case of donations, to the donor or his/
her heirs.
F. The City will store deaccessioned pieces as time and space allow.
G. The Commission will disclose both the deaccession criteria and possible
disposition of such artwork to the artist and/or donor before finalizing
any contractual agreements.
H. In the case the City chooses to sell a piece of public art, all proceeds
from the sale will be placed in a City account for acquisition of new
works of public art or maintenance of the existing collection.
§ 232-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 232-9
230:487
Chapter 234
PUBLIC CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public entertainment — See Ch. 157.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 273.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 234-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Public
Conduct Ordinance."
§ 234-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community, including the protection and preservation
of the property of the City and of its inhabitants, and of the peace and good
order of the City.
§ 234-3. Loitering.
§ 234-4. Firearms and other weapons.
A. No person shall loiter in or around public buildings or obstruct
corridors, stairways or doorways so as to prevent free access by
members of the public, officers or employees. No person shall by his or
her presence or by means either alone or in concert with others
interfere with or interrupt the conduct of business in the offices located
in any such buildings.
B. No person shall loiter in or upon any public sidewalk, street, bridge,
public building or place or obstruct the use thereof so as to prevent free
and reasonable access by other members of the public or prevent the
exercise of duties by public officers or employees.
C. No person shall, without permission of the owner or occupant thereof,
conceal himself, loiter or prowl on the property of another in such a
manner as to reasonably cause alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity.
D. No person shall, during the nighttime or hours of darkness, conceal
himself, loiter or prowl in any public park, playground or recreation
area in such a manner as to reasonably cause alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity.
§ 232-9 AUBURN CODE § 234-4
234:488
§ 234-5. Fireworks.
Pursuant to Subdivision 1 of § 405.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New
York, the City Manager is hereby designated the permit authority to grant
and issue permits for the public display of fireworks in accordance with the
provisions of § 405.00 of the Penal Law.
§ 234-6. Posting advertisements on public property.
No person shall place upon or fasten or affix to any public electric or
telephone pole, lamppost, tree, fence, sidewalk, container or building any
advertisement, placard, poster, letter or device stating, referring to,
advertising or intending to state, refer to or advertise any meeting, business
exhibition, dance or amusement of any kind, or the sale or manufacture
of any article or thing whatsoever, except, however, that upon special
occasions or in emergencies the City Manager may sanction by written
permit to be filed in the office of the City Clerk the use of certain lampposts,
electric or telephone poles and trees for such advertisement, for a limited
period of time.
§ 234-7. Soliciting alms.
A. Discharge of firearms, air guns or spring guns. No person shall
discharge any firearm, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, crossbow or other
similar instrument or weapon within the City except in self-defense or
in the discharge of official duty or during a memorial service or
veteran's funeral or at an indoor rifle range operated under the
supervision, guidance and instruction of a duly commissioned officer of
one of the Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Reserve
Forces, or a duly qualified adult citizen of the United States who has
been granted a certificate as an instructor of small arms practice issued
by one of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Adjutant General
of the state, the National Rifle Association of America, or the Bureau of
Municipal Police.
B. Carrying of weapons prohibited; exceptions. No person shall carry
about his or her person any dirk, bowie knife, sword, spear cane, pistol,
revolver, slingshot, jimmy, brass knuckles, or other dangerous,
improper or unlawful weapon, except that this subsection shall not
apply to police officers or other persons expressly authorized to carry
any such weapons.
A. No person shall beg upon any public street or public place within the
City.
B. No person shall solicit alms in any public street or public place for any
purpose within the City without written permission from the City
Manager. Permission shall only be given for bona fide religious,
charitable, veteran and eleemosynary organizations and institutions.
§ 234-4 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 234-8
234:489
§ 234-8. Breaches of the peace.
No person shall engage in fighting or breach of the peace, nor shall any
person challenge or provoke another to fight, or threaten personal violence
to another person, or assist, or in any manner countenance, any fight or
pugilistic encounter, or engage in any cockfight, dog fight or other acts
tending to produce a breach of peace.
§ 234-9. Disorderliness.
§ 234-10. Disturbances.
No person shall willfully disturb or annoy any lawful assembly, collection of
persons, or organized meeting of any kind, or cause the same to be done in
any manner, or by any means whatsoever, or disturb or annoy the occupant
of any house, store, building or other place by knocking or rattling on the
door, window, or gate thereof, or by ringing the doorbell, or in any other
manner.
§ 234-11. Indecent exposure; restrictions on use of Owasco River.
§ 234-12. Vandalism.
No person shall willfully injure, mark, damage or deface any building,
bridge, culvert or other structure, whether public or private, or any fence,
A. Disorderly houses. No person shall suffer or permit his or her building
or property, or any building or property under his or her immediate
control, to be used, resorted to, or frequented by any riotous or
disorderly persons, vagrants, gamblers or prostitutes, or suffer or
permit any boisterous, riotous or disorderly conduct therein or
thereabouts.
B. Disorderly conduct. No person shall take part in any riot or disorder in
or about any building or place, or aid or abet the same.
A. Immodest exhibitions. No person shall publicly make any indecent,
immodest or immoral exhibition or exposure of his or her person, or of
any animal or thing, or cause or procure any other person so to do.
B. Swimming in public places. No person shall swim or bathe in the
Owasco River. No person shall swim or bathe in any other raceway or
canal or public place, unless his or her person is covered by a proper
and sufficient garment or bathing suit, so as not to expose his or her
private parts, including the breasts of a woman, or remove his or her
clothes for the purpose of putting on such garment or bathing suit
preparatory to bathing during the daylight hours, unless within a tent,
building, or other concealed location.
C. Rafting and boating on Owasco River. No person shall engage in tubing,
rafting, boating or similar activities north of the Mill Street Dam on
Owasco River in the City of Auburn.
§ 234-8 AUBURN CODE § 234-12
234:490
fixture, or the appurtenances thereof, or any wall, railing, tree, vine, shrub
or plant in any public place, or any public or private property.
§ 234-13. Abandoned refrigerators and similar containers.
No person shall leave any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, or similar container of any kind having locking doors outside
of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children without first
removing the door or doors from such icebox, refrigerator or other
container.
§ 234-14. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places.
A. Legislative intent and purpose.
(1) The Council finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorders and
related problems as well as the littering of such public places and is
disturbing to the public and threatens peace and good order.
(2) The purpose of this section is to prohibit the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in certain public places in order to prevent
disorderly behavior and the littering of public places and to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and to promote the public
good.
B. Prohibition. No person shall, within the City of Auburn, drink or
otherwise consume liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages
while such person is in or upon any public sidewalk, street, highway,
parking lot, bathing beach, public park or such other public place as
defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
C. Possession of open containers. No person shall carry or have in his or
her possession, within the City of Auburn, any open bottle or open
container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage with
the intent of the possessor or another to consume the same in any of the
public places described in Subsection B of this section.
D. Presumptions.
(1) The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or
with the top exposed in a public place as herein defined shall be
presumptive evidence that such open bottle or open container is
intended to be consumed in a public place.
(2) An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any
public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, bathing beach, public
park or other public place as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law
of the State of New York shall be presumptive evidence that the
same is in the possession of all the occupants thereof.
§ 234-12 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 234-14
234:491
§ 234-15. Railroads.
§ 234-16. Skateboarding. [Amended 3-18-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
E. Exceptions. The City Manager may grant a permit to any benevolent
association or any organized or duly constituted group to use open
bottles or containers of alcoholic beverages at any City-owned park for
certain specified activities or affairs. Permission shall be granted only
to those where all rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board have been complied with. Compliance with such rules
and regulations shall not constitute automatic granting of a permit but
shall only be one of the conditions to be met for such approval.
A. Maximum speed limits.
(1) Guarded crossings. Whenever the crossing by a railroad at grade of
streets, highways, turnpikes, plank roads or traveled ways of this
City shall be protected by gates with persons to open and close the
same or by any type of automatic protection when an engine or
train passes, the maximum rate of speed at which such engine or
train shall run is 40 miles an hour.
(2) Unguarded crossings. Whenever the crossing by a railroad at grade
of streets, highways, turnpikes, plank roads or traveled ways of this
City shall not be protected by gates with persons to open and close
the same or by any type of automatic protection when an engine or
train shall run, the maximum rate of speed at which such engine or
train shall run is 20 miles an hour.
B. Riding on railways. No person shall climb upon or cling to any engine,
tender, railway vehicle or car, or part thereof, or stand, sit or ride upon
the steps or platform of, in or upon any such car, engine or vehicle while
passing through the City, unless such person is an employee of the
railroad company operating such engine, tender, vehicle or car, or
otherwise properly authorized.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of certain
public areas within the vicinity of the City center so as to promote the
general welfare and public use of said areas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DESIGNATED AREA — All that area of public property and public
roadway, including adjacent sidewalks, situated on and within the
following described boundaries: beginning at the intersection of
Genesee Street and North Fulton Street running northerly along said
North Fulton Street to its intersection with Seymour Street; thence
running westerly along Seymour Street to its intersection with
Washington Street; thence first running in a southerly direction along
Washington Street, and continuing in a southeasterly direction along
said Washington Street to its intersection with West Genesee Street;
§ 234-14 AUBURN CODE § 234-16
234:492
thence running westerly along West Genesee Street to its intersection
with Ross Place; thence running southeasterly along Ross Place to
its intersection with Woodlawn Avenue; thence running northeasterly
along Woodlawn Avenue to its intersection with Fort Street; thence
running southeasterly along Fort Street to its intersection with
Westlake Avenue; thence running easterly to its intersection with
William Street; thence running southerly to its intersection with South
Street; thence running southerly to its intersection with Logan Street;
thence running easterly to the intersection of Osborne Street; thence
running southerly to the intersection of Lake Avenue; thence running
northerly over the Lake Avenue Bridge to the intersection of Owasco
Street; thence running northerly on Owasco Street to the intersection
of South Fulton Street; thence running northerly on South Fulton Street
to the intersection of East Genesee; thence running north on North
Fulton to the point and place of beginning.
C. Riding of skateboards, roller blades, bicycles, and similar wheeled
devices is prohibited:
(1) In the aforementioned defined areas at all times;
(2) On public property unless use of a skateboard is authorized by
regulation, ordinance or statute, or is otherwise authorized by the
governmental agency, department or commission responsible for
such property. Public property does not include public roads,
highways, bicycle and/or skateboard paths, or sidewalks abutting
private property outside the aforementioned designated areas.
Public property also shall not include Recreation Department
facilities, which facilities shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the Recreation Department;
(3) On portions of private property, including but not limited to outdoor
plazas, that are dedicated to use by the general public, where the
owner of such private property has posted a notice indicating that
skateboarding is prohibited on the property;
D. Wheelchairs, baby carriages and similar devices intended for the
convenience and comfort of handicapped persons or infants are
permitted in the aforementioned areas. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
bicyclists may ride on said areas, provided that all cyclists shall adhere
to all sections of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law governing
the riding of bicycles and shall not engage in activity which may cause
property damage.
E. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe a skateboard
was used or is being used in violation of this section, the officer may
seize the skateboard. Any person authorized to enforce ordinances may
issue a ticket to any person in violation of this section. Any person to
whom a ticket is issued may, within eight days of receipt, pay $25 in lieu
of contesting the violation and in lieu of any other fines or penalties. For
a second offense within the preceding year, the fine will be $50. For a
§ 234-16 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 234-16
234:493
§ 234-17. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
Chapter 242
SANITARY SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Drain layers — See Ch. 147.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Protection of water — See Ch. 294.
Water service — See Ch. 297.
third offense within the preceding year, the fine will be $100. Upon
timely payment under this subsection, the Police Department shall
make any skateboard seized under this section available for return
to the offender, pursuant to the procedures established by the Police
Department.
§ 234-16 AUBURN CODE § 234-17
234:494
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 242-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sanitary Sewer
Ordinance of the City of Auburn, New York."
§ 242-2. Sewer system established.
A sewer system is hereby created and established consolidating all the
sewer and nonsewer districts into one sewer system containing the entire
territorial limits of the City, as designated and described in §§ C-1 and C-3 of
the Charter of the City, and shall be known as the "Auburn Sewer System."
§ 242-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein, technical terms shall be as defined in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation, whenever used in these rules and regulations, unless
otherwise expressly stated or required by subject matter or context.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
C. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The
quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five days and 20° C., expressed
in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building, beginning three
feet (0.9 meter) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING DRAIN SYSTEM — That part of the plumbing system which
receives, conveys, and removes liquid and water-carried wastes to a
building drain.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY — The City of Auburn.
CITY SEWER SYSTEM — All sewers, laterals, pump stations, treatment
plants or works, or other connections which connect with or pertain to a
connection with the sewers, plants, public works and/or other projects
of the Department.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive wastewater as well
as stormwater and surface water.
§ 242-1 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-3
234:495
COMBINED WASTE — Wastewater containing surface water and/or
stormwater.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A combination of individual samples of
wastewater taken at selected intervals, generally hourly for a specified
period. Individual samples may have equal volume or may be
proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or
suspended solids each in excess of 10 milligrams per liter.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Municipal Utilities of the City of
Auburn.[Amended 9-24-1992]
DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES — The Director of Municipal
Utilities of the City of Auburn or his/her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.[Amended 9-24-199251]
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
EFFLUENT — Treated wastewater flowing from any treatment device
or facility.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FEDERAL ACT — The 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendment, Public Law 92-500, and the 1977 Clean Water Act, Public
Law 95-217, and any amendments thereto, as well as any guidelines,
limitations and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to the Act.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain
period of time.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation,
cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, processing,
storage and sale of food products and produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater taken at either set
time or flow.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any sanitary waste from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum
pump tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGES — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW for treatment and ultimate discharge of the
treated effluent to the state's waters from any nondomestic source
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the title "Director of Municipal Utilities"
be substituted for the title "City Engineer" throughout this chapter.
§ 242-3 AUBURN CODE § 242-3
234:496
regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Federal Act.[Added
8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge or a discharger
to the POTW which discharges nondomestic waters.[Added 8-10-2000
by Ord. No. 13-2000]
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid
or liquid-carried solid, liquid and/or gaseous waste from an industrial
manufacturing process, trade, service, utility or business, as distinct
from sanitary waste.[Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's
SPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations: § 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including
Title II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control
Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.[Added
8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. This term
includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to § 403.5.
NEW SOURCE[Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000] —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance
with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
(c)
(1)
§ 242-3 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-3
234:497
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, are
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Auburn's
SPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.[Added 3-1-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
POLLUTANTS — Shall mean, or may be defined now or hereafter by
appropriate local, state or federal authorities or by the Director of
Municipal Utilities, substances which may be present in wastewater,
whether gaseous, liquid or solid, the amount of which may contain
soluble or insoluble solids of organic or inorganic nature which may
deplete the dissolved oxygen content of nature waters, contribute
solids, contain oil, grease or floating solids which may cause unsightly
appearance on the surface of such waters, or contain materials
detrimental to aquatic life.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land, improvements
or appurtenances such as buildings, grounds, etc.
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of the continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 242-3 AUBURN CODE § 242-3
234:498
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control
equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection
against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a
regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated
wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the
effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with Section 403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS — Prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned
by the City of Auburn. This includes any sewers that convey wastewater
to the POTW but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances
not connected to a facility providing treatment.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — These rules and regulations relating to
the use of the public sewer system issued by the City of Auburn.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewater from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes, and the liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater
than 1/2 inch in any direction.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS[Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 13-2000] —
(1) Those industries meeting one or more of the following criteria:
§ 242-3 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-3
234:499
STORM SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only stormwater, surface
runoff, street wash waters, and drainage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater, as
determined by Standard Methods.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or
solid, which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient
amounts, may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent
from the sewage treatment plant, pose a hazard to sewer maintenance
personnel, or constitute a hazard to fish or animal life or inhibit aquatic
life or any pollutant listed as toxic by the Administrator of the EPA.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any devices or systems used in the storage,
treatment, cycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of liquid nature. This includes intercepting sewers, outfall
sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and
clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the
land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or used
for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or
any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste, including
(a) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact, cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater);
[1]
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5%
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
[2]
Is designated as such by the City of Auburn on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
[3]
(b)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (1)(b)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City of Auburn may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(2)
§ 242-3 AUBURN CODE § 242-3
234:500
§ 242-4. Liability for damages.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
§ 242-5. Damage to sewage works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
stormwater runoff, or industrial waste, including waste in combined
stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such
water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the City treatment works.
WASTEWATER — The water carrying domestic, human or animal waste
from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such ground infiltration and industrial and commercial
wastes as may be present.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological
parameters, including volume, flow rate, and such other parameters,
that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity
and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures or methods used for treating sewage.
§ 242-3 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-5
234:501

ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 242-6. Permit required for connection to public sewer.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of
Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-7. Classes of building sewer permits; application; fee.
§ 242-8. Installation and connection costs.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 242-9. Separate building sewer required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 242-10. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Director of Municipal
Utilities, to meet all requirements of this article.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Municipal
Utilities. A permit and inspection fee of $30 for repairs to sewer service,
$40 new and/or replacement sewer service for a residential or
commercial building and $80 for new and/or replacement sewer service
for an industrial building shall be paid to the City at the time the
application is filed. [Amended 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
§ 242-6 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-11
234:503
§ 242-11. Materials and procedures.
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 242-12. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer will be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 242-13. Connection of sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
public sewer.
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 242-14. Compliance with applicable ordinances and regulations
required.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, all ordinances and local laws or other applicable rules
and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of
Municipal Utilities before installation.
§ 242-15. Inspections; connection to public sewer.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of
Municipal Utilities when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Director of Municipal Utilities or his or her
representative.
§ 242-16. Excavations; restoration of disturbed areas.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
§ 242-11 AUBURN CODE § 242-16
234:504
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
§ 242-17. Notice to eliminate existing connections.
All existing connections of roof water, surface runoff or groundwater to
sanitary or combined sewers shall be eliminated within 90 days of written
notification to do so from the Director of Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-18. Maintenance of sewer laterals.
The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting
on any street, public highway, lane or alley shall at all times maintain the
sewer lateral extending therefrom to the trunk sewer in said street, public
highway, lane or alley free from obstruction of any kind.
§ 242-16 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-18
234:505

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
§ 242-19. Deposits of objectionable wastes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Auburn, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human
or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
§ 242-20. Discharge to natural outlet.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Auburn, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
§ 242-21. Privies, septic tanks and cesspools.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.
§ 242-22. Connection to public sewer; when required.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City
is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is reasonably
accessible to the property in the judgment of the Director of Municipal
Utilities.
§ 242-23. Discharge of certain waters to sanitary sewer prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 242-24. Discharge of certain wastes to public sewers prohibited.
[Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any substances or waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
§ 242-19 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-24
234:507
§ 242-25. Action by Director of Municipal Utilities in cases of
questionable discharges.
§ 242-26. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Director of Municipal Utilities, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create
a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess
of two mg/l of CN in the waste discharged to the public sewer.
B. Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain substances or
possess characteristics which in the judgment of the Director of
Municipal Utilities may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of
Municipal Utilities may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers; and/or
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
B. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director of Municipal Utilities,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:
(1) Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids
to 350 parts per million by weight; or
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for.
C. If the Director of Municipal Utilities permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of
Municipal Utilities and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances, and laws.
§ 242-24 AUBURN CODE § 242-26
234:508
Director of Municipal Utilities and shall be so located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 242-27. Measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes.
[Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined
in accordance with the latest version of 40 CFR Part 136, Analysis of
Pollutants, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property.
§ 242-26 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-27
234:509

ARTICLE IV
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 242-28. When permitted.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 242-22, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 242-29. Permit required; application; fee.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of
Municipal Utilities. The application for such permit shall be made on a
form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Director of Municipal Utilities. A permit and inspection fee of $25 shall be
paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
§ 242-30. Inspections.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director of
Municipal Utilities. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Director of Municipal Utilities when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
§ 242-31. Type, capacities, location and layout.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Environmental Conservation of the State of New York. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 242-32. Abandonment.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 242-35, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 242-33. Owner to operate and maintain facilities.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
§ 242-28 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-34
234:511
§ 242-34. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer of
Cayuga County or any other entity having jurisdiction.
§ 242-35. Connection when public sewer becomes available.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt.
§ 242-34 AUBURN CODE § 242-35
234:512
ARTICLE V
Industrial Pretreatment
§ 242-36. Authority.
Under authority of the City Charter of the City of Auburn, the following
rules and regulations are hereby promulgated by the City of Auburn
pertaining to the discharge of stormwater, well water, groundwater, cooling
water, unpolluted water, industrial wastewater, sewage, or other
wastewater in the City sewer system.
§ 242-37. Purpose and policy.
These rules and regulations set uniform requirements for discharges into
the wastewater collection and treatment system and enable the City of
Auburn to comply with the requirements of the Federal Act and to derive
the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of
wastewater discharged into the City's collection and wastewater treatment
system. These rules and regulations provide a means for determining
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics, the setting of
industrial waste surcharges and fines, and the issuance of permits to certain
users.
§ 242-38. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in § 242-3 of this chapter shall apply in interpreting
this article.
§ 242-39. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
A. No person shall discharge waste directly or indirectly into the City
sewer system, or into any private sewer drain emptying into the City
sewer system, which causes, threatens to cause or is capable of
causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test method
specified in 40 CFR 261.21 or any liquids, solids or gases which, by
reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either
alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the treatment works
or to the operation of the treatment works. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or any point in the system) be more than
5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limits
(LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited
to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other substance
§ 242-36 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-39
234:513
which the City, the DEC or the EPA has notified the user is a fire
hazard or hazard to the system. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord.
No. 13-2014]
(2) Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facility, such as, but not limited to,
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through,
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, whey,
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing waste.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
treatment works.
(4) Any substance or any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic
effect in the receiving waters of the treatment works or exceed the
limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other waste, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance that alone or in conjunction with other discharges
may cause the treatment works' effluent or any other product of the
treatment works, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process where the treatment works is pursuing a reuse
and reclamation program. In no case shall such substance
discharged to the treatment works cause the treatment works to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Federal Act and criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or DEC criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used presently or planned to
be used in the future.
§ 242-39 AUBURN CODE § 242-39
234:514
(7) Any substance that alone or in conjunction with other discharges
will cause the treatment works to violate its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and/or State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment works treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the sewer system which exceeds 150° F. (65.5°
C.), unless the treatment works treatment plant is designed to
accommodate such temperature, or in such quantities that the
temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 104° F. (40°
C.).
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or had reason to know will cause interference to the
treatment works.
(11) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(12) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director of Municipal Utilities in accordance
with § 242-43 of this chapter.
B. When the Director of Municipal Utilities determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the treatment works any of the above-enumerated
substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the
treatment works, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall:
(1) Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the
treatment works; and
(2) Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the
interference with the treatment works; and/or
(3) Take appropriate action pursuant to § 242-74.
C. Affirmative defense. A user shall have an affirmative defense in any
action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions
established in § 242-24 and this section where the user can
demonstrate that:
(1) It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference.
§ 242-39 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-39
234:515
§ 242-40. Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, interior or exterior
footing drainage, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters shall not be discharged through direct or indirect
connections to the sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to designated storm sewers, combined sewers
or other approved receivers of such unpolluted water where such
designation is made.
§ 242-41. Limitations on radioactive wastes.
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any radioactive
materials or wastes into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 242-42. Limitations on point of discharge.
No person shall discharge substances directly into a manhole or other
sanitary opening in a sanitary sewer other than through an approved
building sewer.
§ 242-43. Holding tank waste; industrial waste haulers. [Amended
8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
(2) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference,
as the case may be, was developed for each pollutant in the user's
discharge that caused pass-through or interference and the user
was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and
during the pass-through or interference or, if a local limit designed
to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be,
has not been developed for the pollutant(s) that caused the passthrough
or interference, the user's discharge directly prior to and
during the pass-through or interference did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge activity when the City was regularly in compliance with
the City of Auburn SPDES permit requirements and, in the case of
interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or
disposal.
A. No person shall discharge any holding tank waste into a manhole or
other opening in a sanitary sewer. All holding tank waste shall be
discharged at a City facility at locations and such times as are
designated by the Director of Municipal Utilities. Each separate load of
holding tank waste shall be registered with the operator of the
treatment facility. The user shall pay the applicable charges or dumping
fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the
Department. The Department shall have the right to inquire about the
type of waste, the approximate volumes and the origin of holding tank
wastes. The transporter of such wastes shall also have a waste hauler's
permit from DEC. Such waste shall not violate § 242-39 of this chapter
§ 242-39 AUBURN CODE § 242-43
234:516
§ 242-44. Effluent limitations and concentrations. [Amended
5-18-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006; 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014]
The concentration in wastewater discharged into the City sanitary sewer
system of any of the following pollutants shall not exceed the values
specified below. These limitations shall apply to each and every individual
industrial sewer lateral at a point immediately prior to discharge to the City
sanitary sewer system.
Allowable Effluent Concentration
(milligrams/liter)
Pollutant 24-Hour Composite
Antimony 2.0
Arsenic 2.0
Barium 5.0
Cadmium 0.5
Chromium, hex 2.0
Chromium, total 2.0
Copper 1.5
Iron 10.0
Lead 1.0
or any other requirements established by the Director of Municipal
Utilities. Campers and trailers for recreational use are exempt.
B. The Director of Municipal Utilities shall require haulers of industrial
waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Director of
Municipal Utilities may require generators of hauled industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Director of Municipal
Utilities also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements
of this chapter.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Director of Municipal Utilities. No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the Director of Municipal Utilities.
The Director of Municipal Utilities may collect samples of each hauled
load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Director of
Municipal Utilities may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a
waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous waste.
§ 242-43 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-44
234:517
Allowable Effluent Concentration
(milligrams/liter)
Pollutant 24-Hour Composite
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 5.0
Selenium 3.0
Silver 0.02
Zinc 5.0
Cyanide 1.0
Methylene chloride 0.7
Phenol 10.0
Toluene 5.3
Trichloroethylene 3.0
Tetrachloroethylene 3.0
1,1,1-Trichloroethane 3.0
§ 242-45. Special conditions.
No person shall discharge or permit the discharge or infiltration into the
City sewer system of the following wastes unless prior written approval is
granted by the Director of Municipal Utilities:
§ 242-46. Federal effluent limitations.
A. Wastes containing more than 300 mg/l of BOD5.
B. Wastes containing more than 350 mg/l of total suspended solids.
C. Wastes containing more than 10 mg/l of total phosphorus.
D. Wastes containing more than 40 mg/l of total Kjeldahl nitrogen.
E. Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations
greater than 100 mg/l. [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
A. Effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply in any
instance where they are more stringent than limitations in these rules
and regulations.
(1) Under Section 307 of the Federal Act, pretreatment standards are
designed to achieve three purposes:
(a) To protect the operation of the publicly owned treatment
works;
(b) To prevent discharge of pollutants which pass-through such
works inadequately treated; and
§ 242-44 AUBURN CODE § 242-46
234:518
(c) To prevent treatment plant sludges from becoming
contaminated with toxic materials which would limit a publicly
owned treatment works' sludge disposal alternatives.
[Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014]
(2) Users in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued
under Section 304 of the Federal Act and discharging pollutants to
publicly owned treatment works are required to achieve the level of
treatment established by federal regulations.
B. Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to relieve any
industrial user from its obligation to comply with the pretreatment
standards established pursuant to § 307 of the Federal Act. Limitations
on wastewater strength in §§ 242-44 and 242-45 of these rules and
regulations may be supplemented with more stringent limitations
when, in the opinion of the Director of Municipal Utilities:
(1) The limitations in §§ 242-44 and 242-45 of these rules and
regulations may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the
Department's treatment works; or
(2) The limitations in §§ 242-44 and 242-45 of these rules and
regulations may not be sufficient to enable the Department's
treatment works to comply with the water quality standards or
effluent limitations specified in the Department's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or the State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit.
C. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471 are hereby incorporated. [Added
8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000; amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No.
13-2014]
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Director of Municipal Utilities may impose
equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Director of Municipal Utilities shall impose an alternate limit using
the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural
substance and provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to
its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by the EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
§ 242-46 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-46
234:519
§ 242-47. Dilution prohibited. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
No discharger into the City sewer system shall augment his or her use
of process water or otherwise intentionally dilute his or her discharge as
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with any effluent limitations specified in these rules and regulations. The
Director of Municipal Utilities may impose mass limitations on users who
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 242-48. Disposal of unacceptable waste. [Amended 8-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 13-2000]
Waste not permitted to be discharged into the City sewer system must
be transported in accordance with Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act regulations or applicable state law to a state or federally
approved waste disposal site.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include
the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall
contain the following information, to the extent that such information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the waste, an estimation of the
mass and concentration in such constituents and the waste stream
discharge during the calendar month and an estimation of the mass or
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must be
submitted under § 242-53 of this chapter. The notification requirement
in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the selfmonitoring
requirements of §§ 242-46, 242-52G and 242-53 of this
chapter. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014]
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
§ 242-46 AUBURN CODE § 242-48
234:520
§ 242-49. Approval of connection to sewer.
No connection with or opening into any sewer, manhole or appurtenances
thereto shall be made without the written approval of the Director of
Municipal Utilities. The connection of a building sewer into any City sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Department and Administration
Rules and Regulations Governing Plumbing Installations.
§ 242-50. Acceptance of new or increased discharges.
Written approval by the Director of Municipal Utilities is required for all
new discharges from industrial users added to the City's sewer system. The
Director of Municipal Utilities reserves the right to:
kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of the RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Director of
Municipal Utilities, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has been determined to
be economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
A. Deny or condition new or increased contribution of wastes or changes
in waste characteristics;
B. Require an industrial user to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit as specified in § 242-51;
C. Require the development of a schedule of compliance for an industrial
user for the installation of technology required to meet pretreatment
standards and requirements;
D. Require the industrial user to submit to the Department self-monitoring
reports;
§ 242-48 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-50
234:521
§ 242-51. Industrial waste discharge permits. [Amended 8-10-2000
by Ord. No. 13-2000]
§ 242-52. Filing of permit application.
E. Require the industrial user, either new or existing, to complete a
questionnaire relating to its industrial waste discharge;
F. Inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at
least once a year.
A. Each industrial user whose wastewater flow and/or wastewater
strength is different from that of sanitary waste must obtain a discharge
permit before connecting to or discharging into the City sewer system.
Each industrial user, as determined by the Director of Municipal
Utilities, currently connected must obtain an industrial waste permit
within 180 days after the effective date of these rules and regulations.
All significant industrial users shall obtain a discharge permit before
connecting to the City sewer system.
B. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Director of Municipal Utilities as the
Director of Municipal Utilities may require.
A. Industrial users required to obtain an industrial waste discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Department an application in the form
prescribed by the Director of Municipal Utilities. The applicant may be
required to submit the following information prepared by a New York
State licensed engineer:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(2) Name and phone number of person to contact concerning
industrial waste.
(3) Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and
seasonal variations, if any.
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics of the sewage,
industrial waste, or other wastes discharged to the sewer system.
(5) Time and duration of discharge.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials processed and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
§ 242-50 AUBURN CODE § 242-52
234:522
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed.
(10) Number and type of employees and hours of work.
(11)Water consumption and uses.
(12) Any other information as may be deemed by the Director of
Municipal Utilities to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
(13) Completion of DEC industrial chemical survey.
(14) All information required by Subsection D of this section. [Added
8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
B. Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit application and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage this system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations." [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
C. Reporting requirement. [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
(1) Baseline monitoring reports.
(a) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever
is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the
Director of Municipal Utilities a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection C(1)(b) below. At least 90 days
prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall
submit to the Director of Municipal Utilities a report which
contains the information listed in Subsection C(1)(b) below. A
new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
§ 242-52 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-52
234:523
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below:
[1] Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
[2] Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
[3] Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial
classifications of the operation carried out by such user.
This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated process.
[4] Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day,
to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
[5] Measurement of pollutants.
[a] The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
[b] The results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration and/or mass, where
required by the standard or by the Director of
Municipal Utilities, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 242-64 of this chapter.
[c] Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 242-64 of this chapter.
[6] Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
[7] Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
§ 242-52 AUBURN CODE § 242-52
234:524
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet
the requirements set out in Subsection D of this section.
[8] Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Subsection B of this section.
D. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Subsection C(1)(b)[7] of
this section: [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction and
beginning and conducting routine operation).
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the Director of Municipal
Utilities no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for
any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to
return to the established schedule.
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director of Municipal Utilities.
E. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Director of Municipal Utilities a report
containing the information described in Subsection C(1)(b)[4] through
[6] of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
§ 242-52 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-52
234:525
accordance with Subsection B of this section. [Added 8-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 13-2000]
F. Periodic compliance reports. [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the Director of Municipal Utilities, but in no case less than twice
per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Subsection B of this section.
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for
the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(3) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Director of Municipal Utilities, using the procedures prescribed in
§ 242-64 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
G. Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Director of
Municipal Utilities of any planned significant changes to the user's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of
its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. [Added 8-10-2000
by Ord. No. 13-2000]
(1) The Director of Municipal Utilities may require the user to submit
such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater
discharge permit application under this section.
(2) The Director of Municipal Utilities may issue a wastewater
discharge permit under Subsection I of this section or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit under § 242-54 of this
chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
H. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
§ 242-52 AUBURN CODE § 242-52
234:526
§ 242-53. Permit conditions.
Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of these rules and regulations and all other ordinances,
regulations, charges and fees established by the City of Auburn. The
conditions of the industrial waste discharge permit shall be uniformly
enforced by the Director of Municipal Utilities in accordance with these
rules and regulations and applicable state and federal regulations. The
permits may contain the following:
Director of Municipal Utilities within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director of Municipal
Utilities within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The
user is not required to resample if the Director of Municipal Utilities
monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Director
of Municipal Utilities samples between the user's initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling. [Added 8-10-2000
by Ord. No. 13-2000]
I. The Director of Municipal Utilities will evaluate the data furnished by
the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
approval of all data required, the Department may issue an industrial
waste discharge permit subject to the conditions and terms provided
herein. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
A. Effluent limitations or other appropriate limitations when toxic
substances are present in the user's wastewater discharge.
B. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sample
locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and
standards for analytical tests and reporting schedule.
C. Requirements for submission of reports for conditions of
noncompliance.
D. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
E. Pretreatment requirements.
F. Requirements for the submission of information concerning the
disposal of waste material separated from the authorized discharge.
G. Requirements for the installation of inspection and sampling manhole
or structure.
H. Schedule of compliance allowing reasonable time to conform to the
effluent limitations of these rules and regulations.
I. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents, flow
rates and time of discharge.
§ 242-52 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-53
234:527
§ 242-54. Duration of industrial waste discharge permits.
Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for a specified period of
time not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than
one year or may be stated to expire on a specified date. If the permittee is
not notified by the Department 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit,
the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions
of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the Department
during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified
by §§ 242-44 and 242-45 are modified or changed. The permittee shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior
to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 242-55. Transfer of permit.
Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. In the event of any change in ownership of the industrial facility,
the permittee shall notify the new owner of the existence of the permit
by letter, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the Director of Municipal
Utilities. If the operations and processes are to remain the same, the permit
will be effective for the new owner. A new industrial waste discharge permit
must be issued to the new owner and facility if any other changes are made
other than the control of ownership.
J. Requirements for maintaining records relating to wastewater discharge
as specified by the Department and affording Department access
thereto along with the specific right of the Department to inspect and
copy any pertinent records required to be maintained by industrial
users. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by
this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and
time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates and analyses that were performed; who performed the analyses;
the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user of the City of Auburn, or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention
period by the Director of Municipal Utilities or the regional
administrator. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
K. The computation and requirement for payment of the industrial waste
surcharge.
L. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Department to ensure
compliance with these rules and regulations.
§ 242-53 AUBURN CODE § 242-56
234:528
§ 242-56. Suspension, modification or revocation of permit.
Industrial waste discharge permits may be modified, suspended or revoked
where the Director of Municipal Utilities finds, after a hearing held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in these rules and regulations:
§ 242-57. Monitoring facilities.
A. A violation of any term of the permit or any order or determination of
the Director of Municipal Utilities promulgated under these rules and
regulations;
B. That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts; or
C. A change in conditions or the existence of a condition which requires
either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the
authorized discharge.
A. Users who discharge, who propose to discharge, or who in the
judgment of the Director of Municipal Utilities could discharge now or
in the future wastewater with constituents and characteristics different
from that produced by a domestic premises may be required to install a
monitoring facility when in the opinion of the Director of Municipal
Utilities such facility is necessary.
B. When in the judgment of the Director of Municipal Utilities there is a
significant difference in the wastewater constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the
Director of Municipal Utilities may require that separate monitoring
facilities be installed for each discharge.
C. Monitoring facilities are to be constructed at a common location into
which all flows from the user are combined. Sanitary wastewater may
be excluded. Whenever the installation of a monitoring facility in a
common location is impossible or impractical, the user shall construct
and maintain, at the user's expense, in lieu of one common monitoring
facility, two or more monitoring facilities as required by the Director of
Municipal Utilities.
D. Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be
constructed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The
purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of wastewaters produced by the user. If sampling and
metering equipment is also required by the Department, it shall be
provided, installed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The
monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the user's
premises outside of the building. If the monitoring facility is inside the
user's fence, there shall be accommodation to allow safe and immediate
access for the Department personnel, such as a gate secured with a
Department lock. There shall be ample room on or near such facility to
allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The
§ 242-56 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-57
234:529
§ 242-58. Inspection and sampling.
The Director of Municipal Utilities and other authorized employees of the
Department and employees of the EPA and DEC bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, flow
measurement and testing to ascertain compliance with these rules and
regulations. The Department shall have the right to set upon the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or flow
measurement. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry to the premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the Department will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
§ 242-59. Pretreatment.
§ 242-60. Accidental discharge.
entire facility and the sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
and at the expense of the user. In the event that no special monitoring
facility is required, sampling shall be conducted at a point or points
selected by the Director of Municipal Utilities.
A. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director of Municipal Utilities,
users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations
established by these rules and regulations and by § 307 of the Federal
Act before discharging into the City sewer system. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
Department shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Director of Municipal Utilities for
review and shall be approved by the Director of Municipal Utilities
before construction of the facility. The review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent complying with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
B. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be approved by the Department.
When pretreatment regulations are adopted by the EPA or DEC for any
industry, then that industry must immediately conform to the EPA or
DEC timetable for adherence to federal or state pretreatment
requirements and any other applicable requirements promulgated by
the EPA or DEC in accordance with § 307 of Public Law 92-217.
Additionally, such industries shall comply with any other more stringent
standards necessitated by local conditions as determined by the
Director of Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-57 AUBURN CODE § 242-60
234:530
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by these rules and
regulations. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the Director of Municipal Utilities
for review and shall be approved by the Department before
construction of the facility.
B. Users shall notify the Department immediately upon discharging
wastes in violation of these rules and regulations due to breakdown of
pretreatment equipment, accidents caused by human error or
negligence or mechanical failure, or other causes, such as acts of
nature, to enable countermeasures to be taken by the Department to
minimize damage to the City sewers, treatment facilities, treatment
processes and receiving waters.
C. The Director of Municipal Utilities shall be notified within five days of
the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the
causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future
occurrences.
D. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss
or damage to the sewer system, treatment facility or treatment process,
or for any fines imposed on the Department on account thereof under
§ 309 of the Federal Act or any liability for civil penalties under
§ 272-74. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
E. At least every two years, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. Where the Director of Municipal Utilities
determines that a slug control plan is necessary, the SIU is required to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively,
the Director of Municipal Utilities may develop such a plan for any user
at the user's cost. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following: [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000; amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014]
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of Municipal
Utilities of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by
Subsection C above.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
§ 242-60 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-60
234:531
§ 242-61. Confidential information. [Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 13-2000]
§ 242-62. Special agreements. [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
No statement in these rules and regulations shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement between the Director of Municipal
Utilities and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
constituents or characteristics may be accepted by the Director of
Municipal Utilities for treatment subject to the proper payment by the
industrial user, except that no agreement shall violate any applicable state
or local pretreatment standard or requirements or federal standards or
requirements or cause or contribute to pass-through or interference.
§ 242-63. Notice to employees.
In order that employees of the users are informed of Department
requirements, users should make available to their employees copies of
these rules and regulations together with such other wastewater
information and notices which may be furnished by the Department from
time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice
shall be furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in
violation of these rules and regulations.
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
A. When requested, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall make
available to the public, for inspection and/or copying, information and
data on industrial users obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permit and monitoring programs and inspections, unless
the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Director of Municipal Utilities, that such
information, if made public, would divulge processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and reports of accidental
discharges shall not be recognized as confidential.
B. Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/
or copying by the public but shall be disclosed immediately with
unlimited access, upon written request, to governmental agencies for
uses related to this chapter, or the SPDES permit, provided that the
governmental agency making the request agrees to hold the
information confidential, in accordance with state or federal laws, rules
and regulations. The Director of Municipal Utilities shall provide
written notice to the industrial user of any disclosure of confidential
information to another governmental agency.
§ 242-60 AUBURN CODE § 242-64
234:532
§ 242-64. Analytical procedures. [Added 8-10-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
§ 242-65. Imposition of surcharge.
In addition to any other fees, charges, sewer rents, or sanitary district
taxes provided by law, the owner or tenant of any parcel of real property
connected with the City's sewer system by any means shall pay an industrial
sewer use charge for use of the wastewater treatment works for discharging
industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for admission into the system.
The industrial sewer use charge shall consist of, but not be limited to, the
following charges:
§ 242-66. Computation of industrial sewer use charge. [Amended
9-15-2011 by Ord. No. 9-2011]
The industrial sewer use charge shall be computed by the Director of
Municipal Utilities using the following formula and shall apply to any
industrial user at the discretion of the Director of Municipal Utilities:
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the constituents and
characteristics of waters and waste to which reference is made in these
rules and regulations shall be determined in accordance with the latest
version of 40 CFR Part 136, Analysis of Pollutants. If 40 CFR Part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques of the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with
the procedures approved by the EPA.
B. Sample collections.
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection B(2) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event that flow proportional sampling is
infeasible, the Director of Municipal Utilities may authorize the use
of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples
where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge
limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using
grab collection techniques.
A. Operation and maintenance charges.
B. Debt service charges.
§ 242-64 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-66
234:533
IC = {[(AvgTSS - LimitTSS) x RateTSS] + [(AvgBOD – LimitBOD) x
RateBOD] + [(AvgCOD – LimitCOD) x RateCOD] + [(AvgO&G – LimitO&G)
x RateO&G] + [(AvgTKN – LimitTKN) x RateTKN] + [(AvgP – LimitP) x
RateP]} x Flow(MG) x 8.34#/gal
Where:
IC = Industrial sewer use charge for the billing period.
TSS = Total suspended solids (mg/l).
BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand.
COD = Chemical oxygen demand.
O&G = Oil and grease.
TKN = Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen.
P = Phosphorous.
§ 242-67. Basis for determination.
The industrial sewer use charge shall be based upon the measured or
estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge of
the user, which may include, but are not limited to, flow rate, biochemical
oxygen demand, total suspended solids, phosphorus, nitrogen, and total
organic carbon. The wastewater constituents used to calculate the
industrial sewer use charge will be those determined by the Director of
Municipal Utilities. Any data provided by the user may be used in addition
to the data obtained by the Director of Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-68. Volume determination.
In applying the surcharge formula, the Director of Municipal Utilities may
represent flow discharged into the sewer system by:
§ 242-69. Determination of pollutant concentration.
A. The amount of water supplied to the premises as shown on the water
meter, or water records if the premises are metered;
B. The volume of wastewater discharged into the sewer system as
determined by the measurements and samples taken at a monitoring
facility installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer
system;
C. Allowances for water not discharged to the sewer system will be made
at the discretion of the Director of Municipal Utilities; or
D. A figure determined by the Director of Municipal Utilities by any
combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable methods.
A. The pollutant concentration of any wastewater shall be determined
from the analysis of representative samples taken prior to discharge
into the City sewers, taken by representatives of the Director of
§ 242-66 AUBURN CODE § 242-69
234:534
§ 242-70. Pollutant concentration disputed by industry.
In the event that a pollutant concentration determined through sampling
conducted by the Director of Municipal Utilities is disputed by the industry,
the industry may request that, in future samples by the City, enough volume
be collected for the sample to be split in two parts. One part will be analyzed
by the City and the other will be analyzed by the industry at a certified
laboratory of its choice. The results of the industry analysis should be
sent to the Director of Municipal Utilities and will be given consideration
in determining average pollutant concentrations. Disputes will be decided
by the Director of Municipal Utilities subject to appropriate action by the
aggrieved industry.
§ 242-71. Payment of industrial sewer use charge.
Payment of the industrial sewer use charge within the time period allotted
by the Director of Municipal Utilities shall be made to the City by the
industrial user after receiving the industrial sewer use charge bill unless
other arrangements for payment have been made and approved by the
Director of Municipal Utilities. Failure to submit payment of any industrial
Municipal Utilities at sampling stations as described in § 242-57 of
these rules and regulations, at any period, or time, or of such duration
and in such a manner as the Director of Municipal Utilities may elect,
or at any place or manner mutually agreed upon between the user
and the Director of Municipal Utilities. The intent of any sampling
procedure is to establish the pollutant concentration in the wastewater
discharge during an average or typical working day. Sampling results
taken by the industry in compliance with conditions in an industrial
wastewater permit may also be used by the Director of Municipal
Utilities in determining an average pollutant loading rate for the billing
period. This concentration may be derived according to the best
judgment of the Director of Municipal Utilities.
B. The analysis of samples taken shall be performed in a laboratory of the
Department or a laboratory designated by the Director of Municipal
Utilities. The industrial waste surcharge and/or the acceptability of the
wastes shall be determined from said analysis.
C. All surcharges shall be based on the analysis of the wastes from any
plant or premises related to total volume of wastes determined under
this section of these rules and regulations. The average value of the
concentrations of pollutants measured during a three-month period,
quarterly, shall be used in calculating the industrial waste surcharge.
D. Whenever the wastes discharged from a premises to a public sewer
might be expected to show appreciable periodic variation during the
year due to manufacturing process or production variation due to
seasonal changes, the Director of Municipal Utilities may average the
results of the two or more series of analysis taken to reflect these
variations and thereby determine an average pollutant concentration.
§ 242-69 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-71
234:535
sewer use charge as determined under §§ 242-65 through 242-69 will result
in penalties and fines as prescribed under these rules and regulations.
§ 242-72. Investigation; notice of violation.
§ 242-73. Hearing; notice and procedure.
A. The Director of Municipal Utilities may, on his or her own motion,
investigate or make inquiry, in a manner to be determined by him or
her, as to any condition affecting the public sewer system as to any
alleged act or omission or failure to comply with any provision of these
rules and regulations and any permit, order or determination issued
thereunder.
B. Whenever it shall appear to the Director of Municipal Utilities, after
investigation, that there has been a violation of any of the provisions of
these rules and regulations or any permit issued thereunder, he or she
shall give written notice to the alleged violator or violators setting forth
any thing or act done or omitted to be done or claimed to be in violation
of any such provisions and requiring that the matters complained of be
corrected or that the alleged violator appear in person or by an attorney
before the Director of Municipal Utilities or his or her duly designated
representative at the time and place in said notice specified and answer
the charges complained of.
C. At least 15 days' notice of such hearing shall be given.
D. Upon the return day of such notice the person so notified shall file with
the Director of Municipal Utilities a statement setting forth the position
of the person so notified, the answer, if any, to the charges made against
him or her, the methods, practices and procedures, if any, which are
being taken to correct each alleged violation, and any other defenses or
information pertinent to the case. Pertinent and relevant testimony of
witnesses shall be received in support of or opposition to said
statement.
E. Following a hearing and after due consideration of the written and oral
statements, and testimony and arguments filed pursuant to Subsection
D above, or on default in appearance on said return day, the Director of
Municipal Utilities may issue and enter such final order or make such
final determination as he or she deems appropriate under the
circumstances and shall notify such person or persons thereof, in
writing, personally or by registered mail.
A. The Director of Municipal Utilities, or any person designated by him or
her for this purpose, may issue subpoenas and administer oaths in
connection with any hearing or investigation under or pursuant to the
provisions of this article, and it shall be the duty of the Director of
Municipal Utilities and any persons designated by him or her for such
purpose to issue subpoenas at the request of and upon behalf of the
respondent.
§ 242-71 AUBURN CODE § 242-73
234:536
B. The Director of Municipal Utilities and those designated by him or her
shall not be bound by laws of evidence in the conduct of hearing
proceedings, but the determination shall be founded upon sufficient
legal evidence to sustain it.
C. Notice of hearing shall be served at least 15 days prior to the date of the
hearing, provided that whenever, because of danger to the public
health, safety or welfare, it appears prejudicial to the public interest to
delay action for 15 days, the Director of Municipal Utilities may serve
the respondent with an order requiring certain action or the cessation
of certain activities immediately or within a specified period of less than
15 days, and the Director of Municipal Utilities shall provide an
opportunity to be heard within 15 days after the date the order is
served.
D. Service of notice of hearing or order shall be made by personal service
or by registered or certified mail. Where service, whether by personal
service or by registered or certified mail, is made upon an infant,
incompetent, partnership, corporation, governmental subdivision,
board or commission, it shall be made upon the person or persons
designated to receive personal service by Article 3 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules.
E. The Corporation Counsel may prefer charges, attend hearings, present
the facts, and take any and all proceedings in connection therewith.
F. At a hearing, the respondent may appear personally, shall have the right
to counsel, and may cross-examine witnesses against him and produce
evidence and witnesses in his or her behalf.
G. A record, or summary thereof, of the proceedings of said hearings shall
be made and filed with the Department. If requested to do so by any
party concerned with said hearing, the full stenographic notes of the
testimony presented at said hearing shall be taken and filed. The
stenographer shall, upon the payment of his or her fees allowed by law
therefor, furnish a certified transcript of the whole or any part of his
notes to any party to the action requiring the same.
H. Unless precluded by law, disposition may be made of any hearing by
stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, default, or other informal
method. Within 10 days of the notice specified in Subsection C, the user
may request a prehearing conference with the Director of Municipal
Utilities' representative for an informal disposition of any or all
charges.
I. Upon request made by any party upon the Department within a
reasonable time, but prior to the time for commencement of judicial
review, of its giving notice of its decision, determination, opinion or
order, the agency shall prepare the record together with any transcript
of proceedings within a reasonable time and shall furnish a copy of the
record and transcript or any part thereof to any party as he or she may
request. Except when any law provides otherwise, the Department is
§ 242-73 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-73
234:537
§ 242-74. Administrative sanctions.
§ 242-75. Criminal sanctions.
authorized to charge not more than its cost for the preparation and
furnishing of such record or transcript or any part thereof, or the
rate specified in the contract between the agency and a contractor, if
prepared by a private contractor.
J. Upon application of any affected user, the Director of Municipal Utilities
may modify and amend any determination after a hearing.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by these rules and regulations, or any order or
determination of the Director of Municipal Utilities promulgated under
these rules and regulations, or the terms of any permit issued
thereunder, shall be liable to the City for a civil penalty not to exceed
$1,000 for each such violation, to be assessed after a hearing held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in these rules and
regulations. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation
and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance
thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty
may be recovered in an action brought by the Corporation Counsel at
the request of the Director of Municipal Utilities in the name of the City
in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be
released or compromised by the Director of Municipal Utilities before
the matter has been referred to the Corporation Counsel, and where
such matter has been referred to the Corporation Counsel, any such
penalty may be released or compromised and any action commenced to
recover the same may be settled and discontinued by the Corporation
Counsel with the consent of the Director of Municipal Utilities.
B. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in Subsection A
above, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall have the power,
following a hearing held in conformance with the procedure set forth in
these rules and regulations, to issue an order suspending, revoking or
modifying the violator's permit, or enjoining the violator from
continuing the violation. Any such order of the Director of Municipal
Utilities shall be enforceable in an action brought by the Corporation
Counsel at the request of the Director of Municipal Utilities in the name
of the Department in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Director of Municipal Utilities
pursuant to this section shall be reviewable in a proceeding pursuant to
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Application for such
review must be made within 60 days after service, in person or by mail,
of a copy of the determination or order upon the attorney of record of
the applicant and of each person who has filed a notice of appearance,
or the applicant in person, if not directly represented by an attorney.
§ 242-73 AUBURN CODE § 242-75
234:538
§ 242-76. Civil liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations
shall, in addition, be civilly liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned to the City by reason of such violation.
§ 242-77. Injunction.
The Corporation Counsel, on his or her own initiative or at the request of
the Director of Municipal Utilities, shall have the right to seek equitable
relief in the name of the City to restrain the violation of, or to compel
compliance with, these rules and regulations or any order or determination
issued thereunder by the Director of Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-78. Summary abatement.
A. Any person who willfully violates any provision of these rules and
regulations or any final determination or order of the Director of
Municipal Utilities made in accordance with these rules and regulations
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
or face appropriate civil/criminal prosecution. Each offense shall be a
separate and distinct offense, and, in the case of a continuing offense,
each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
B. No prosecution under this section shall be instituted until after final
disposition of an appeal or review, if any, provided by § 242-74C.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the
Director of Municipal Utilities finds, after investigation, that any user is
causing, engaging in or maintaining a condition or activity which, in his
or her judgment, presents an imminent danger to the public health,
safety or welfare or to the environment, or is likely to result in
irreversible or irreparable damage to the public sewer system, and it
therefore appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to delay action
until notice and an opportunity of a hearing can be provided, the
Director of Municipal Utilities may, without prior hearing, order such
user by notice, in writing wherever practicable or in such other form as
in the Director of Municipal Utilities' judgment will reasonably notify
such person whose practices are intended to be proscribed, to
discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity, and thereupon
such person shall immediately discontinue, abate or alleviate such
condition or activity, or, where the giving of notice is impracticable, in
the event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily with an emergency
order, the Director of Municipal Utilities may take all appropriate action
to abate the violating condition. As promptly as possible thereafter, not
to exceed 15 days, the Director of Municipal Utilities shall provide the
user an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations.
§ 242-75 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-78
234:539
§ 242-79. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
[Amended 8-10-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000]
The Director of Municipal Utilities shall publish annually, in the largest
daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located,
a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean:
B. The Director of Municipal Utilities, acting upon the belief that an
emergency exists, shall be indemnified against any personal liability
that may arise in the performance of his or her duties to protect the
public health, safety or welfare or preserve the public sewer system.
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, for the same pollutant parameter by any
amount; [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH); [Amended 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
C. Any other discharge violation that the Director of Municipal Utilities
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment or has resulted in the Director of
Municipal Utilities' exercise of his emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 242-78 AUBURN CODE § 242-79
234:540
H. Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best
management practices which the Director of Municipal Utilities
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No.
13-2014]
§ 242-79 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-79
234:541

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 242-80. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 242-81. Civil liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided herein, shall, in addition, be civilly liable to the City
for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the City by reason of such
violation.
§ 242-82. Injunctive relief.
The Corporation Counsel, on his or her own initiative or at the request of the
Director of Municipal Utilities, shall have the right to seek equitable relief
in the name of the City to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance
with, this chapter, or any order or determination issued thereunder by the
Director of Municipal Utilities.
§ 242-80 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-82
234:543

ARTICLE VII
Sewer Service Charges
[Added 6-25-1992]
§ 242-83. Determination of charges; billing and payment.
A. A sewer rental charge schedule shall be used for deriving revenues for
financing and maintaining sewage collection and treatment facilities.
The funds derived from these charges shall be used for all municipal
expenses associated with design, engineering, constructing, improving
or maintaining a sewage system, including engineering, planning,
construction, reconstruction of sewers and sewage treatment works
and all necessary appurtenances thereto, including pumping stations,
extension, enlargement, replacement or additions to the sanitary and
stormwater sewer system, separation of sanitary and stormwater
sewers, or the preliminary or other studies and surveys relative thereto
and for the acquisition of land or rights-of-way for any of the capital
improvements.
B. The sewer rental charge shall be assigned to owners of properties
located within or without the corporate limits of the City of Auburn who
contribute wastes to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
C. The basis for the normal sewer rental charge for properties located
within the City of Auburn shall be the volume of water consumed from
the public water supply system by the individual property owner. The
sewer rental charge shall be determined by multiplying the cubic feet of
water used by a specific rate per 100 cubic feet as determined by City
Council: [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998; 6-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 11-2003; 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005; 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 15-2007; 6-12-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008; 6-18-2009 by
Ord. No. 5-2009; 6-3-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010; 11-20-2014 by
Ord. No. 12-2014]
D. The basis for the normal sewer rental charge for properties serviced
which are located outside the geographic boundaries of the City of
Auburn shall be the volume of water consumed from the public water
supply system by the individual property owner. The sewer rental
charge for these properties shall be determined by multiplying the
existing sewer rental charge for properties located in the City of
Auburn by a multiplier determined by City Council per hundred cubic
feet of water. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
E. The City Council reserves the right to change the stated percentage
multiplier of the water bill in accordance with the requirements of the
above subsections. The determination of the property owner's
classification as industrial or domestic shall be according to the present
water charge schedule.
F. The sewer rental charge assigned to any property owner who is not
connected to the public water supply system but who is connected to
§ 242-83 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-83
234:545
the public sewers shall be based on the estimated or measured volume
of sewage contributed to the public sewers by such property owner, as
determined by the Director of Municipal Utilities or the City Manager.
Such charges shall be expressed in terms similar to water charge
arrangements. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
G. The sewer rental charge assigned to any property owner with both a
public and private water supply, whose contribution of sewage to the
public sewers exceeds the volume of public water consumed by that
owner, as evidenced by his water bill, shall be based on the estimated or
measured volume of sewage entering the public sewers as determined
by the Director of Municipal Utilities or the City Manager. Such charges
shall be expressed in terms similar to water charge arrangements.
[Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
H. The sewer rental charge assigned to any property owner who
contributes industrial wastes to the public sewers, or who contributes a
combination of sewage and industrial wastes to the public sewers, shall
be determined as follows:
(1) The sewer rental charge shall be determined in accordance with
the previous subsections.
(2) A surcharge shall be added to the sewer rental charge for any
waste which exceeds the maximum strength and concentration
standards set up. The charge shall depend on the strength and
character of the industrial waste finally admitted to the public
sewer. The surcharge amount shall be established by the Director
of Municipal Utilities or the City Manager. [Amended 11-20-2014
by Ord. No. 12-2014]
I. A special sewer rental charge shall be assigned to any industrial firm or
organization which, by virtue of the volume, strength or unusual
characteristic of its waste alone, would overload or upset the capacity
or efficiency of the sewage works or any part thereof if such waste
entered the public sewer, or whose waste disposal situation is such that
it does not discharge all of its waste into the public system. The Director
of Municipal Utilities or City Manager shall assign a special sewer
rental charge to the industrial firm by separate agreement with said
firm. The applicable portions of the preceding provisions as well as the
equitable rights of the public shall be the basis for such an agreement.
[Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
J. Payments. [Added 5-23-1997 by Ord. No. 18-1997]
(1) Sewer rental charges shall be billed with the water bill monthly for
industrial accounts or quarterly for domestic accounts. Gross
amounts due on these bills shall be due one month from the billing
date. Net amounts are due by the 15th day from the billing date. A
minimum sewer service charge shall be assessed for usage at or
below minimum water usage which shall be the specific rate per
§ 242-83 AUBURN CODE § 242-83
234:546
§ 242-84. Disposition of charges and moneys.
All charges and moneys collected under the provisions of this article shall
be credited to the revenues of the sewer rent fund for sewer facilities.
§ 242-85. Effective date for rental charge increase.
The increase in the rental charge shall become effective July 1, 1992.
§ 242-86. Charges as a result of leaks. [Added 11-20-2014 by Ord.
No. 12-2014]
Owner's responsibility. The owner of the premises to which sewer service
is supplied shall be charged for sewer service utilizing the total volume
of water consumed from the public water supply system, whether used,
wasted or lost by leakage. The Director of Municipal Utilities or the City
Manager may make an adjustment to the sewer service charge, at his/her
discretion, wherein it appears that the water did not enter the sewer and it
is determined that the owner or user did not reasonably know that the leak
had occurred and would have had an opportunity to correct the leak. Such
reduction to the sewer service shall not exceed 1/2 of the estimated loss of
water, and the adjustment may only be allowed to the owner or user onetime
basis unless there has occurred exceptional circumstances causing the
loss.
100 cubic feet as set forth in Subsection C of this section times
1,000 cubic feet of water.
(2) Sewer rental charge payments shall constitute a lien upon the real
property against which the charge is made. Delinquent sewer
rental charges shall be levied and collected as taxes annually
against the real property for which they are made. If at any time net
and gross billings are dropped from the water bill, the sewer rental
charge at the rate established by this chapter shall be applied to
the water bill with payments due at the same time as the water bill.
K. The City Council reserves the right, from time to time, to change sewer
rental charges originally or previously assigned to any property owner.
§ 242-83 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 242-86
234:547
Chapter 245
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 242-86 AUBURN CODE § 242-86
234:548
ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 2-1-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 245-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
§ 245-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — Licensed and/or registered child day-care
centers, group family day-care homes and family day-care homes as defined
by the New York State Social Services Law.
RESIDENCE — The place where a person sleeps, which may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEX OFFENDER — A person who has been convicted of a sexual offense and
has received a Level III designation as defined under Article 6-C of the New
York State Correction Law.[Amended 5-15-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 245-3. Restrictions.
A Level III sex offender as herein defined shall not reside within, or enter
within, a radius of 500 feet measured from the main, or secondary, or
tertiary entrances of a public or private school, nursery school, preschool,
child-care facility, playground, or park. Notwithstanding, however, a Level
III sex offender may enter within the five-hundred-foot radius solely for
the purpose of employment, shopping or attending appointments, but in no
A. The highest priority of government is the safety and protection of its
residents, especially its children. The City of Auburn has had placed in
its borders a large number of registered sex offenders, some of which
have committed criminal sexual offenses against minors. A number of
these sex offenders have been categorized as Level III sex offenders
who have been determined to pose a high risk of committing another
sexual crime.
B. This Council finds and determines that it is essential to assure residents
of the City of Auburn that City government continues to make every
effort to protect children from sex offenders.
C. This Council further finds and determines that it is in the best interests
of City of Auburn residents to establish residency and proximity
restrictions for Level III sex offenders.
D. Accordingly, the purpose of this article is to prohibit Level III sex
offenders from residing within, or entering within, a radius of 500 feet
measured from the main, or secondary, or tertiary entrances of a public
or private school, nursery school, preschool, child-care facility,
playground, or park.
§ 245-1 PUBLIC CONDUCT § 245-3
234:549
event shall the sex offender enter onto the premises of a public or private
school, nursery school, preschool, registered day-care center, playground,
or park while working, shopping or attending any appointments.
§ 245-4. Notifications.
Notification of passage of this article, and of these prohibitions, shall be
delivered in writing, by the City of Auburn Police Department, to each
and every Level III registered sex offender now residing, or in the future
residing, within the City of Auburn. Notifications will also be delivered in
writing by the City of Auburn Police Department to the New York State
Police, the New York State Division of Parole, the Cayuga County Parole
Department, all school districts and private schools within the City of
Auburn, and all child-care facilities as defined in this article.
§ 245-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be an A
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding one year; or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 245-6. Applicability.
It is intended that this article shall apply only to Level III sex offenders. This
article is not intended to replace, mitigate, abrogate, modify or in any way
extend, enhance or supplant any existing law enforcement requirements by
any other agencies as designated under any applicable state statutes.
§ 245-3 AUBURN CODE § 245-6
234:550
Chapter 248
SIDEWALK CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259. Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 248-1. License required.
Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted upon application to the City Manager. A
license to operate a sidewalk cafe shall only be issued to applicants who
will operate the cafe in connection with the operation of a restaurant on the
first floor of the adjoining premises, which fronts or empties onto the street
at the approximate location where the sidewalk cafe license is requested.
The City Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations for the operation
of the sidewalk cafes. Note: The granting of a license hereunder does not
authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages. The State Liquor Authority has
exclusive jurisdiction. See Appendix to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law,
§ 48.4 in particular.
§ 248-2. License fee; expiration of license.
The license fee payable to the City of Auburn for sidewalk cafes shall be
$20. Such license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the
license is issued.
§ 248-3. Revocation of license.
Since the use of streets by the general public is the paramount purpose,
any license issued hereunder may be revoked at any time with or without
notice and with or without cause by the City Manager. No license fee or part
thereof shall be refunded except pursuant to the rules and regulations of
the City Manager.
§ 248-4. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other applicable law, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
§ 245-6 SIDEWALK CAFES § 248-4
248:551
Chapter 254
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
§ 248-4 AUBURN CODE § 248-4
248:552
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 254-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Garbage and Trash Ordinance."
§ 254-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GARBAGE — Includes all refuse from animal or vegetable matter, or both,
intended for human food but rejected for such use; all ordinary kitchen
refuse, except dirt, ashes, cans, bottles and glass containers; and all refuse
of food supplies not used for human food, all offal, and decayed fruit.
RUBBISH — All crockery, bottles, refuse, glass, tin cans and other metal and
noncombustible substances in whatever form they may be and no longer
intended or suitable for reuse.
§ 254-3. Transportation and deposit of waste material.
A. Generally. No person shall dump or deposit any ashes, rubbish, or
garbage upon any lot, yard, premises or street in the City except in a
sanitary landfill operated by the City and pursuant to all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations applicable thereto.
B. Exception. The above Subsection A shall not apply to the filling of land
on private premises by the owner or with his or her permission with
ashes or clean fill upon obtaining a permit therefor from the City
Manager.
C. Transportation of rubbish. No person shall haul or transport ashes,
garbage, rubbish or other similar waste material in any vehicle in such
a manner as to cause or permit any such material to fall or be blown
therefrom. Any open truck, vehicle, trailer, or conveyance transporting
garbage or containers of garbage must be adequately and securely
covered with a tarpaulin at all times when the truck, vehicle, trailer, or
conveyance is in motion.
§ 254-1 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-3
248:553

ARTICLE II
Garbage Collection
§ 254-4. Authority of City Manager.
The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall have power to
take such measures as he or she shall deem appropriate for the removal of
garbage and any other components of solid waste as defined by this chapter
from the City, subject to the following requirements:
§ 254-5. Placing garbage for collection.
A. The solid waste management services of collection, transportation,
recycling and disposal shall be provided on a tax- and fee-supported
basis for the sole benefit of individuals, business operations or other
organizations residing in or occupying all properties in the City of
Auburn.
B. Solid waste management services provided by the City to properties
shall include the waste categories of solid waste, yard waste and
recycling.
C. There shall be no multiple pickups for special areas unless such extra
services are paid for, nor will extra collection routes be established that
do not treat every property the same, unless in extreme health
emergencies the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee shall
deem it in the public's interest to do so on a limited basis. Multiple
pickups shall be paid for at rates established at least annually by the
City Council through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee
schedule.
A. Use of approved container required. All individuals, business
operations or other organizations residing in or occupying all
properties in the City of Auburn shall cause his or her garbage to be
placed in approved containers defined as follows:
APPROVED REFUSE CONTAINER — A plastic or metal container or a
clear plastic bag not larger than 35 gallons and not weighing more than
50 pounds when full. Cardboard boxes are not considered approved
refuse containers. No more than five approved refuse containers per
unit may be placed curbside each week.
APPROVED RECYCLABLE CONTAINER — A plastic or metal container,
not larger than 35 gallons and not weighing more than 50 pounds when
full. Recyclable Containers shall be clearly marked or labeled with a
large letter "R" to define them as containers that hold only the contents
defined as recyclables. To encourage recycling, there is no limit to the
number of approved recyclable containers per unit that may be placed
curbside each week.
B. Container to be accessible. The filled container shall be placed near the
curb in front of the property in the City's right-of-way at such time as it
§ 254-4 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-5
248:555
§ 254-6. Prohibited deposits in garbage containers.
No person shall place in an approved container, the contents of which are
to be removed by the collector of garbage, any papers, rubbish, sweepings,
ashes, tin cans, bottles or glass receptacles, paint cans or any other matter
not defined as garbage in this chapter.
§ 254-7. Garbage to be kept dry and unfrozen.
All precautions shall be taken to keep garbage dry and prevent its freezing
after being put in the approved container for removal. Frozen garbage will
not be collected, and the collector of garbage shall not be responsible for
damage to any container when its contents are frozen.
§ 254-8. Location of garbage containers.
§ 254-9. Frequency of collection.
shall be called for collection, except that a person may be exempted
from these requirements upon obtaining a permit from the City
Manager, or the City Manager's designee.
C. Set-out times. All garbage to be picked up shall be at the curb no later
than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. No garbage shall be placed at
the curb before dusk (dusk being defined as 1/2 hour before sunset) on
the day before the scheduled pickup day. All garbage and containers
must be removed from the curb by 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
A. Generally. No container used for the storing of garbage shall be kept in
or upon any street, sidewalk or any public place except for immediate
removal, or within 20 feet of any line fence in the residential section,
and such containers and the place where they stand shall be kept clean
and disinfected. No garbage shall be thrown or allowed to remain in any
public place or upon the ground or property near or adjacent to any
store, bakery, milk plant or any other food stores.
B. Authority of Superintendent of Public Works. In case of complaint or
dispute arising as to the place where containers containing garbage
awaiting removal shall be placed, the Superintendent of Public Works
or his or her subordinate so designated for such purpose shall forthwith
designate the place or places where such containers shall be set aside
while awaiting removal.
A. Generally. Solid waste shall be collected once a week from all places in
the City of Auburn where placed for collection in compliance with
Article II and Article IV of this chapter.
B. Authority of City Manager.
(1) The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall have the
authority to prescribe a different number of collections from those
herein provided, if in his or her judgment conditions may require
§ 254-5 AUBURN CODE § 254-9
248:556
§ 254-10. Private garbage collection regulated.
§ 254-11. General regulations.
such, in the interest of the public health, safety and/or welfare. Any
collections prescribed by the City Manager, or the City Manager's
designee shall be done at the expense of the landowner or
occupant. The cost of such cleanup shall be charged to the
landowner in the format provided in § 254-29B. Rates for these
collections will be established at least annually by the City Council
through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
(2) The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall also have
the authority to order the immediate cleanup of solid waste placed
for collection in violation of Article II, Article III or Article IV of this
chapter, without notice to the landowner or occupant, where in his
or her judgment conditions may require such, in the interest of the
public health, safety and/or welfare. The cost of such cleanup shall
be charged to the landowner in the format provided in § 254-29B.
Rates for these collections will be established at least annually by
the City Council through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee
schedule.
A. Permit or license required. No person shall engage in the business of
collecting and transporting garbage without first having obtained a
permit or license from the City of Auburn Landfill office authorizing
such person to engage in said business in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
B. Renewals. Applications for renewals of such permits or licenses must be
made annually on a schedule set by the City of Auburn landfill office at
which time all said permits or licenses previously issued shall become
void.
A. Garbage to be conveyed in covered, watertight containers and vehicles.
All garbage being removed shall be carried through the City in
watertight, covered vehicles or in watertight, covered containers
placed in vehicles and shall be so loaded and transported that no part
thereof shall fall, spill or leak from such vehicle or vessel. In passing
through the streets of the City to and from the City Landfill, the doors
and covers of all vehicles must be tightly closed so that the contents will
not be exposed to view; at other times they must be kept closed as much
as the nature of the work will permit. Any open truck, vehicle, trailer, or
conveyance transporting garbage or containers of garbage must be
adequately and securely covered with a tarpaulin at all times when the
truck, vehicle, trailer, or conveyance is in motion.
B. Vehicles and containers. All vehicles and containers used by a collector
of garbage must be thoroughly washed and disinfected, inside and
outside, at least once a day. They must at all times be kept as clean and
§ 254-9 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-11
248:557
neat as possible and in a condition approved by the City Manager, or
the City Manager's designee.
C. Manner of disposal. All garbage removed shall be disposed of in such
manner as not to create a nuisance.
D. Taking, removing, or disturbing garbage. No person, except the owner
thereof, shall take, remove, molest or otherwise disturb any garbage
which has been placed for and is waiting removal by the City without
permission from the City Manager.
E. Deposit of out-of-city garbage is strictly prohibited. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation not an
owner, resident, occupant and/or tenant of real property situated within
the City of Auburn to place out for collection or cause to be collected on
any highway within the City of Auburn or within the limits of the rightof-
way of such highway or upon private land adjacent thereto household
garbage, household green waste, miscellaneous waste of any kind, and
recyclables, as those terms are defined in § 254-18 of this chapter.
F. Allowing deposit of out-of-city garbage is strictly prohibited. It shall be
a violation of this chapter for any owner, resident, occupant and/or
tenant of any real property parcel situated within the City of Auburn to
place out for collection or permit or allow to be placed out for collection
any household garbage, household green waste, miscellaneous waste of
any kind, and recyclables, as those terms are defined in § 254-18 of this
chapter, that has not been generated at the real property parcel as it is
defined by the City of Auburn.
§ 254-11 AUBURN CODE § 254-11
248:558
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Trash Collectors
§ 254-12. License required; definitions; insurance; application for
license; fees.
§ 254-13. Minimum criteria for disposing of solid waste.
A. License required. Any hauler desiring to collect, transport or haul any
solid waste materials for hire within the City of Auburn must obtain a
license to do business from the City Landfill as a prerequisite thereto.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAULER — Any person engaged in the collection and/or transportation
of solid waste for compensation.
LANDFILL SERVICE AREA — Encompasses the City of Auburn and the
towns and villages within Cayuga County and the Central New York
region which have entered into intermunicipal agreements with the
City of Auburn for the disposal of solid waste at the Auburn Landfill
facility.
SOLID WASTE — As defined in § 254-18 of this chapter.
C. Insurance. The hauler shall present to the City of Auburn and maintain
therewith a current copy of his or its insurance binder governing his or
its business operations within the State of New York, to the minimum
requirements as may be established by the City Manager.
D. Applications and renewals. Application for a license, or renewal thereof,
shall be filed with the City of Auburn Landfill annually on a schedule set
by the City of Auburn Landfill office at which time all said permits
previously issued shall become void.
E. Fees. Fees shall be set at least annually by the City Council through a
budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
A. The City of Auburn shall further require, as an ongoing requirement to
dispose of waste within the City of Auburn, that the hauler meet the
following minimum criteria:
(1) Each hauler must covenant to deliver all of the solid waste
originating in the City of Auburn to the Auburn Landfill.
(2) Each hauler must supply a plan of operation, when required by the
City Manager, to address present and future requirements of the
City and county recycling programs.
(3) Each hauler must agree not to deliver knowingly any hazardous
waste into the landfill.
§ 254-12 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-13
248:559
§ 254-14. Other conditions and restrictions.
The City of Auburn, through its City Manager, may place any additional
conditions and/or restrictions on the granting of a license which it deems
necessary or advisable and in the best interest of the City, as determined by
the City Manager.
§ 254-15. Revocation of license.
The City Manager of the City of Auburn retains the right to revoke a license
to collect, transport or haul solid waste within the City or to dispose of solid
waste at its landfill at any time for a violation of this chapter.
§ 254-16. Rubbish to be covered.
No person shall be issued a license or permit to transport or haul ashes,
rubbish or refuse for hire within the City in an open truck, vehicle, trailer or
conveyance unless said ashes, rubbish or refuse is adequately covered with
a tarpaulin at all times when the truck, vehicle, trailer or conveyance is in
motion.
B. The minimum criteria delineated herein constitute the threshold level
that each hauler must meet to obtain and hold a license and are in no
way intended to limit the municipality's ability to establish any
additional criteria which it deems necessary or desirable. Compliance
with the minimum criteria shall be a condition precedent to holding a
license, and the material noncompliance with these minimum criteria
may result in the immediate revocation of the license.
§ 254-13 AUBURN CODE § 254-16
248:560
ARTICLE IV
Solid Waste Recycling Program
§ 254-17. Components of solid waste.
Solid waste consists of:
§ 254-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPROVED REFUSE CONTAINER — A plastic or metal container, or a clear
plastic bag not larger than 35 gallons and not weighing more than 50
pounds when full. Cardboard boxes are not considered approved containers.
No more than five approved refuse containers per unit may be placed
curbside each week.
APPROVED RECYCLABLE CONTAINER — A plastic or metal container, not
larger than 35 gallons and not weighing more than 50 pounds when full.
Recyclable containers should be clearly marked or labeled with a large
letter "R" to define them as containers that hold only the contents defined
as recyclables. To encourage recycling, there is no limit to the number of
approved recyclable containers per unit that may be placed curbside each
week.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE — All components of household solid waste not
included in recyclables, green waste or miscellaneous waste.
HOUSEHOLD GREEN WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, and cuttings from
shrubs, hedges and trees and garden debris. "Green waste" shall not be
construed to include garbage, recyclable materials, construction debris and
major appliances.
MISCELLANEOUS WASTE — Encompasses the following terms and items:
A. Garbage waste (useless).
B. Green waste (usable for composting).
C. Miscellaneous waste (usable and useless).
D. Recycling items (reusable items from households and agricultural,
public, commercial and industrial sites).
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A large and/or bulky household mechanism
(such as a refrigerator, washer, dryer, stove, etc.) ordinarily operated by
gas or electric current.
A.
LARGE HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — All other large and/or bulky
articles actually used in the home and which equip it for living (such as
chairs, sofas, tables, beds, carpets, etc.).
B.
C. VEHICULAR TIRES — Tires from cars and trucks and their casings.
§ 254-17 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-18
248:561
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTES — Household hazardous wastes
are exempt from state and federal regulations. For the purpose of
this article, "household hazardous waste" shall include pesticides, used
motor oil, automobile batteries, swimming pool chemicals, flammable
materials, flammable liquids, paints, special metals, explosives and any
other "red label" substance. Special disposal times for these substances
will be established. The substances that are generated by commercial
or industrial establishments cannot be collected per federal law.
D.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — As defined in 6 NYCRR 360, as amended.
Infectious and medical waste must be incinerated.
E.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL GARBAGE — Includes all
nonhazardous and nontoxic wastes which are not recyclable
commercial and industrial byproducts or green wastes.
F.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures, road
building, and land clearing. Such wastes include but are not limited to
bricks, concrete and other masonry materials, soil, rock, lumber, road
spoils, paving material, and stumps of trees.
G.
FARM HAZARDOUS WASTE — All containers containing pesticides
and/or pesticide residue and which can no longer be utilized for farm
purposes.
H.
RECYCLABLES — Any material designated, from time to time, by the
City Council, either upon the Council's own initiative or upon the
recommendation of the City Manager, which under any applicable law
or regulation is not hazardous and which is separated from the waste
stream and held for its material recycling or reuse value.
I.
HOUSEHOLD METALS — Any empty metal food containers, including
aluminum, bimetal and steel cans (tin cans).
J.
HOUSEHOLD GLASS — Any empty and clean glass food jars and
beverage bottles without any lids and caps. Auto glass, light bulbs,
mirrors, fluorescent tubes, Pyrex, window glass, ceramics or table
china is not acceptable.
K.
HOUSEHOLD COMMODITY GRADE PLASTIC — Only high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) cloudy white milk and water jugs plus mixed
colors. Commodity grade plastics are graded as follows: polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE) No. 1; high-density polyethylene (HDPE) No. 2;
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) No. 3; low-density polyethylene (LDPE) No. 4;
Polypropylene (PP) No. 5; polystyrene (PS) No. 6.
L.
CARDBOARD and CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Respectively, singleply
cardboard and triple-ply corrugated cardboard where the middle
ply is a wavy flute of reinforcing material. This definition does not
include plastic liners, wood, plastic, string and/or straps which may be
attached to the cardboard, nor does it include wax or plastic boxes
M.
§ 254-18 AUBURN CODE § 254-18
248:562
PERSON — Any individual head of household, tenant, landlord, chief
executive officer, owner or manager of a commercial or industrial
establishment.
RECYCLERS — Those who deal with recyclable material as collectors,
separators and marketers. This definition shall include not-for-profit
corporations and charitable organizations which collect recyclables for
fundraising purposes.
ROADSIDE DUMPING — Solid waste abandoned on unauthorized sites.
Littering is unlawful. The Department of Environmental Conservation has
a hotline called 1-800-TIPP-DEC (1-800-847-7332). The "TIPP" stands for
"Turn in a Poacher or Polluter."
SET-OUT TIMES — All refuse and recyclables to be picked up must be
at the curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on the regularly scheduled day of
collection. No refuse and recyclables shall be placed at the curb before
dusk (dusk being defined as 1/2 hour before sunset) on the day before the
regularly scheduled collection day. Large items that require arrangements
for a special collection must be at the curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on
the arranged day of collection and shall not be placed at the curb before
dusk (dusk being defined as 1/2 hour before sunset) on the day before the
scheduled collection day. All empty refuse and recyclable containers must
be removed from the curb by 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
but not limited to materials or substances discarded or rejected as being
spent, useless, worthless, or in excess to the owners at the time of such
discard or rejection, or which are being accumulated, stored, or physically,
chemically or biologically treated prior to being discarded or rejected,
having served their intended use, or as a manufacturing byproduct,
including but not limited to garbage, refuse, industrial, commercial and
agricultural waste, sludges from air or water pollution control facilities
or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous
material, incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal,
but not including sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials
or substances and those in gaseous form, special nuclear or byproduct
associated with "wet foods" (i.e., ice cream, frozen food, take-out food
containers, etc.). Cardboard items are to be kept dry.
HOUSEHOLD PAPER A-GRADE — Newspapers without a glossy or
waxy coated surface. Paper is to be kept dry. Newspapers used for
reasonable secondary household uses, such as for animal droppings,
shall not be required to be recycled.
N.
PUBLIC, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PAPER B-GRADE — Typical
office correspondence paper. Paper is to be kept dry.
O.
RECYCLABLE COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BYPRODUCTS —
Includes all materials which are a byproduct of production utilized in
production or sale after sale by a commercial enterprise or industrial
enterprise.
P.
§ 254-18 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-18
248:563
materials within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, or waste which appears on the list or satisfies the characteristics
of hazardous waste promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental
Conservation.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials from the
solid waste stream at the point of generation for separate collection, sale or
other disposition.
§ 254-19. Preparation of garbage and recyclable material for
residential collection.
No person shall dispose of garbage or recyclables except as follows:
A. In order to provide for public health and safety and to facilitate the
conservation of vital resources, each person shall provide for the
removal of garbage and recyclables from the property on which they
are generated either through a service provided by the City or a
licensed private hauler or by direct haul by the individual generator to
the Auburn Sanitary Landfill or other designated location approved by
the City.
B. In order to facilitate the conservation of vital natural resources through
recycling, and pursuant to Article 6, § 120-aa of the General Municipal
Law, each person is required to provide for the source separation and
segregation of recyclables in suitable containers as authorized by the
City for recyclable material.
C. In order to further facilitate the conservation of vital natural resources
through recycling, household glass, household metals, household
commodity grade plastics, newsprint, and cardboard and corrugated
cardboard shall be separated from garbage. The particular
requirements for separation shall be established by the City.
D. From the time of placement of garbage and of recyclable material at the
street curb or other designated area approved by the City by a person
for collection in accordance herewith, such garbage and recyclable
material shall be delivered to the appropriate facility designated by the
City. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person without
authority from the City to collect, pick up, remove, or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any garbage and recyclable material
placed at the street curb or other designated area, and each such
collection, pickup, or removal from one or more premises shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense in violation of this chapter. A
resident may dispose of his or her recyclables by selling or donating the
same to recyclers, but these recyclables may not be picked up at the
street curb. Residents are encouraged to report scavengers to the
Police Department.
E. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place at the street
curb for collection the following:
§ 254-18 AUBURN CODE § 254-19
248:564
§ 254-20. Public sale of recyclables.
It shall be the responsibility of the City Manager, the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Landfill Supervisor to administer a program for proper
disposal of recyclables collected in the City of Auburn and at the Auburn
Landfill. Such program shall make attempts to obtain the most economical
return to the City when the recyclables are sold.
§ 254-21. Residential, commercial and industrial construction and
demolition debris.
(1) Household garbage in containers other than approved containers.
(2) Household garbage unbagged.
(3) Household garbage in excess of 50 pounds per approved container.
(4) Recyclables in nonapproved containers.
(5) Recyclables not separated from household garbage.
(6) Recyclables not scheduled to be picked up.
(7) Recyclables not cleaned.
(8) Nonrecyclable materials mixed with recyclables.
(9) Household green waste unbundled.
(10) Household green waste in excess of four inches in diameter.
(11) Household green waste in excess of six feet long.
(12) Construction and demolition debris in excess of 50 pounds per
approved container and in excess of two such containers.
F. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person without authority
from the City to collect, pick up, tamper with, remove or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any clear bag or recyclable material
placed at the street curb or other designated area, and each such
collection, pickup, or removal from one or more premises shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense in violation of this chapter.
G. Tipping fees, if necessary, for the collection, handling and disposal of
recyclables shall be established by the City Council as needed, either
upon its recommendation or that of the City Manager.
H. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place at the street
curb for collection household garbage, recyclables, household green
waste and miscellaneous waste except at such times as allowed
pursuant to the definition of "set-out times" in § 254-18.
A. The City shall provide a location at the sanitary landfill or other suitable
area for residential, commercial and industrial construction and
§ 254-19 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-21
248:565
§ 254-22. Residential green waste.
§ 254-23. Commercial and industrial garbage and recyclables.
demolition debris. Such material which is recycled or reused for
construction shall not be regulated by this chapter.
B. Tipping fees or other charges for the handling and disposal of
residential, commercial and industrial construction and demolition
debris shall be established at least annually by the City Council through
a budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
C. Any rules and regulations pertaining to said handling and disposal of
solid waste not specifically stated in this chapter may be established by
the City of Auburn Landfill and communicated at least annually to the
public.
A. The City shall provide a schedule for the collection of residential green
waste. Said green waste shall be composted by the City at a site or sites
designated by the City. Where allowed by law or regulation, this section
shall not prohibit private composting of green waste.
B. Tipping fees or other charges for the handling and disposal of
residential green waste shall be established at least annually by the
City Council through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee
schedule.
C. Any rules and regulations pertaining to said handling and disposal of
residential green waste not specifically stated in this chapter may be
established by the City of Auburn Landfill and communicated at least
annually to the public.
A. All commercial and industrial garbage collected by the generator or
private hauler shall be delivered to the Auburn Landfill or facility
designated by the City Council.
B. All commercial and industrial recyclables designated for disposal at an
approved facility shall be packaged and collected in a manner
designated by the City and delivered to the facility.
C. Tipping fees or other charges for the handling and disposal of
commercial and industrial garbage and recyclables shall be established
and modified at least annually by the City Council through a budget
resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
D. Rules and regulations pertaining to the handling and disposal of
commercial and industrial garbage and recyclables not specifically
stated in this chapter may be established by the City of Auburn Landfill
and communicated at least annually to the public.
E. The materials collected by the metal industry, recyclers, and their
agents, as well as the materials that they separate and market shall be
§ 254-21 AUBURN CODE § 254-23
248:566
§ 254-24. Major appliances, large household furnishings and tires.
§ 254-25. Household hazardous waste and farm hazardous waste.
The City of Auburn Landfill will not accept household hazardous waste
and farm hazardous waste of any kind. For the purpose of this article,
"household hazardous waste" shall include pesticides, used motor oil,
automobile batteries, swimming pool chemicals, flammable materials,
flammable liquids, paints, special metals, explosives and any other "red
label" substance. Special disposal times for these substances will be
established. The substances that are generated by commercial or industrial
establishments cannot be collected per federal law. "Farm hazardous waste"
shall include containers containing pesticides and/or pesticide residue and
which can no longer be utilized for farm purposes.
§ 254-26. Infectious waste.
All infectious waste, including needles and other sharps, as defined and
regulated by 6 NYCRR 360, shall be disposed of at a location and by a
method as designated and approved by the City of Auburn Landfill and in
compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations.
exempt from this chapter. Any waste they tender for municipal
collection shall not include recyclables.
F. Recyclable industrial and commercial byproducts may be sold or
donated by an industrial and/or commercial enterprise to any scrap
metal enterprise or recycler. Materials cannot be placed at the curbside
for collection by said scrap metal enterprise or recycler.
G. Green waste produced by commercial and industrial enterprises shall
be delivered to the Auburn Landfill or a location designated by the City
Manager. It shall not be left for City pickup.
A. The City shall provide a schedule for the collection and disposal of
major appliances, large household furnishings and tires.
B. Major appliances, large household furnishings and tires shall be
disposed of by the City at a site or sites designated by the City Manager.
C. Tipping fees or other charges for the handling and disposal of major
appliances, large household furnishings and tires shall be established at
least annually by the City Council through a budget resolution that
adopts a City fee schedule.
D. Any rules and regulations pertaining to said handling and disposal of
major appliances, large household furnishings and tires not specifically
stated in this chapter may be established by the City of Auburn Landfill
and communicated at least annually to the public.
§ 254-23 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-26
248:567

ARTICLE V
Accumulation of Solid Waste
§ 254-27. Maintenance of property.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner, occupant or any person
having control of any lot or land in the City to permit or maintain on
such lot or land any accumulation of solid waste as that term is defined
in § 254-18 or to place or allow to be placed solid waste on the curb in
violation of § 254-5A and C, the definition of "roadside dumping" in § 254-18
and § 254-24.
§ 254-28. Duty of owner or occupant.
It shall be the duty of any such owner, occupant or any person having
control of any such lot or land to remove or cause to be removed all
such solid waste as may be necessary to comply with the requirements of
§ 254-27.
§ 254-29. City to perform cleanup; fee.
A. The City shall provide an annual notification to the public outlining the
rules and regulations of the City of Auburn's Solid Waste Ordinance.
Each owner, occupant or person having control of real property in the
City of Auburn will be presumed to have been given sufficient notice of
infraction of the City of Auburn's Solid Waste Ordinance for the entire
year following this annual public notification. If the provisions of the
foregoing articles of this City of Auburn Solid Waste Ordinance are not
complied with, the City Manager, the City Manager's designee, the City
Superintendent of Public Works, the City Landfill Supervisor, the City
Building Inspector, or any of the aforementioned titles' designee shall
have the authority to immediately correct violations. Said corrections to
be conducted by the City or its agent without additional notice to the
owner, occupant or person having control of said property.
B. The actual charge for the collection, plus a service charge of 50% of the
same to cover costs of supervision and administration, shall be
established at least annually by the City Council through a budget
resolution that adopts a City fee schedule. Said amount to be charged
shall be added to and become in form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the
same rate as City real estate taxes and shall be collected and enforced
in the same manner as such taxes. The City also has the authority to bill
said property owner prior to adding the bill to the taxes if it chooses to
do so.
C. Subsequent violations shall be charged at the same fee as outlined in
§ 254-29B.
§ 254-27 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-30
248:569
§ 254-30. Interference with City employees.
It shall be a violation for any person to resist, obstruct or interfere with any
agent or employee of the City in the removal of solid waste as set forth in
§ 254-9 and/or § 254-29.
§ 254-31. Right to hearing.
§ 254-32. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies set forth herein are in addition to the penalties as provided in
Article VI of this chapter.
A. The owner, occupant or any person having control over a lot, land or
property upon whom a violation is billed may request a hearing before
the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee. The request for a
hearing shall be in writing addressed to the City Manager and shall be
served within seven days of receipt of the bill served pursuant to this
article.
B. After hearing, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall
have the authority to do any one of the following:
(1) Confirm the bill served pursuant to § 254-29.
(2) Sustain the charges assessed for the cleanup of the premises.
(3) Reduce, in whole or in part, the charges assessed for the cleanup of
the premises.
(4) A combination of any of the above.
C. The decision of the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall
be in writing and shall be served by regular United States Mail.
§ 254-30 AUBURN CODE § 254-32
248:570
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 254-33. Penalties for offenses; appearance tickets.
A. Failure to comply. Failure to comply with this chapter by any person, or
tenant in cases where a written agreement gives specific responsibility
for solid waste disposal to said tenant, shall be an offense punishable as
provided herein.
B. Fines and penalties. Conviction of a first offense provided by this
chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $25, and, in addition, anyone
convicted of a first offense thereunder shall be liable to pay a civil
penalty of $25. Conviction of a second offense within a year of the first
offense shall be punishable by a fine of $50 or imprisonment of not more
than 15 days, or both, and, in addition, anyone convicted of a third or
subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine of at least $100 and not
more than $200 or imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. In
addition, anyone convicted of a third or subsequent offense hereunder
shall be liable to pay a civil penalty of $500.
C. Appearance tickets.
(1) The City Manager, the City Manager's designee, the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Building Inspector, the Landfill
Supervisor and/or a designated assistant shall have the authority to
issue appearance tickets for violations of this chapter.
(2) The requirements set forth in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure
Law of the State of New York shall govern herein.
§ 254-33 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-33
248:571

ARTICLE VII
Auburn Landfill
§ 254-34. Disposal of residential waste by Auburn residents.
§ 254-35. Disposal of residential waste by nonresidents.
A. The City of Auburn, owner of the Auburn Landfill, agrees to permit
residents of the City of Auburn to continue to deposit small amounts of
refuse at the landfill residential dropoff point, subject to the following
terms and conditions:
(1) Each vehicle entering the Auburn Landfill must display on the
driver-side window an Auburn Landfill sticker. New landfill stickers
may be obtained at the Office of Solid Waste, Auburn Landfill.
Stickers are nontransferable and shall be limited to one per family.
The permit fee and fee per ton of all solid waste disposed at the City
of Auburn Landfill shall be established at least annually by the City
Council through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee
schedule.
(2) Disposal. All refuse must be deposited in an approved container.
Loose materials will not be accepted. Bulk materials may be
disposed of at the discretion of the Landfill Supervisor or the
Landfill Supervisor's designee depending upon the nature and
volume of the materials to be disposed of.
(3) Limitations. Disposal of residential waste by residents of the City of
Auburn shall be limited to waste that has been generated on the
property they reside and will be paid for at the time of disposal on a
fee per ton of all solid waste disposed.
(4) Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials shall be accepted
into the Auburn Landfill at a fee that shall be established at least
annually by the City Council through a budget resolution that
adopts a City fee schedule.
(5) Tires. Each tire, up to a maximum of 24 inches in diameter,
disposed of at the Landfill will be charged a fee that shall be
established at least annually by the City Council through a budget
resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
(6) Chlorofluorocarbons. Disposal of any appliance containing
chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) or Freon shall be charged a fee that
shall be established at least annually by the City Council through a
budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
B. This program shall be limited to residents of the City of Auburn only.
A. The City of Auburn, owner of the Auburn Landfill, agrees to permit
participating town and village residents to continue to deposit small
§ 254-34 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-35
248:573
§ 254-36. Refuse collection fee for tax exempt properties located in
City of Auburn.
amounts of refuse at the landfill residential drop-off point, subject to
the following terms and conditions:
(1) Permits. Each vehicle entering the Auburn Landfill must display on
the driver-side window an Auburn Landfill permit sticker. New
landfill permit stickers may be obtained at the Solid Waste Office,
Auburn Landfill. Stickers are nontransferable and shall be limited
to one per family. The permit fee and fee per ton of all residential
waste disposed at the City of Auburn Landfill by nonresidents of the
City of Auburn shall be established at least annually by the City
Council through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee
schedule.
(2) Nonresidents who own property in the City of Auburn may
purchase a landfill permit. Disposal of residential waste by
nonresident property owners of the City of Auburn shall be limited
to waste that has been generated on the property they own and will
be paid for at the time of disposal on a fee per ton of all waste
disposed. The fee per ton of all residential waste disposed at the
City of Auburn Landfill by property owners of the City of Auburn
shall be established at least annually by the City Council through a
budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
(3) Tires. Each tire disposed of at the Auburn Landfill shall be charged
a fee that shall be established at least annually by the City Council
through a budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
(4) Chlorofluorocarbons. Disposal of any appliance containing
chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) or Freon shall be charged a fee that
shall be established at least annually by the City Council through a
budget resolution that adopts a City fee schedule.
(5) This program shall be limited to Cayuga County residents of
adjoining towns to the City of Auburn.
A. There is hereby enacted by the Auburn City Council a refuse collection
fee to be paid by entities which own or occupy real property within the
City and receive solid waste collection services provided by the City,
and are exempt from the payments of Auburn City property taxes.
B. Calculation of the refuse collection fee shall be established at least
annually by the City Council through a budget resolution that adopts a
City fee schedule.
C. Billing of the refuse collection fee for tax exempt properties. All charges
incurred for the solid waste collection fee shall be included in a utility
bill issued monthly or quarterly with water and sewer rate charges for
water and sewer services supplied to the premises.
§ 254-35 AUBURN CODE § 254-36
248:574
§ 254-37. Mandatory deposit of all City waste products in Auburn
Landfill.
D. Penalty for nonpayment. Nonpayment of the solid waste collection fee
shall be subject to the same penalty provided for the nonpayment of
water rates pursuant to § 297-24 of this Code.
E. Termination of services. The nonpayment of any portion of the utility
bill for water rates and the solid waste collection fee may result in the
termination of the water and solid waste collection services pursuant to
the provisions of § 297-40 of this Code.
A. All waste products picked up within the City limits of the City of
Auburn, whether picked up by a public hauler or by a private hauler,
shall be deposited at the Auburn Landfill.
B. "Waste products" shall be defined as all solid wastes; yard waste;
recycling materials; garbage and rubbish; green waste; miscellaneous
wastes; commercial and industrial garbage and recyclables; residential,
commercial, and industrial construction and demolition debris; major
appliances, large household furnishings and trees; household
hazardous wastes and farm hazardous wastes; and chlorofluorocarbons
as the foregoing terms are defined and used in Chapter 254 of the
Auburn City Code.
C. Enforcement of this article shall be in a manner consistent with
§ 254-33 of the City of Auburn Code.
§ 254-36 SIDEWALK CAFES § 254-37
248:575
Chapter 259
STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 115.
Cemeteries — See Ch. 135.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 157.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Nuisances — See Ch. 213.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Public conduct — See Ch. 234.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 248.
Trees — See Ch. 277.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 254-37 AUBURN CODE § 254-37
248:576
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 259-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Streets
and Public Places Ordinance."
§ 259-2. Deposit of building materials.
§ 259-3. Moving of buildings.
No person shall move, or cause or suffer to be moved, any building into,
along, upon or through any street or highway without first having obtained
a permit therefor from the Superintendent of Engineering Services, and no
such building shall be allowed to remain in any highway for a longer period
than that limited or specified in such permit.
§ 259-4. Awnings.
A. Permit required. No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any
building material, scaffolding, barricades, roll-off trash containers and
the like in or upon any portion of any public street, sidewalk, bridge,
alley or public place unless he or she shall first have obtained a permit
therefor from the Office of the Code Enforcement for such use of a
portion of the public street. Such permit shall state the portion of the
street that may be so used and the period of time such material may
remain therein, together with such other conditions and provisions as
the Office of the Code Enforcement may deem advisable. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008]
B. Barriers and warning devices to be erected. Any person so occupying a
portion of any public street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or public place with
building material shall, at all times, erect a good and sufficient barrier
around such materials and, during the nighttime, place a sufficient
number of warning lights or devices to be kept burning during the night
to advise of the location of such material.
C. Walkway to be provided. Any person to whom any such permit is
granted shall immediately construct a sufficient walk for street
passengers of board or planks or other material around such obstacle
so as to allow a safe and convenient passage for pedestrians.
D. Restoration of street or sidewalk. Every person so occupying a portion
of such street with building material shall, at the termination of such
permit, unless the same is renewed, immediately remove all material
from such street and restore the street and sidewalk where such
material was stored to a reasonably safe condition for public travel
acceptable to the Superintendent of Engineering Services.
§ 259-1 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-4
248:577
§ 259-5. Removal of snow and ice from building roofs.
The owner or occupant of every building fronting upon or in close proximity
to the line of any sidewalk, street, highway or traveled place shall remove,
or cause to be removed, the snow and ice from the roof of such building,
when the same is liable to fall therefrom. Such removal shall be done at
such times and in such manner as not unnecessarily to hinder or delay
travel and so as not to subject persons or animals traveling upon such
highway to risk or danger.
§ 259-6. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks.
A. Materials. No awning shall be placed or constructed over any sidewalk
unless the same is made of cloth or canvas and is properly supported;
provided, however, that awnings of other materials may be placed or
constructed over sidewalks if they are of a material and type of
construction approved by the Building Inspector and installed in a
manner approved by him or her.
B. Clearance. Every part of such awning and the supports thereof shall be
at least seven feet above the sidewalk, except that the Building
Inspector may require further clearance if necessary.
A. Responsibility. The owner, occupant or lessee of any lot or lands
adjoining any public sidewalk shall keep the same free from snow, slush
or ice. In case of failure or neglect to comply with this requirement
within 24 hours following any storm depositing such snow, slush or ice,
such may be removed by the Department of Public Works at the
direction of the City Manager. Failure to complete such removal shall
not be deemed an act of negligence by the City of Auburn.
B. Cindering or sanding. In the event that snow, slush or ice may become
frozen on sidewalks in such a way that removal is difficult or injurious to
sidewalks, the sidewalks shall be rendered safe for public travel by use
of cinders, sand or other suitable materials and shall be properly
cleaned thereafter when weather permits. If any owner, occupant or
lessee of lots or lands abutting sidewalks fails to comply with this
requirement, the walks shall be rendered safe by the Department of
Public Works and thereafter cleaned at the direction of the City
Manager.
C. Work performed by Department of Public Works. Any work performed
by the Department of Public Works pursuant to this section shall be
charged against the property owner and shall be billed and collected by
the City Treasurer. Such charge shall be a lien on the adjoining realty to
the same extent as City taxes and may be included in the general City
tax roll and enforced in the same manner as other City taxes. All actual
items of work, including labor and materials, plus an administrative and
supervisory expense of 50% thereof, shall be charged; provided,
however, that the minimum charge for each occurrence shall be $5 per
lot or parcel of land.
§ 259-4 AUBURN CODE § 259-7
248:578
§ 259-7. Hanging of wares and merchandise.
No person shall place, hang out or suspend, or suffer to be placed, hung out
or suspended, any goods, wares or merchandise of any sort in any street
in front of his or her building, or place of business, at a greater distance
therefrom than three feet.
§ 259-8. Depositing wares and merchandise on sidewalk.
§ 259-9. Playing in streets.
No person shall fly a kite, play ball, throw any stone or missile, or use or
discharge any air gun or slingshot, or use any device for throwing stones or
shot, or roll or tumble a hoop on, in or upon any sidewalk or street.
§ 259-10. Coasting upon streets.
§ 259-11. Prohibited deposits.
No person shall deposit, place, or throw, or permit to be deposited, placed
or thrown, any ashes, leaves, papers, letters, cards, dodgers, glass, nails, or
other matter into or upon any street, sidewalk, highway, traveled road or
lane, or place in such street, except that boxes, barrels or other receptacles
containing such things may be deposited for collection. No person shall
throw or deposit the peelings of any bananas, oranges, lemons or other
fruits upon any sidewalks or crosswalks, except that ashes or sand may be
used on slippery walks in winter as provided in § 259-6.
A. Generally. No person shall deposit, place or put, or suffer to be
deposited, placed or put, any goods, wares or merchandise, or any
chattel, on any sidewalk in front of his or her building or lot, except
while actually removing the same into or from such building.
B. Exception. The City Manager may permit the display and placing of
goods, wares and merchandise on special occasions or promotions
under such terms and conditions as will reasonably safeguard the
public.
A. Council may designate. No person shall coast, slide or ride upon any
sled or similar contrivance on any sidewalk or street, except upon those
streets or parts thereof as the Council designates.
B. Hours. Use of streets set aside and used for coasting shall be limited to
the following hours: 4:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on school days; 2:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m. on Sundays; and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and
holidays.
C. Responsibility of Recreation Department. The Recreation Department
shall assume all responsibility for placing barricades and warning lights
and for cindering at the foot of all grades.
§ 259-7 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-12
248:579
§ 259-12. Placing or splitting firewood.
No person shall place or split any firewood on any sidewalk, crosswalk or
public place or permit or suffer any such wood, chips or similar rubbish to
be or remain on any sidewalk, crosswalk, street or road in front of his or her
premises.
§ 259-13. Deposit of sweepings or rubbish on sidewalk or street;
beating rugs.
No person shall sweep, brush, throw or deposit the sweepings of any store
or building, or other similar rubbish, upon any sidewalk or street or whip,
beat or shake any rug, mat, or carpet in or upon any sidewalk, street or
traveled road.
§ 259-14. Foul or obnoxious substances.
No person shall place, allow to be placed or permit to run, fall or drip
the contents of, or any substance from, any sink, privy or cesspool, or any
manure, dirt or any foul liquid or obnoxious substance whatsoever, into or
upon any street, gutter, sidewalk or public place within the City or allow the
same or any part thereof to remain in such place.
§ 259-15. Sidewalks and gutters to be kept clear.
The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting on
any street, public highway, lane or alley shall keep the sidewalk and the
gutter along the same in front of such lot or parcel of land free from ice,
dirt, filth, weeds, papers, leaves, obstructions, or encumbrances of every
kind and in such manner as to permit easy, safe and commodious use of
such sidewalk and to allow the free passage of water in the gutter. Every
such owner or occupant shall, after every fall of snow, cause the same to
be removed from such sidewalk in order to provide a reasonable, safe and
convenient passage for pedestrians.
§ 259-16. Deposits in Owasco River.52
A. Prohibited. No person shall place, put, dump, deposit, or leave any
ashes, rubbish, stones, garbage, refuse, shopping carts, tires or
material or thing of any kind in the Owasco River, or outlet, or in any
raceway or basin connected therewith or forming a part of such river in
the City, or permit or allow any such matter or thing to fall into or be so
placed, put, deposited or dumped as to slide or fall into said river,
raceway or basin, or deposit, place, leave or put any such matter or
thing on the bank or shore of such river, raceway or basin.
B. Exception. A fill or deposit of earth and stones may be permitted by
resolution of the Council upon the erection of a suitable guard,
52.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 242, Sanitary Sewers.
§ 259-12 AUBURN CODE § 259-16
248:580
§ 259-16.1. Snow removal. [Added 11-29-2001 by Ord. No. 27-2001]
protection or retaining wall so as not to interfere with the flow of the
river or the area of any backflow or basin or any raceway.
C. Construction or near Owasco River. No person shall place, construct or
erect any abutment, wall, foundation or building within, over or upon
the banks of any such river, raceway or basin, unless such construction
is expressly approved and sanctioned by resolution of the Council.
[Note: Permission of New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation and United States Army Corps of Engineers may also be
required.]
A. When snow or ice is removed from private property, it shall not be
deposited upon any sidewalk, right-of-way or public street.
B. Snow or ice shall not be deposited in a manner that interferes with any
fire hydrant or public transportation system.
C. Snow or ice shall not be pushed across any public street.
D. Snow or ice shall not be deposited upon any public right-of-way
designated for handicap accessibility.
E. No person or private entity shall plow, shovel, sweep or heap upon any
snow, ice or other materials into piles on any public street or public
place in the City of Auburn, or cause any such act to be done which
interferes with the visibility, safety and convenience with public travel.
F. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $100.
§ 259-16 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-16.1
248:581

ARTICLE II
Excavations
§ 259-17. Dangerous places or excavations to be barricaded.
The owner or occupant of any lot fronting on any street, traveled road or
public place upon which lot there is an abrupt descent from such sidewalk,
street or traveled road, or an excavation, or a dangerous place, shall make,
maintain and continue upon such lot in front of the same upon the line of
the sidewalk, street or highway a strong and sufficient barrier, wall or fence
so as to prevent persons or animals from falling through or over the same
into such dangerous place or excavation.
§ 259-18. Permit required for excavations; exception for
emergencies.
§ 259-19. Application for permit; contents; accompanying
information.
Any person desiring to procure a permit as herein provided shall file with
the Superintendent of Engineering Services, at least 24 hours before the
time proposed to begin such work, a written application on a blank form
provided by the City. Such application shall state the name and business
or residence address of the applicant, name of the street, sidewalk or
public place in which it is desired to make the excavation or opening, the
kind of pavement or sidewalk therein, the proposed size and location of
the proposed excavation or opening, the name and business or residence
address of the person for whom the work is to be done, the extent of
such excavation, and the time during which it is desired such opening
be permitted. Whenever required by the Superintendent of Engineering
Services, the application shall be accompanied by a sketch or tracing
showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed excavation
or opening.
§ 259-20. Conditions and restrictions on permit.
A. Generally. Unless acting under a contract with the City, it shall be
unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized City official or
employee in the course of his or her employment, to make or cause or
permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under any sidewalk,
or in or under the pavement of any street, alley or other public place
within the limits of the City, without first having obtained, or having in
force, a permit to do so, as herein provided.
B. Exceptions. A permit shall not be required in case of an emergency
arising out of office hours, at night, on Saturdays, Sundays or legal
holidays, when an immediate excavation must be made; provided,
however, that application for a permit shall be made in the manner
herein provided within the next business day.
§ 259-17 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-20
248:583
§ 259-21. Revision of terms and conditions of permits.
The Superintendent of Engineering Services, with the approval of the
Corporation Counsel, shall be and is hereby authorized to revise the terms
and conditions of permits issued for excavations in order to protect
adequately the City's interest during the period of construction.
§ 259-22. Restoration of wearing surface.
In all such excavations, the wearing surface shall be relaid by the City,
under the direction of the Superintendent of Engineering Services. Such
relaying shall consist of the foundation and wearing surface in hard surface
pavement, such as concrete, asphalt, bituminous or brick, and the
foundation and wearing surfaces in the macadam pavements. At the time
the application is made, the Superintendent of Engineering Services shall
furnish the applicant with a copy of specifications for carrying on the work
and a schedule of costs of restoring the foundation and wearing surfaces of
the different kinds of pavements.
§ 259-23. Rate for replacement of pavement.
The rate for the replacement of permanent pavement over excavations
made in City streets by property owners and utilities shall be fixed by the
resolution of the Council.
§ 259-24. Utility company bond to cover restoration costs.
In the case of a public utility company having a franchise to operate through
the streets of the City, a bond approved by the Superintendent of
Engineering Services as to amount and by the Corporation Counsel as to
form and execution may be required by the City to cover such costs of
restoration.
§ 259-25. Agreements.
Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the City may enter
into an agreement with any person, firm or corporation providing for the
conditions, method and manner of excavation or opening under, and
A. Indemnity of City. In every permit granted, the applicant shall agree to
indemnify and protect the City against all loss or damage by reason of
any such excavation or opening.
B. Conduct of work. Such work shall be expeditiously conducted from the
time the permit is granted until the desired repairs are completed.
C. Authority of Superintendent of Engineering Services. The
Superintendent of Engineering Services shall have full authority and
power at any time to cancel, rescind and alter any such permit, or any of
the terms thereof, and to direct the manner in which the work shall be
conducted.
§ 259-20 AUBURN CODE § 259-25
248:584
relaying of foundation and wearing surfaces on, any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place by such person, firm or corporation.
§ 259-25 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-25
248:585

ARTICLE III
Poles, Wires and Subways
§ 259-26. Written consent required for placement of poles or wires.
No company engaged in furnishing telephone, telegraph, electric light or
power, or television cable service, or any employee thereof, shall hereafter
erect, locate or place any pole, post or structure designed and intended for
the support of telephone, telegraph or electric light or power or other wires
in any street or public place in the City or hereafter place, string or locate
any wires or cables intended for use in such service in any street or public
place in the City except by and with the express consent in writing of the
Superintendent of Engineering Services.
§ 259-27. Replacement of existing poles or wires.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the replacement or substitution in
kind of existing poles, fixtures or wires, providing the number thereof is
not increased; or the change in existing secondary mains for electric light
and power service to other secondary mains, as may be required, providing
the voltage thereof is not increased; or the installation or change of service
wires of subscribers.
§ 259-28. Application for permit.
Every application for a permit hereunder shall state the intended location
of each pole or structure and the number of wires to be carried thereon,
the location of new wires or cables, the purpose to be served by proposed
additional poles, wires and cables, and the existing condition in such street
or public place as to poles, wires and cables.
§ 259-29. Two lines of poles carrying like conductors in same street.
No two lines of poles intended to carry or carrying a like class of conductors
shall be erected in the same street except with the approval of the Council.
§ 259-30. Map of system to be filed with Superintendent of
Engineering Services.
A. Every company owning and operating telephone, telegraph or electric
light or power wires or television cable wires in the City shall file in the
office of the Superintendent of Engineering Services a map showing the
location of all pole lines and the number of wires and cables carried
thereon.
B. Any permitted extension or addition of any telephone, telegraph or
electric light or power wire or television cable wire shall be
approximately shown upon such map of the Superintendent of
Engineering Services, and such map shall at all times be kept up-todate,
in order to show all poles, lines, wires, cables and extensions
thereof.
§ 259-26 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-31
248:587
§ 259-31. Construction and maintenance of posts or poles.
§ 259-32. Subways.
A. Locations. No posts or poles designed to carry or support telephone,
telegraph or other wires or cables shall be erected within five feet of
any hydrant or so as to interfere with any water or gas pipe,
underground main or conduit, or any driveway. No such poles shall be
placed or left in the traveled portion of any highway or between
curblines, as the same may be defined by curbs actually set or as
defined by the Superintendent of Engineering Services.
B. Trimming, arms and wires. All such poles shall be straight and properly
trimmed, and the crossarms shall be not less than 25 feet in height from
the ground and may contain such arms for the carrying of wires as the
Superintendent of Engineering Services may approve. The
Superintendent of Engineering Services shall direct the placing of such
arms and the number of wires to be carried thereon.
C. Removal of wires and poles. All broken and dead wires and all poles and
fixtures not actually in use must be removed from the street or highway
immediately. In case of any broken wire the current shall immediately
be shut off at the switch or main office, and the person or company
controlling, operating or using such wire shall immediately remove the
same from the traveled portion of the highway.
A. Overhead construction prohibited where subway is available. No wires,
fixtures, poles or other overhead construction for the purpose of
carrying wires or cables of any kind shall be erected in any street or
public place where or in which there is situated or located a suitable
and sufficient subway designed for the purpose of carrying wires or
cables underground, whether the same is owned or controlled by the
City or by some company or person with the consent of the City. In case
any person or company owning, controlling or operating any such wires
refuses to place the same in said subway because of insufficient outlets
or other facilities, specifications of the need of such person or company
as to outlets required in such subway for its reasonable needs shall be
immediately given to the Superintendent of Engineering Services in
writing. The owner of any subway shall provide and furnish such
suitable outlets or facilities as the Superintendent of Engineering
Services may direct.
B. Lanes or alleyways. No person or company shall erect, construct, place
or maintain poles, wires, fixtures and overhead construction in lanes or
alleyways in the rear of buildings fronting on streets, or parts thereof,
in which subways are constructed and maintained, unless by and with
the express consent of the Superintendent of Engineering Services.
C. Subway construction. All subway construction, including installation of
wires, outlets, and connections, and all operation and maintenance of
such subway, including wires, cables and fixtures of every kind, shall be
§ 259-31 AUBURN CODE § 259-32
248:588
made and done in accordance with established practice, the directions
of the Superintendent of Engineering Services, and the rules and
regulations therefor approved or established by the Underwriters'
Association. High- and low-tension wires shall not be placed either in
the same box or in the same manhole.
D. Use of subway manholes restricted.
(1) Protection of public. Whenever a subway manhole is opened the
person so opening or using the same shall place an iron frame over
such opening with a suitable red light or flag as a warning. When so
opened one person shall always be provided by the user to act as a
guard on the surface of each manhole so opened for the purpose of
guarding and warning users of the highway.
(2) Smoking. There shall be no smoking in or around any manhole or
subway.
(3) Tampering. No person shall, without direct authority or right,
interfere or tamper with, molest or open any manhole connected
with any subway or deface, damage or break or remove any
conduit, duct, wire, cable or appliance situated in or connected
with such subway.
E. Duties of subway users. All users of subways shall make such
alterations and repairs to their wires, cables and conductors as may be
reasonably necessary for the safe and proper use of such subway and
shall observe and follow all directions and orders of the Superintendent
of Engineering Services in reference thereto.
§ 259-32 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-32
248:589

ARTICLE IV
Trees53
§ 259-33. Location of posts and trees.
§ 259-34. Poplar and willow trees.
§ 259-35. Maintenance of trees.
A. Generally. No person shall hereafter set any post or tree outside of the
curbline. No posts hereafter set shall be set immediately inside the
inner line of the curb, in streets or lands where curbs are set. All
ornamental or shade trees hereafter planted shall be placed inside the
inner lines by the curb on a line established by the Superintendent of
Engineering Services and on the same line throughout the entire length
of the street.
B. Permit required. No person shall hereafter plant or set between the
sidewalk and the curbline any tree or shrub without first having applied
to the Superintendent of Engineering Services and obtained permission
therefor.
A. Prohibited upon private and public property. No person shall hereafter
plant, set or suffer to grow upon his or her land, or in the space between
the sidewalk and the curb adjoining his or her land, or elsewhere, any
tree of the poplar or willow species.
B. Destruction. Any such tree found to be growing may be ordered and
caused to be cut down or otherwise destroyed by the Superintendent of
Engineering Services, and it shall be the duty of every person upon
whose lands any such trees may be growing to cut down and destroy
the same upon and in accordance with the order and direction of the
Superintendent of Engineering Services.
A. Clearance. All trees planted or growing in any street, or overhanging
any street or sidewalk from private lands, shall be kept by the owner or
occupant of such private lands, or the lands adjoining such street or
highway, suitably trimmed and cut so that the lower limbs and branches
thereof shall be no less than 12 feet above the street or sidewalk and so
that such trees shall not in any manner from any cause interfere with,
obstruct, impede, or be hazardous, dangerous or detrimental to the
health or safety of any person on any street or sidewalk.
B. Trimming. The Superintendent of Engineering Services or his or her
designee shall have the right to enter upon such adjoining private lands
to trim any such trees to such additional height or cut or remove the
same in such a manner as he or she may deem advisable. No person
shall cut down or severely trim any tree growing in the highway without
53.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 277, Trees.
§ 259-33 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-35
248:591
first having obtained a permit therefor from the Superintendent of
Engineering Services.
§ 259-35 AUBURN CODE § 259-35
248:592
ARTICLE V
Sidewalks54
[Amended 9-21-1995 by Ord. No. 40-1995;55 10-21-2010 by Ord. No.
12-2010]
§ 259-36. Maintenance of sidewalks.
The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel fronting upon any public street
or traveled highway, in front of which parcel a sidewalk, curbstone or gutter
has been or shall be laid, shall at all times maintain or keep such sidewalk,
curb or gutter in good repair and so as to be safe, easy and commodious
for persons using the highway. In case of major repair and replacement, all
such repairs and replacement shall be made of materials approved by City
Council pursuant to § 88 of the City Charter.
§ 259-37. Construction of sidewalks.
A. The Auburn City Council shall have the sole authority to decide if it
deems advisable to direct that new sidewalks be installed on any street
or part thereof pursuant to §§ 87 and 88 of the Auburn City Charter.
B. In the event that the Auburn City Council decides that sidewalks should
be installed in any part or portion of a City street, it shall cause all
property owners on the street or streets in question to be notified of the
installation of the sidewalks prior to any construction being authorized.
After all property owners on the designated streets subject to the
installation of sidewalks are notified, the City Council shall require a
public hearing to be held pursuant to the Auburn City Charter rules
allowing comment on the proposed installation of sidewalks.
C. If the Auburn City Council so decides that sidewalks should be installed
on any street or portion thereof, said cost of construction and
installation may be paid by the City of Auburn with no expense being
borne by the property owners so affected.
54.Editor's Note: Local Law No. 2-2010, adopted 9-9-2010, imposed a fourteen-month
moratorium that suspended the requirement that property owners be required to install
new sidewalks on their property, at the City's direction, where no sidewalks currently
exist; provided, however, that the requirement set forth in § 88 of the Auburn City Charter
requiring the repair and replacement of defective or broken sidewalks shall continue to
remain in full force and effect. This local law also provided that the moratorium shall not
prohibit the installation, construction and repair of sidewalks implemented by CDBG
programs, federal- and state-funded capital projects and on City-owned property, which
will not require financial responsibility by property owners.
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that the City Manager shall establish regulations
for the issuance of permits for the construction or replacement of sidewalks and
driveways, with said permits to be issued for the nominal fee of $1.
§ 259-36 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-37
248:593

ARTICLE VI
Weeds, Grass and Rank, Poisonous or Harmful Vegetation
§ 259-38. Prohibited acts.
§ 259-39. Cutting and removal required.
It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant or person having control of any
lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds,
grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be
necessary to comply with the provisions of § 259-38, provided that cutting
and removing such weeds, grass and vegetation at least twice in each of the
months from May 1 until October 30 shall be deemed to be a compliance
with this article.
§ 259-40. Notice to owner or occupant; action by City.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant or person having control
of any lot or land in the City to permit or maintain on any such lot or
land, or along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the
property line and the curb or middle of the street, or for 10 feet outside
the property line if there is no curb, any growth of weeds or grass to a
greater height than six inches on the average, or any accumulation of
dead weeds, grass or brush from May to October inclusive.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to cause, suffer or allow
poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants or plants detrimental to
health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of
such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous weed shall extend upon, overhang
or border any public place or allow seeds, pollen or other poisonous
particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any
public place.
C. It is prohibited to allow hedges, shrubs, or trees to encroach onto public
sidewalks and lines of sight of public roadways.
A. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the
Director of Parks and Recreation shall serve written notice, personally
or by mail, upon the owner, occupant or any person having the control
of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions of this article.
Mailing by regular mail to the owner's address on file in the City
Assessor's office shall be deemed sufficient five days after mailing. In
the event that the owner files with the Director of Parks and Recreation
a notice designating another person as being responsible for the care
and maintenance of said property, then mailing by regular mail to both
shall be deemed sufficient five days after mailing. [Amended
9-25-1997 by Ord. No. 24-1997]
B. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses
to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass or
other vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice, or if no
§ 259-38 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-40
248:595
§ 259-41. Interference with City agents or employees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or interfere with the
Director of Parks and Recreation or any agent or employee of the City
in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass or rank, poisonous or harmful
vegetation as set forth in § 259-40 herein.
person can be found in the City who either is or claims to be the owner
of such lot or land or who either represents or claims to represent such
owner, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall cause such weeds,
grass and other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed,
and the actual cost of such cutting and removal plus a service charge
of 50% thereof to cover cost of supervision and administration shall be
certified by the Director of Parks and Recreation to the City Clerk, and
such certified amount shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
property on which such weeds, grass and other vegetation were located
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the
same rate as City real estate taxes and shall be collected and enforced
in the same manner as such taxes.
C. The owner, occupant or any person having control over any lot, land or
property found in violation of § 259-38 shall be notified in writing only
once in any given three-month period for a particular violation.
Subsequent violations of a similar nature at the same location during
the same three-month period shall be corrected by the City or its agent
without notice to the owner, occupant or person having control of said
property. After initial notification, such owner, occupant or person
having control of said property will be presumed to have been given
sufficient notice of infraction for the entire three-month period.
[Amended 9-25-1997 by Ord. No. 24-1997]
§ 259-40 AUBURN CODE § 259-41
248:596
ARTICLE VII
Regulation of Private Lanes
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 8-2009]
§ 259-42. Assessor as Addressing Official.
The Assessor for the City of Auburn is designated as the Municipal
Addressing Official to coordinate the designation of 911 addresses for the
City of Auburn.
§ 259-43. Signage to designate existing lanes.
It shall hereafter be the policy of the City of Auburn that existing private
lanes shall be designated by signage according to the provisions of this
article.
§ 259-44. Approval of signs.
The Engineering Department of the City of Auburn is designated as the
agency to approve the color, size and wording of signs not only to identify
private lanes, but also to clearly disclose that said lanes are privately
owned.
§ 259-45. Production and installation of signage.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the production and
installation of all signage for private lanes. All costs in connection with the
production and placement of signage for private lanes shall be reimbursed
to the City by the owner of the private lane.
§ 259-46. Applications for naming.
The Municipal Addressing Official shall prepare and make available an
application to name a private lane. The application shall:
§ 259-47. Approval of lane name.
A name for a private lane maybe proposed by the property owner who shall
submit a written application provided by the Assessor's office as specified
in this article to the Municipal Addressing Official. The proposed name
A. State the legal name and address of the owner.
B. Identify the lane by providing the book and page number of the deed
recorded in the Cayuga County Clerk's Office evidencing applicant's
ownership.
C. State the tax identification number of the parcel.
D. State the nearest intersection with a public street.
E. State the number of buildings situated on the lane.
§ 259-42 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-47
248:597
must be approved by the Municipal Addressing Official, who shall index
the proposed name against the names of existing public streets and private
lanes, in order to control that a proposed name shall not conflict nor be of a
similar nature to any existing public street or private lane.
§ 259-47 AUBURN CODE § 259-47
248:598
Chapter 265
TAXATION
§ 259-47 SIDEWALK CAFES § 259-47
248:599

ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 180 of the 1991 Code]
§ 265-1. Tax imposed.
§ 265-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with
respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included
in gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or
use by the purchaser in this City, including cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is
rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or
other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever;
provided, however, that gross income with respect to the sale of telephony
or telegraphy or the furnishing of telephone or telegraph service, except as
otherwise provided with respect to the provision of carrier access service
to interexchange carriers, shall include receipts received in or by reason of
all sales made or service furnished in this City (whether or not for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser), but if telephony or telegraphy which
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of
the State of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its annual gross income for
the period from July 1 to June 30 of each and every year is hereby
imposed upon every utility doing business in the City of Auburn which
has a gross income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500,
except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under
Article 3-b of the Public Service Law,56 and a tax equal to 1% of its gross
operating income is hereby imposed for the same period upon every
other utility doing business in the City of Auburn which has a gross
operating income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500,
which taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of
the City of Auburn and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and
fees imposed by any other provision of law for the same period.
B. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or
consummated outside of the territorial limits of the City of Auburn,
notwithstanding that some act is necessarily performed with respect to
such transaction within such limits.
C. All of the provisions of § 186-a of the Tax Law, so far as the same are
applicable, shall apply to the taxes imposed by this article.
56.Editor's Note: Article 3-b of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267. For
current provisions, see § 240 of the Transportation Law.
§ 265-1 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-2
248:601
is sold in this City by a utility or telephone or telegraph service which
is furnished in this City by a utility is then resold by the purchaser with
respect to such a sale, there shall be allowed a deduction from the receipts
of such purchaser from the resale the amount paid to his seller or furnisher
for such telephony or telegraphy or telephone or telegraph service,
provided further that receipts of an exchange carrier paid by interexchange
carriers for the provision of carrier access which is resold by such
interexchange carriers shall be excluded from the gross income of such
exchange carrier, and no deduction shall be allowed to such interexchange
carriers for the amount so paid for such access service. "Gross income" also
includes profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also profits from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from
interest, dividends, and royalties derived from sources within this City other
than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting
stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for
any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof;
also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within
this City whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption
or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph
service in this City, including cash, credits and property of any kind or
nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever; provided,
however, that gross operating income with respect to the sale of telephony
or telegraphy or the furnishing of telephone or telegraph service shall,
except as otherwise provided with respect to the provision of carrier access
service to interexchange carriers, include receipts received in or by reason
of all sales made or service furnished in this City (whether or not for
ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser), but if telephony or
telegraphy which is sold in this City by a utility or telephone or telegraph
service which is furnished in this City by a utility is then resold by the
purchaser with respect to such a sale, there shall be allowed a deduction
from the receipts of such purchaser from the resale the amount paid to
his seller or furnisher for such telephony or telegraphy or telephone or
telegraph service, provided further that receipts of an exchange carrier
paid by interexchange carriers for the provision of carrier access service
which is resold by such interexchange carriers shall be excluded from the
gross operating income of such exchange carrier, and no deduction shall
be allowed to such interexchange carriers for the amount so paid for such
access service.
§ 265-2 AUBURN CODE § 265-2
248:602
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations and
associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and excepting a corporation
organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of leasing from a City
in this state a waterworks system designed to supply water at cost to users
thereof for discharge, either before or after industrial use, into a river
within such City in order to improve the flow and condition of such river and
thereby to provide a means to relieve such river from pollution.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of
operating on the public highways of this City one or more omnibuses,
having a seating capacity of more than seven persons, and persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes, or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public
streets, and the words "interexchange carrier" shall mean and include any
seller of telephone service between two or more exchanges that qualifies as
a common carrier with the meaning of Subsection (h) of § 153 of Title 47 of
the United States Code or, if performing intrastate telephone service only,
would otherwise qualify but for the fact that it was not engaged in providing
interstate or foreign telephone service.
§ 265-3. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the City Treasurer may require, and such
records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
City Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 265-4. Tax returns.
A. Quarterly returns. Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or
before September 25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for
the three calendar months preceding each such return date, including
any previous unreported period for which the tax imposed hereby or by
any amendment hereof is effective, each of which returns shall state the
§ 265-2 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-4
248:603
§ 265-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the City Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 265-6. Determination of tax; notice and hearing; court review.
gross income or gross operating income for the period covered by each
such return.
B. Form and contents. Returns shall be filed with the City Treasurer on a
form to be furnished by him or her for such purpose and shall contain
such other data, information or matter as the City Treasurer may
require to be included therein.
C. Annual returns. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three-month
periods is less than $1,500 may file a return annually on June 25 for the
12 preceding calendar months, and the City Treasurer may require any
utility doing business in the City to file an annual return, which shall
contain any data specified by the City Treasurer, regardless of whether
the utility is subject to tax under this article.
D. Supplemental returns. The City Treasurer, in order to insure payment of
the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental
return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by the City
Treasurer.
E. Affidavit required. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit
of the head of the utility making the same, or of a copartner thereof, or
of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by
a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are
true.
A. Determination of tax for insufficient returns. In case any return filed
pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the City
Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20
days after the same is required by notice from the City Treasurer, or if
no return is made for any period, the City Treasurer shall determine the
amount of tax due from such information as he or she is able to obtain
and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices
or otherwise.
B. Notice of determination; time limit to review. The City Treasurer shall
give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the
person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving
§ 265-4 AUBURN CODE § 265-6
248:604
§ 265-7. Service of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him or
her in the last return filed by him or her under this article or, if no return
has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of
such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by
the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined
according to the provisions of this article by giving of notice shall commence
to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 265-8. Penalties.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax
for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the City
Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any
portion of such penalty.
§ 265-9. Refunds.
of notice of such determination, apply to the City Treasurer for a
hearing or unless the City Treasurer, of his or her own motion, shall
reduce the same. After such hearing, the City Treasurer shall give
notice of his or her decision to the person liable for the tax.
C. Court review. The decision of the City Treasurer may be reviewed by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, if
application therefor is made within 30 days after the giving of notice of
such decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted
unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties
thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City Treasurer and an
undertaking filed with him or her in such amount and with such sureties
as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if
such order is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant for the order
will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of
such proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking
may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, penalties, costs and charges
as aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay
such tax and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such
order.
A. Generally. If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the
payer thereof shall make application for a refund thereof and the City
Treasurer or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any
portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the City
Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and
§ 265-6 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-9
248:605
§ 265-10. Tax to constitute part of utility's operating costs.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 265-11. Enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by
this article, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the City
Treasurer, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds
of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the City
Treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the
person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent
that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law are made a lien.
§ 265-12. Administration.
In the administration of this article the City Treasurer shall have power to
make such reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with law as
may be necessary for the exercise of his or her powers and the performance
of his or her duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other
records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take
testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within
the line of his or her official duty under this article and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers
and documents.
§ 265-13. Returns to be confidential.
within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the
City Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty
paid pursuant to a determination of the City Treasurer as hereinbefore
provided unless the City Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore
provided, or of his or her own motion, shall have reduced the tax or
penalty or it shall have been established in an Article 78 proceeding of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules that such determination was erroneous
or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this
article.
B. Procedure; review. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore
provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or
penalty complained of, and the City Treasurer may receive additional
evidence with respect thereto. After making his or her determination,
the City Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested,
and he or she shall be entitled to an order to review such determination
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an
order.
§ 265-9 AUBURN CODE § 265-13
248:606
A. Generally. Except in accordance with the proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Treasurer, or
any agent, clerk or employee of the City, to divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income or
any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article.
The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
City in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on
behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of
any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in
such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may
require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said
returns or of the facts shown thereby as is pertinent to the action or
proceeding and no more.
B. Limited use. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery
to a person or his or her duly authorized representative of a copy of any
return filed by him or her or to prohibit the publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the
items thereof or the publication of delinquent lists showing the names
of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the
manner provided for by this article, together with any relevant
information which in the opinion of the City Treasurer may assist in the
collection of such delinquent taxes, or the inspection by the Corporation
Counsel or other legal representatives of the City of the return of any
person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based
thereon or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
C. Penalties for breach. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy
provision shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender is
an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the City, he or she shall be
dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or
employment in the City for a period of five years thereafter.
D. Exchange of information. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article,
the City Treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any
other City in the State of New York information contained in returns
filed under this article, provided such other City grants similar
privileges to the City and provided such information is to be used for tax
purposes only, and the City Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the
State Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 265-13 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-14
248:607
§ 265-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the City Treasurer for the taxes
heretofore or hereafter imposed under this article shall be credited and
deposited by him or her in the general fund of the City.
§ 265-15. Exemption.
The City does hereby exempt the Auburn Transit Corporation, a corporation
operating buses in the City, from the utility tax imposed pursuant to § 20-b
of the General City Law.
§ 265-14 AUBURN CODE § 265-15
248:608
ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 181 of the 1991 Code]
§ 265-16. Partial exemption granted.
§ 265-17. Limitations on exemption.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of
whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the
City of Auburn in the City of Auburn to the extent of 50% of the
assessed valuation thereof.
B. Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed.
C. The real property tax exemption on real property owned by husband
and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted, shall not
be rescinded by the City of Auburn solely because of the death of the
older spouse so long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
A. Income. [Amended 1-20-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994; 11-22-1994 by
Ord. No. 39-1994; 8-10-1995 by Ord. No. 35-1995; 12-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 40-1996]
(1) If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of
the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of making application for exemption exceeds the sum of
$18,800: [Amended 1-16-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003; 3-23-2006
by Ord. No. 4-2006]
2005-2006 Allowed
Up to $18,800 50%
$18,801 to $19,800 45%
$19,801 to $20,800 40%
$20,801 to $21,800 35%
$21,801 to $22,700 30%
$22,701 to $23,600 25%
$23,601 to $24,500 20%
(2) "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if
no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
§ 265-16 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-17
248:609
retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or
exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a loss from
the sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax
year, net rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from
self-employment but shall not include a return of capital, gifts or
inheritances. In computing net rental income and net income from
self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for
the exhaustion, wear and tear of real or personal property held for
the production of income.
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
one of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a
time of ownership by the survivor and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 24 consecutive
months.
(1) In the event of a transfer by either a husband or wife to the other
spouse of all or part of the title to the property, the time of
ownership of the property by the transferor spouse shall be deemed
also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse and such
ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 24 consecutive months.
(2) Where property of the owner or owners has been acquired to
replace property formerly owned by such owner or owners and
taken by eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding, except a
tax sale, the period of ownership of the former property shall be
combined with the period of ownership of the property for which
application is made for exemption and such periods of ownership
shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of this section.
(3) Where a residence is sold and replaced with another within one
year and both residences are within the state, the period of
ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for
purposes of the exemption from taxation by the City of Auburn.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event any portion of such property is not
so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property,
provided that an owner who is absent while receiving health-related
§ 265-17 AUBURN CODE § 265-17
248:610
§ 265-18. Notice of eligibility.
The City shall notify, or cause to be notified, each person owning residential
real property in the City of the provisions of this article. The provisions
of this section may be met by a notice or legend sent on or with each
tax bill to such persons reading "You may be eligible for senior citizen tax
exemptions. Senior citizens have until month ______ day _____, year _____,"
followed by the name, telephone number and/or address or a person or
department selected by the City to explain the provisions of this article.
Failure to notify or cause to be notified any person who is in fact eligible to
receive the exemption provided by this article or the failure of such person
to receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement
of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 265-19. Annual application required.
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board to be
furnished by the City Assessor's office and shall furnish the information and
be executed in the manner required or prescribed in such forms and shall
be filed in such Assessor's office on or before the appropriate taxable status
date.
§ 265-20. Notice to applicants.
At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the City
Assessor shall mail to each person who was granted exemption pursuant
to this section on the latest completed assessment roll an application form
and a notice that such application must be filed on or before taxable status
date and be approved in order for the exemption to be granted. The City
Assessor shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the tentative
assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included with his
application at least one self-addressed, prepaid envelope of the approval or
denial of the application; provided, however, that the City Assessor shall,
upon the receipt and filing of the application, send by mail notification of
receipt to any applicant who has included two of such envelopes with the
application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial pursuant to
this section, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the State Board
and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall further state that the
applicant may have such determination reviewed in the manner provided by
law. Failure to mail any such application form or notices or the failure of
care as an inpatient of a residential health care facility, as defined in
§ 2801 of the Public Health Law, shall be deemed to remain a legal
resident and an occupant of the property while so confined, and income
accruing to that person shall be income only to the extent that it
exceeds the amount paid by such owner, spouse, or co-owner for care
in the facility, and provided further that during such confinement such
property is not occupied by other than the spouse or co-owner of such
owner.
§ 265-17 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-20
248:611
such person to receive any of the same shall not prevent the levy, collection
and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such
person.
§ 265-21. Authorization to accept applications after taxable status
date.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 265-19 and 265-20 of this article, the
City Assessor may accept applications for renewal of exemptions pursuant
to this article after the taxable status date. In the event the owner, or all of
the owners, of property which has received an exemption pursuant to this
article on the preceding assessment roll fails to file the application required
pursuant to this article on or before the taxable status date, such owner or
owners may file the application, executed as if such application had been
filed on or before the taxable status date, with the City Assessor on or before
the date for the hearing of complaints.
§ 265-22. Penalties and forfeitures.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 265-20 AUBURN CODE § 265-22
248:612
ARTICLE III
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 182 of the 1991 Code]
§ 265-23. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Veterans Exemption
Law of the City of Auburn, New York."
§ 265-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the maximum veterans exemption
allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York.
§ 265-25. Partial exemption granted; limitations. [Amended
11-22-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $12,000 or
the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the City of Auburn.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall
be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the lesser of $8,000 or the product of $8,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the City of Auburn.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this
section, where the veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans' Administration because of a service-connected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such
property multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $40,000 or
the product of $40,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the City of Auburn.
§ 265-23 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-25
248:613

ARTICLE IV
Job Incentive Exemption
[Adopted 3-28-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 as Ch. 183 of the 1991 Code]
§ 265-26. Exemption granted; requirements.
Pursuant to §§ 115 to 120 of the Commerce Law of the State of New York,
which establish a Job Incentive Board for the State of New York, and also
pursuant to § 485 of the New York Real Property Tax Law,57 which provides
for exemptions on real property taxes and special ad valorem levies for
property owners qualifying under the job incentive program, said owners
of real property shall be exempt from real property taxation and special
ad valorem levies by the City of Auburn, subject to meeting the following
requirements:
A. Only eligible business facilities as defined by §§ 115 to 120 of the
Commerce Law shall qualify.
B. The owner or owners must file annual application with the New York
State Job Incentive Board and receive a certificate of eligibility. Said
certificate must be filed with the City Assessor on or before the taxable
status date each year.
C. If a certificate is revoked, the property shall be returned to the tax roll;
if modified, the exemption shall be recalculated pursuant to §§ 551 and
485 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
D. The exemption shall be for a period not to exceed nine successive years
in accordance with the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 80%
3 50%
4 50%
5 30%
6 20%
7 10%
8 5%
9 5%
57.Editor's Note: Sections 115 to 120 of the Commerce Law (now the Economic Development
Law) were repealed by L. 1983, c. 15. Such provisions, however, continue in effect for
those taxpayers who had previously received a certificate of eligibility or an exemption.
Section 485 of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed by L. 1988, c. 165. For current
provisions see Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
§ 265-26 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-26
248:615

ARTICLE V
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 6-23-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 265-27. Continuation of collection procedures.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as signed into
law by Governor Mario Cuomo on August 4, 1993, the City of Auburn, New
York, hereby enact acts by local law, not subject to referendum, to provide
that the collection of property taxes shall continue to be enforced pursuant
to the provisions of the City Charter of the City of Auburn, as may from time
to time be amended.
§ 265-28. Filing.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the New York State Board of
Equalization and Assessment58 no later than August 1, 1994.
58.Editor's Note: Now the State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 265-27 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-28
248:617

ARTICLE VI
Sales and Compensating Use Taxes
[Ordinance No. 25-1995, adopted 5-25-1995, imposing taxes on
sales and uses of tangible personal property and on certain services
and on occupancy of hotel rooms, admission charges and club dues,
pursuant to Article 29 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, as
amended by Ordinance Nos. 27-1995 and 1-2001, and as
subsequently amended, is on file in the office of the City Clerk.]
SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-28
248:619

ARTICLE VII
Exemption from Sales and Compensating Use Taxes
[Adopted 11-20-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 265-29. Exemption granted.
Receipts from sales of and consideration given or contracted to be given
for, or for the use of, property and services exempt from state sales and
compensating use taxes pursuant to Subdivision (z) of § 1115 of the New
York Tax Law shall also be exempt from sales and compensating use tax
taxes imposed in this jurisdiction.
§ 265-30. Effective date; applicability.
This article shall take effect March 1, 2001, and shall apply to sales made,
services rendered and uses occurring on and after that date in accordance
with the applicable transitional provisions in §§ 1106, 1216 and 1217 of the
New York Tax Law.
§ 265-29 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-30
248:621

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Historic Properties
[Adopted 7-5-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 265-31. Legislative intent; statutory authority.
§ 265-32. Exemption granted.
Real property within the City of Auburn altered or rehabilitated subsequent
to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from City real property
and special ad valorem levies, subject to and in accordance with the
schedule set forth in § 265-33 and conditions outlined in § 265-34.
§ 265-33. Schedule.
Historic property, which shall be defined hereafter, shall be exempt for
taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such alteration
or rehabilitation pursuant to the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
A. This real property tax exemption for historic properties is being
enacted in order to achieve the following goals: to increase incentives
for property owners in historic districts to invest in the upkeep and
rehabilitation of properties; to provide an incentive for the restoration
and rehabilitation of commercial structures which qualify as landmarks
in order to provide financial advantages, not available elsewhere in the
City at this time, which may help to attract and retain business in the
City of Auburn; to assist homeowners who are interested in restoring
their own properties but may not be able to afford to do so when faced
with potential increases in taxation as the result of alterations which
would qualify for this exemption; to provide financial incentives for
investment in low-income residential neighborhoods which may contain
landmarked buildings or districts designated within the area; and to
provide a concrete benefit for restoring or improving historically or
architecturally significant properties which are subject to the
regulations of Chapter 178, Historic Preservation, of the Auburn
Municipal Code.
B. The City of Auburn real property tax exemption is intended to apply to
alterations or rehabilitation of historic property as authorized pursuant
to General Municipal Law §§ 96-a and 119-aa through 119-dd and Real
Property Tax Law § 444-a and all other powers granted to the City of
Auburn to provide such exemptions.
C. This article is intended to create a real property tax exemption that
preserves or increases the historic character of real property located
within the City of Auburn.
§ 265-31 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-33
248:623
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
§ 265-34. Criteria for exemption.
No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or rehabilitation
unless all of the following criteria are met:
A. Such property must be "historic," which shall mean that the property
has been designated as a landmark or is a property that is located in
and contributes to the character of a designated historic district
created by a local law which was passed pursuant to General Municipal
Law §§ 96-a and 119-dd;
B. Alteration or rehabilitation of exteriors and public interiors (to the
extent that public interiors are regulated by Chapter 178, Historic
Preservation, of the Auburn Municipal Code) of the historic property
must meet guidelines and review standards established in the local
preservation law;
C. Alteration and rehabilitation of exteriors and public interiors (to the
extent that public interiors are regulated by Chapter 178, Historic
Preservation, of the Auburn Municipal Code) of the historic property
are approved by the Historic Resources Review Board prior to the
commencement of work;
D. Alteration and rehabilitation must be for the purpose of historic
preservation. For purposes of qualifying for a real property tax
exemption pursuant to this article, alterations and rehabilitation shall
be deemed to be for the purpose of historic preservation if:
(1) Only exterior work is involved;
(2) Interior work involves the portion of the building that has been
designated as a public interior under Chapter 178, Historic
Preservation, of the Auburn Municipal Code, to the extent that
public interiors are regulated under Chapter 178, Historic
Preservation, of the Auburn Municipal Code;
(3) At least 20% of the total cost of the project is directly attributable
to exterior work and/or work that enhances the structural stability
or structural integrity of the property; provided, however, that such
§ 265-33 AUBURN CODE § 265-34
248:624
§ 265-35. Application.
This exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner(s) of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Equalization and
Assessment Board.59 The application shall be filed with the Assessor for the
City of Auburn on or before the appropriate taxable status date for the City
of Auburn.
§ 265-36. Approval.
Such exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the
applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this article. The Assessor
shall approve such application and such real property shall thereafter be
exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies for City real property
as provided in the schedule set forth in § 265-33 of this article commencing
with the assessment roll prepared on the basis of the taxable status date.
The Assessor shall enter the assessed value of any taxable real property
granted an exemption pursuant to this section on the assessment roll, with
the amount of the exemptions shown in a separate column.
§ 265-37. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
completed on or after such effective date.
portion of interior work done for the purpose of converting
property from a one- or two-family dwelling to a multiple dwelling
as defined in the Municipal Code of the City of Auburn, and any
increase in value resulting from such conversion, shall not qualify
for the exemption; or
(4) The project returns to use a building which has not been used for a
permissible purpose under applicable zoning ordinances for a
continuous period of at least two years; and
E. Alterations or rehabilitation must be commenced subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
59.Editor's Note: Now the State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 265-34 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-37
248:625

ARTICLE IX
Exemption for First-Time Homebuyers
[Adopted 5-23-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
§ 265-38. Legislative intent.
§ 265-39. Exemption granted.
Real property within the City of Auburn constructed or purchased
subsequent to the effective date of this article may be exempt from City real
property and special ad valorem levies, subject to and in accordance with
the schedule set forth in § 265-40 and conditions outlined in § 265-41.
§ 265-40. Schedule.
The exemption would apply to the increase in assessed value attributable to
the construction/reconstruction pursuant to the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 40%
3 30%
4 20%
5 10%
6 or more 0%
§ 265-41. Eligibility for exemption.
A. This partial real property tax exemption is being enacted to assist firsttime
homebuyers of moderate income in their ability to afford low to
moderately priced housing in the City of Auburn. In attracting future
homeowners to the City of Auburn through this article, the City would
realize a direct benefit to its neighborhoods through development,
stabilization and preservation of those neighborhoods and communities
so affected. As a collateral benefit to this article, the City of Auburn
would be able to create a positive environment for economic growth by
attracting future homeowners into the City.
B. The aforementioned partial real property tax exemption would be
available to apply to first-time homebuyers of newly built/reconstructed
homes as authorized pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 457 and all
other powers granted to the City of Auburn to provide such exemptions.
A. No exemption shall be granted for such construction/reconstruction
unless one of the following criteria are met.
(1) Newly constructed primary residential property may be purchased
by one or more persons, each of whom is a first-time homebuyer
§ 265-38 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-41
248:627
who has not been married to a homeowner in the three years prior
to applying for this first-time homeowner's exemption.
(2) The newly constructed primary residential real property must be
within the purchase price limits as defined on January 1, 2001, by
the State of New York mortgage agency low-interest rate mortgage
program in the non-target one-family new category for the County
of Cayuga.
(3) A first-time homebuyer who either as part of the written contract
for the purchase of the primary residential property, or who enters
into a written contract within 90 days after closing of the sale of the
primary residence for reconstruction, alterations, or improvements
to the primary residential property, the value of which exceeds
$3,000, would be eligible.
B. Limitations.
(1) Such exemption shall apply solely to the increase in assessed value
thereof attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or
improvement, provided that the assessed value after
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements does not exceed 15%
more than the purchase price limits as referenced in Subsection
A(2) hereinabove stated.
(2) A first-time homebuyer shall not qualify for the exemption
authorized pursuant to this section if the household income
exceeds income limits as defined as January 1, 2001, by the State of
New York mortgage agency low-interest rate mortgage program in
the nontarget, one- or two-person household category for the
County of Cayuga.
(3) Newly constructed primary residential property purchased by firsttime
homebuyers at a sales price greater than the maximum
eligible sales price shall qualify for the exemption for that portion
of the sales price of such newly constructed primary residential
property equal to the maximum eligible sales price, provided,
however, that any newly constructed primary residential property
purchased at a sales price greater than 15% above the maximum
eligible sales prices shall not be allowed any exemption.
(4) No exemption shall be allowed for any newly constructed primary
residential property purchased by a first-time homebuyer on or
after December 31, 2005, unless such purchase is pursuant to a
binding written contract entered into prior to December 31, 2005;
provided, however, that any first-time homebuyer who is allowed an
exemption prior to such date shall continue to be allowed further
exemptions.
(5) No portion of a single-family newly constructed/reconstructed
primary residential property shall be leased during the period of
time when the first-time homeowner exemption shall apply to the
§ 265-41 AUBURN CODE § 265-41
248:628
§ 265-42. Application for exemption.
This exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner(s) of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Equalization and
Assessment Board. The application shall be filed with the Assessor for the
City of Auburn on or before the appropriate taxable status date for the City
of Auburn.
§ 265-43. Approval.
Such exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the
applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this article. The Assessor
shall approve such application and such real property shall thereafter be
exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies for City real property
as provided in the schedule set forth in § 265-40 of this article commencing
with the assessment roll prepared on the basis of the taxable date. The
Assessor shall enter the assessed value of any taxable real property granted
an exemption pursuant to this section on the assessment roll, with the
amount of the exemptions shown in a separate column.
residence. If any portion of the single-family newly constructed/
reconstructed primary residential property is found to be the
subject of a lease agreement, the assessor shall discontinue any
exemption granted.
(6) In the event that a primary residential property granted an
exemption ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or
title thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of
the owner, the exemption granted shall be discontinued.
(7) Upon determining that an exemption granted should be
discontinued, the Assessor shall mail a notice so stating to the
owner or owners thereof. Such owner or owners shall be entitled to
seek administrative and judicial review of such action in the
manner provided by law, provided that the burden shall be on such
owner or owners to establish eligibility for the exemption.
(8) The exemption cannot be used in conjunction with any other
exemption currently offered by the State of New York or the City of
Auburn.
§ 265-41 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-43
248:629

ARTICLE X
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 4-29-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
§ 265-44. Partial exemption granted.
§ 265-45. Limitations on exemption.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. Real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, or real
property owned by husband, wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of
whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereinafter defined, is
limited by reason of such disability, shall be exempt from taxation by the
City of Auburn in the City of Auburn to the extent of 50% of the
assessed valuation thereof.
B. For purposes of this section: a "sibling" shall mean a brother or sister,
whether related through half blood, whole blood or adoption.
C. A person with a disability is one who has a physical or mental
impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drug use, which
substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major
life activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working,
and who:
(1) Is certified to receive social security disability insurance (SSDI) or
supplemental security income (SSI) benefits under the federal
Social Security Act; or
(2) Is certified to receive Railroad Retirement Disability benefits under
the federal Railroad Retirement Act; or
(3) Has received a certificate from the state Commission for the Blind
and Visually Handicapped stating that such person is legally blind;
or
(4) Is certified to receive a United States Postal Service disability
pension.
D. An award letter from the Social Security Administration or the Railroad
Retirement Board, or a certificate from the state Commission for the
Blind and Visually Handicapped, or an award letter from the United
States Postal Service, shall be submitted as proof of disability.
E. Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed.
A. Income.
§ 265-44 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-45
248:631
(1) If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of
the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of making application for exemption exceeds the sum of
$18,800 beginning 2006-2007 fiscal year: [Amended 3-23-2006
by Ord. No. 4-2006]
2006-2007 Allowed
$18,800 or less 50%
$18,801 to $19,800 45%
$19,801 to $20,800 40%
$20,801 to $21,800 35%
$21,801 to $22,700 30%
$22,701 to $23,600 25%
$23,601 to $24,500 20%
(2) "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if
no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum, except where the husband or wife, or ex-husband
or ex-wife, is absent from the property due to divorce, legal
separation or abandonment, then only the income of the spouse or
ex-spouse residing on the property shall be considered and may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or
exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a loss from the
sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax year, net
rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from selfemployment
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts,
inheritances, or monies earned through employment in the federal
foster grandparent program, and any such income shall be offset by
all medical and prescription drug expenses actually paid which
were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance. In computing net
rental income and net income from self-employment, no
depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the exhaustion, wear
and tear of real or personal property held for the production of
income.
B. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event any portion of such property is not
so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this section;
C. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the disabled person; except where the disabled
person is absent from the residence while receiving health-related care
as an inpatient of a residential health care facility, as defined in § 2801
§ 265-45 AUBURN CODE § 265-45
248:632
§ 265-46. Notice of eligibility.
The City shall notify, or cause to be notified, each person owning residential
real property in the City of the provisions of this article. The provisions
of this section may be met by a notice or legend sent on or with each
tax bill to such persons reading, "You may be eligible for a disability tax
exemption. Eligible citizens have until month ______ day _____, year _____,"
followed by the name, telephone number and/or address of a person or
department selected by the City to explain the provisions of this article.
Failure to notify or cause to be notified any person who is in fact eligible to
receive the exemption provided by this article or the failure of such person
to receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement
of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 265-47. Annual application required.
Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner, or
all of the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the state board,
and shall be filed in the City Assessor's office on or before the appropriate
taxable status date; provided, however, proof of a permanent disability need
be submitted only in the year exemption pursuant to this article is first
sought or the disability is first determined to be permanent.
§ 265-48. Notice to applicants.
At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the City
Assessor shall mail to each person who was granted exemption pursuant
to this article on the latest completed assessment roll an application form
and a notice that such application must be filed on or before taxable status
date and be approved in order for the exemption to be granted. The City
Assessor shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the tentative
assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included with his
application at least one self-addressed, prepaid envelope of the approval or
denial of the application; provided, however, that the City Assessor shall,
upon the receipt and filing of the application, send by mail notification of
receipt to any applicant who has included two of such envelopes with the
application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial pursuant to
this section, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the State Board
and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall further state that the
applicant may have such determination reviewed in the manner provided by
law. Failure to mail any such application form or notices or the failure of
such person to receive any of the same shall not prevent the levy, collection
and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such
person.
of the Public Health Law, provided that any income accruing to that
person shall be considered income for purposes of this section only to
the extent that it exceeds the amount paid by such person or spouse or
sibling of such person for care in the facility.
§ 265-45 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-49
248:633
§ 265-49. Authorization to accept applications after taxable status
date.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 265-47 and 265-48 of this article, the
City Assessor may accept applications for renewal of exemptions pursuant
to this article after the taxable status date. In the event the owner, or all of
the owners, of property which has received an exemption pursuant to this
article on the preceding assessment roll fails to file the application required
pursuant to this article on or before the taxable status date, such owner or
owners may file the application, executed as if such application had been
filed on or before the taxable status date, with the City Assessor on or before
the date for the hearing of complaints.
§ 265-50. Penalties and forfeitures.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 265-49 AUBURN CODE § 265-50
248:634
ARTICLE XI
Exemption for Improvement of Multifamily Dwellings
[Adopted 9-13-2007 by L.L. No. 11-2007]
§ 265-51. Grant of exemption.
The City of Auburn adopts a local law60 granting the exemption authorized
pursuant to § 421-k of the Real Property Tax Law and that a copy of such
local law shall be filed with the State Board and the Assessor of such City
who prepares the assessment roll on which the taxes of said City are levied.
60.Editor's Note: Local Law Number 11-2007 adopts the terms and provisions of § 421-k of
the Real Property Tax Law, which provides property owners who invest in the
reconstruction or improvement of a multifamily dwelling a tax incentive by granting an
exemption from property taxation and special ad valorem levies. The exemption shall
apply to an increase in the assessed valuation of the premises and shall continue for a
term of seven years at the rate of 12.5% of the increased assessed market value of the
premises as a result of reconstruction, alteration and conversion.
§ 265-51 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-51
248:635

ARTICLE XII
Real Property Conversion Exemption
[Adopted 6-21-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
§ 265-52. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for a real property tax exemption
from City of Auburn real property taxes as authorized by § 485-a of the
Real Property Tax law of the State of New York relative to the conversion
of qualified nonresidential real property to mixed-use commercial and
residential status in accordance with the terms of state law and this article.
This article shall be read in conjunction with the provisions of § 485-a of
the Real Property Tax Law to effectuate the authorized real property tax
exemption.
§ 265-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person obligated to pay real property taxes on the
property for which an exemption from real property taxes under this article
is sought.
COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION WORK — The modernization,
rehabilitation, expansion or other improvement of the portion of mixed-use
property to be used for commercial purposes.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE OR USE — The buying, selling or otherwise
providing of goods or services, including hotel services, or other lawful
business or commercial activities permitted in mixed-use property.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY — Property on which will exist, after completion of
residential construction work or a combination of residential construction
work and commercial construction work, a building or structure used for
both residential and commercial purposes.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Auburn, New York.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, agency, trust, estate, foreign or domestic
government or subdivision thereof, or other entity.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION WORK — The creation, modernization,
rehabilitation, expansion or other improvement of dwelling units, other than
dwelling units in a hotel, in the portion of mixed-use property to be used for
residential purposes.
§ 265-54. Exemption authorized.
The City of Auburn, by this article, provides for the exemption of real
property from taxation as provided in this article. Upon the adoption of this
article, the County of Cayuga and the Auburn Enlarged School District may,
§ 265-52 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-54
248:637
by resolution, exempt such property from its taxation in the same manner
and to the same extent as the City of Auburn has done.
§ 265-55. Exemption for conversions.
Upon the adoption of this article, nonresidential real property, upon
conversion to mixed-use property, shall be exempt from taxation and special
ad valorem levies as provided for in § 265-56 of this article.
§ 265-56. Exemption details.
A. For a period of 12 years form the approval of an application, the
increase in assessed value of such property attributable to such
conversion shall be exempt as provided in Subsection B of this section.
Such exemption shall be computed with respect to the "exemption
base." The exemption base shall be determined for each year in which
there is an increase in assessed value so attributable from that of the
previous year's assessed value.
B. The following table shall illustrate the computation of the tax
exemption:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 through 8 100% of exemption base
9 80% of exemption base
10 60% of exemption base
11 40% of exemption base
12 20% of exemption base
C. No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(1) Such conversion was commenced subsequent to the date on which
this article took effect; and
(2) The cost of such conversion exceeds the sum of $10,000.
D. For purposes of this section, the term "conversion" shall not include
ordinary maintenance and repairs.
E. No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to
any other real property tax exemption granted to the same
improvements to real property, except where, during the period of such
previous exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were
made to the City of Auburn in an amount that would have been equal to
or greater than the amount of real property taxes that would have been
paid on such improvements had such property been granted an
exemption pursuant to this article. In such case, an exemption shall be
granted for a number of years equal to the twelve-year exemption
granted pursuant to this article less the number of years the property
would have been previously exempt from real property taxes.
§ 265-54 AUBURN CODE § 265-57
248:638
§ 265-57. Application for exemption.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such
real property on a form prescribed by the State Board. Such application
shall be filed with the Assessor of the City of Auburn having the power to
assess property for taxation on or before the appropriate taxable status date
of the City of Auburn.
§ 265-58. Approval; assessed value of exemption.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, he or she shall approve the application, and such
real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as in this article provided, commencing with the assessment
roll prepared after the taxable status date referred to in § 265-7 of this
article. The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article
shall be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
§ 265-57 SIDEWALK CAFES § 265-58
248:639
Chapter 268
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
§ 268-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Taxicab
Ordinance."
§ 268-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — References herein shall also apply to any other
member of the Police Department so designated by the Chief of Police.
CLEAN, SANITARY AND SAFE — The vehicle is regularly cleaned and
maintained in such a manner as to render adequate and proper public
service. For purpose of clarification, this definition shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following examples: clean and sanitary interiors of a
vehicle; interiors that are not littered with debris, ripped, soiled or the like;
and vehicles that are not otherwise unsanitary, unkempt or poorly cleaned.
GOOD CONDITION AND APPEARANCE — The vehicle is maintained in
good mechanical working condition and meets all equipment requirements
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. In addition thereto, the taxicab shall be free
from disfiguring damage to both the interior and exterior of the vehicle,
including visible rust holes through the body, as well as unrepaired damage
or excessive wear on the vehicle, which unduly detracts from the overall
good appearance or serviceability of the vehicle. This definition shall not
be intended to include minor dents, wear, scratches and the like on the
vehicle. All taxicab doors, lights and safety equipment shall be maintained
in operating condition.
OPERATOR — Any person owning or having control of the use of one or
more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets of the City, or a person engaged
in the business of operating a taxicab.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire, except vehicles subject to the provisions of the Transportation
Corporations Law, or those used by undertakers in carrying on their
business.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such a
person is the owner of such taxicab or is employed by a taxicab owner or
operator.
§ 265-58 AUBURN CODE § 268-2
248:640
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE — A license granted by the Chief of Police to
any person to operate any licensed taxicab upon the streets of the City.
TAXICAB LICENSE — A license granted by the Chief of Police to any person
to operate or keep for hire any taxicab in the City.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
which is exclusively reserved by the City for the use of taxicabs.
§ 268-3. Taxicab driver's license.
A. Required. No person shall drive a taxicab within the City without a
taxicab license.
B. Qualifications.
(1) Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall have the
following qualifications. He or she must:
(a) First have obtained a chauffeur's license from the State of New
York.
(b) Be of the age of 18 years or over.
(c) Be able to read, write and speak the English language.
(d) Not be addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor, or of drugs,
and must be neat in dress and person.
(e) Fill out an application to be provided by the Chief of Police
stating his or her full name, residence, age, height, color of
eyes, color of hair, place of birth, whether a citizen of the
United States, length of time he or she has resided in Auburn,
places of employment in past five years, whether married or
single, whether he or she has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, such details as the Chief of Police may
require, whether he or she has been previously licensed as a
driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether his or her license has
ever been revoked or suspended, with the reason therefor, and
the number of the chauffeur's license issued to him or her by
the State of New York, which statement shall be signed and
sworn to by said applicant and shall be filed with the Chief of
Police as a permanent record.
(2) The Chief of Police may require of any applicant such additional
information as he or she may deem necessary to clarify or more
fully explain any of the statements made in the application.
(3) False information; effect and action thereon. Any false statement by
the applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be cause for
refusing the license or revoking the license after it is issued, and
such false statement shall be promptly reported by the Chief of
Police to the District Attorney.
§ 268-2 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-3
248:641
§ 268-4. City of Auburn Taxicab Ordinance.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be given a copy of the
above noted ordinance and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
become familiar with the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations
of the City, the Vehicle and Traffic Law and the geography of the City, and
to fully comply with said ordinance, regulations and laws.
§ 268-5. Photograph of taxicab driver; attachment to license;
display.
§ 268-6. Fingerprints and photo of taxicab driver.
(4) Authorization for investigation. Accompanying each application,
the applicant shall furnish to the Chief of Police, on a form provided
by the Chief of Police, a signed authorization by the applicant
permitting any person to divulge and report to the Chief of Police
any matter which might otherwise be confidential, without
limitation.
(5) Investigation. After receipt of an application, the Chief of Police
shall institute an investigation of the applicant, including the
applicant's driving record, and no license shall be issued under the
provisions of this chapter until the Chief of Police has indicated, in
writing, approval thereof after such investigation has been
completed.
(6) Refusal of license. If the results of the investigation are
unsatisfactory, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall be refused a license, subject to the provisions hereof for
hearings.
A. Required. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license will be
photographed at the Auburn Police Department. The photograph shall
be taken within 30 days of the date of the application. A copy of the
photograph shall be filed with the application and another copy
attached to the license to be issued hereunder. All taxicab licenses will
remain the property of the Auburn Police Department.
B. Exhibition. The photograph, together with his or her driver's license,
must be exhibited by each licensed driver upon demand and shall be
displayed in a prominent place in the taxicab, clearly visible to
passengers, at all times while he or she is operating the same.
A. Required. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall contact the
Auburn Police Department Identification Bureau for the purpose of
scheduling an appointment for submission of civilian fingerprints.
B. The applicant's fingerprints and any applicable fees shall be forwarded
to the Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) in the form and
manner as prescribed by DCJS for a complete criminal background
§ 268-3 AUBURN CODE § 268-6
248:642
§ 268-7. Issuance of taxicab driver's license; contents; defacement;
term.
§ 268-8. Renewal of taxicab driver's license.
check. Applicants are responsible for all fees associated with the
fingerprint submission. Applicants may contact the Auburn Police
Department I.D. Bureau for a fee schedule.
C. The Chief of Police or his authorized designee shall review all
information provided by DCJS in connection with the applicant's
criminal background check.
D. Grounds for denial of license. No license shall be granted to a person
who has been convicted of a felony. Where the felony conviction is a
crime against property, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, a
probationary license may be issued. In addition, at the discretion of the
Chief of Police, persons convicted of misdemeanors involving crimes
against persons and/or crimes which are alcohol or drug-related may be
denied a license. Any denial of license is subject to Article 23 and 23-A
of the New York State Correction Law.
A. Issuance. Upon complying with the foregoing requirements to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police, and upon the conclusion by the Chief
that the applicant is a proper person to be given a license to operate a
taxicab in the City, there shall be issued to the applicant a license,
which shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature
of the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of
any arrest or serious complaint against him or her or of any accident in
which he or she is involved.
B. Contents. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are
issued and shall contain the name and place of residence of the licensee
and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license.
C. Suspension or revocation for defacing. Any licensee who defaces,
removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his or her license
may have his or her license suspended or revoked as provided in
Chapter 200, Licensing, of this Municipal Code.
D. Term. Each taxicab driver's license shall be valid for a period of 12
months, unless suspended or revoked.
E. Newly licensed taxicab drivers will be subject to a six-month
probationary period.
A. The Chief of Police may renew a taxicab driver's license from year to
year by the appropriate endorsement thereon. A taxicab driver shall
make application for a renewal not less than 30 days before its
expiration date. For purposes of this section, each license shall be for a
period of 12 months from the date issued.
§ 268-6 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-8
248:643
§ 268-9. Fee for taxicab driver's license.
§ 268-10. Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's license.
B. The renewal form, titled "Application for Renewal of License," shall be
filled out with the full name and address of the applicant, together with
a statement of the date on which his or her original license was granted,
the number thereon and such other information as the Chief of Police
shall deem necessary. The failure of an applicant to submit an
application for renewal of license by the end of business on the date of
expiration of the subsequent year shall result in denial of the renewal
and in the requirement that the applicant follow the process for
application and issuance of a new original license.
A. A fee of $35 shall be paid upon the filing of an original application and a
fee of $20 for the application for renewal of an existing license. Such
application fees shall not be refunded in the event that the application
is denied.
B. In the event that a license described in this section has been lost,
destroyed or stolen, the Chief of Police shall cancel the particular
license number on the records of the Department and, upon the
payment of a replacement fee of $10, issue a new license.
A. Upon arrest for a crime or a violation of any local or state law or
ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or motor vehicles, a
taxicab driver's license may at any time be suspended for cause,
pending the disposition of such crime or violation. Upon conviction, said
taxicab driver's license may be revoked. When a license is so suspended
or revoked, the taxicab driver's license shall be delivered forthwith to
the Chief of Police, and, in the case of suspension, the license shall be
returned to the taxicab driver upon the expiration of the period of
suspension. No taxicab driver whose license has been revoked shall be
again licensed as a taxicab driver in the City of Auburn unless, after a
special hearing upon such application held before the Chief of Police, he
or she determines that such license should again be granted.
B. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any
taxicab driver's license for a driver's failing or refusing to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, or if he/she finds in his/her judgment the
licensee is unfit, undesirable, incapable of performing as a holder of a
license, or not fit to be a licensee in the best interest of the public
welfare and safety.
C. Any taxicab driver who has his/her license suspended or revoked shall
be so notified by mail or, when necessary, in person. Such taxicab driver
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have 10 days after
such notification to request a hearing before the Chief of Police to
present evidence on his/her behalf.
§ 268-8 AUBURN CODE § 268-11
248:644
§ 268-11. Records relating to taxicab driver's license.
A complete record of each license issued to a driver, including all renewals,
suspensions and revocations thereof, shall be kept in the Auburn Police
Department Records Bureau, which record shall be kept on file with the
original application of the taxicab driver for his or her license.
§ 268-12. Taxicab license and taxicab business license.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon the streets of the
City without a taxicab license and a taxicab business license, both issued by
the Chief of Police. Such licenses shall be issued for the calendar year. The
application for a taxicab license and taxicab business license shall be made
by the owner upon forms furnished by the Chief, and such application shall
contain:
§ 268-13. Inspection of vehicles.
A. The name, age and residence of the person, if a natural person or
persons, or the same information for officers, if a corporation (and the
place of business), applying for the license and what, if any, previous
experience he or she has had in the taxicab business.
B. The name, age and residence of the person to be in immediate charge of
any such taxicab or taxicabs.
C. The type of motor vehicle to be used, the type of motor, the factory
number, the state plate number and license number, the number of
years the vehicle has been driven and the seating capacity according to
its trade rating.
D. Whether previously licensed to operate a taxicab and, if so, where.
E. Whether a license to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked and, if so,
for what cause.
F. Proof of motor vehicle liability insurance in the minimum amount
established by the State of New York.
G. Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary to
clarify or more fully explain the above information.
H. Investigation. After receipt of an application, the Chief of Police shall
institute an investigation of the applicant, and no license shall be issued
under the provisions of this article until the Chief of Police has
indicated, in writing, approval thereof after such investigation has been
completed.
A. No taxicab license shall be issued unless the taxicab has passed a New
York State inspection and been found to be in compliance with state
regulations, performed by licensed New York State inspectors
designated by the Chief of Police, and approved.
§ 268-11 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-13
248:645
§ 268-14. Issuance of taxicab license and taxicab business license.
§ 268-15. Change in state plate or license number.
It is the duty of each licensee to report to the Chief of Police any change in
the New York State plate or license number of any taxicab during the period
for which his or her license is issued under this chapter.
§ 268-16. Taxicab license fee.
The annual fee for a taxicab license shall be set forth in the City of Auburn
Fee Schedule, which is on file in the City offices. No license fee shall be
prorated for a period of less than three months.
§ 268-17. Suspension or revocation of taxicab license.
B. In addition thereto, approval shall also include compliance with the
requirements of this chapter governing the maintenance, appearance
and condition of taxicabs in the City of Auburn. Such inspections shall
be valid for a period of six months, and the costs of such inspections
shall be borne by the taxicab licensee. This semiannual inspection will
be performed by the City of Auburn, Public Works Garage.
(1) Vehicles which pass inspection. Upon passing a New York State
inspection and a City of Auburn inspection, the inspection station
shall place upon the windshield of such vehicle both a New York
State inspection sticker and a City of Auburn inspection sticker.
Each taxicab shall be inspected at a minimum of every six months.
The state inspection sticker shall be recertified at that time,
whereas the City inspection sticker shall be replaced at that time.
(2) Vehicles which fail inspection. If a violation is considered to be a
safety hazard, the taxicab will not be licensed. If the violation is not
considered a safety hazard, the taxicab company will be given 10
days to make the required repairs.
A. Taxicabs. If the taxicab and the application are both approved by the
Chief of Police, upon the payment of the license fee, the taxicab license
shall be issued by delivering to the owner a license which shall be
affixed in a conspicuous place within the taxicab, visible to any
passenger, showing the number assigned to such taxicab for the license
year.
B. Business license. After the taxicab and application are both approved
by the Chief of Police, upon payment of the license fee, a taxicab
business license shall be issued to the taxicab company to be displayed
at the company's headquarters.
A. Any taxicab license issued as herein provided may be revoked by the
Chief of Police at any time upon a showing of sufficient cause that:
(1) The privileges granted by the license are or have been abused;
§ 268-13 AUBURN CODE § 268-17
248:646
§ 268-18. Register of licensed taxicabs.
The Chief of Police shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating a taxicab licensed hereunder, together with the license
number, make and description of such vehicle, and the date it was
inspected, and such record shall be open to inspection by the public at all
reasonable times.
§ 268-19. Taxicab stands.
The Chief of Police may locate, change and designate taxicab stands in such
streets in the City as he or she shall deem to be in the best interests of the
general public.
§ 268-20. Rates of fare.
(2) The person is operating or maintaining the taxicab in an unsafe or
unsanitary manner or condition; or
(3) The person is violating a rule or regulation prescribed by the Chief
of Police.
B. Licenses may be suspended temporarily during the investigation.
Conviction of a violation of this chapter or of any law regulating
vehicles or traffic shall be considered sufficient cause therefor.
C. A third suspension, other than suspension during investigation, shall be
cause for revocation.
A. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a sum for the use of a
taxicab which is less than the minimum allowable rate or which exceeds
the maximum.
B. The rate of fare shall apply to any trip from the point of initiation to any
agreed-upon destination within the corporate limits of the City of
Auburn.
C. Rates.
(1) Basic rate:
(a) Minimum rate of fare: $6; maximum rate of fare: $8.
(b) An explanation of all charges in excess of the base rate shall be
clearly posted on and visible to the passenger(s).
(2) In addition, an operator may choose to charge the following
additional rates; provided, however, that such rates are clearly
posted within the taxicab:
(a) A charge of $1 is permitted for each additional passenger to a
destination, except that one child under the age of 10 shall ride
free if accompanied by an adult passenger.
§ 268-17 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-20
248:647
§ 268-21. Return of license upon discontinuance of operation;
license not transferable; duplicate license.
§ 268-22. Name and license number to be painted on taxicab.
Every taxicab shall have the name of the taxicab licensee and the license
number of such vehicle plainly painted in figures at least two inches in
height, with at least a one-fourth-inch stroke, in clear and distinct colors
(b) Baggage. No charge shall be made for two suitcases or similar
packages. A charge of $1 for each additional piece of luggage
or package shall be permitted.
(3) Disputed fares. In the event that there is a dispute between the
taxicab driver and a passenger with respect to a fare, the taxicab
driver shall submit the dispute to the desk officer in charge at
police headquarters. If the passenger then makes payment
according to the amount determined by said police officer, the
passenger shall be given a receipt by the taxicab driver of the
amount paid, which shall be witnessed by the police officer. If the
passenger pays under protest, such fact shall be recorded by the
desk officer, who shall make a memorandum of the dispute and the
disposition made. The disposition of the dispute shall not be
binding in court.
D. Display required. A copy of the rates under which each taxicab is
operating shall be permanently and conspicuously displayed in each
vehicle in a manner so as to be clearly visible to any passenger at all
times.
E. Payment in advance. Fares may be payable in advance at the option of
the operator; however, a receipt must be given to the passenger if so
requested.
A. Discontinuing use. Every person to whom a taxicab license has been
issued shall, upon discontinuing the operation of driving of a taxicab,
return such license, unless the same has been lost, stolen or destroyed.
Such license shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or
be applicable to any vehicle other than the one specified therein.
B. Use by another prohibited. No licensee shall permit his or her license to
be used by any other person, and no person shall use any license issued
or granted to any other person. Any license issued hereunder shall not
be assigned.
C. Lost, stolen or destroyed. Whenever a license is lost, stolen or
destroyed, without fault on the part of the licensee, a duplicate may be
issued by the Chief of Police upon filing with him or her of an affidavit
stating the facts and upon payment to him or her of the cost of such
duplicate, which shall be $10.
§ 268-20 AUBURN CODE § 268-22
248:648
on both sides of such taxicab so that they may be easily legible in quickly
identifying such taxicab.
§ 268-23. Inspection of licensed vehicles.
§ 268-24. Rules of operation.
A. Required. All vehicles licensed pursuant hereto shall be subject to
inspection in accordance with § 268-13B and/or by the Chief of Police or
his/her designee at any time. If said vehicles are not in good condition
and appearance or are not clean and safe, the license therefor may be
revoked or suspended.
B. Conduct of inspection; frequency. All vehicles licensed pursuant hereto
shall be inspected by a certified New York State inspector upon request
by the Chief of Police or his/her designee for reasonable cause.
C. Certification. A written certificate of the inspector shall be filed with the
Chief of Police showing the vehicle to be in a safe operating condition.
D. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle for hire, licensed as a taxicab
in the City of Auburn, without the appropriate inspection sticker.
A. Drivers shall adhere to the following rules:
(1) Soliciting passengers. No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers on
any streets.
(2) Use of intoxicating liquors or illegal drugs by a driver is prohibited.
No taxicab driver shall drink intoxicating liquor or take illegal
drugs while on duty.
(3) Occupancy restrictions. No person shall occupy a licensed taxicab
while at the taxicab stand or while on a call, except the licensed
taxicab driver thereof or a fare-paying passenger, and no person
other than the passenger first employing the taxicab shall be
carried without the consent of such passenger.
(4) Articles left in taxicabs. Every taxicab driver, immediately after the
termination of any hiring or employment, must search the taxicab
for any property lost or left therein and must leave the same with
the officer in charge at the police station within 24 hours in
compliance with Article 7-B of the Personal Property Law, unless
sooner claimed by the owner.
(5) The smoking of tobacco products within a taxicab is prohibited.
(6) Nondiscrimination: not refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person upon request in the City unless previously engaged or
unable or forbidden by the provisions hereof so to do.
§ 268-22 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-24
248:649
(7) Trip records: keep a written record in ink of all trips on a form
approved by the Chief of Police. Entries on such forms shall be
made as each trip is completed.
(8) Accident reports: report all accidents as required by the Vehicle
and Traffic Law to the Police Department. The Chief of Police may
require that a taxicab be reinspected prior to its return to service.
(9) Change of residence: report each change of residence within 10
days after such change to the Chief of Police.
(10)Rate cards for passengers: at all times while on duty have available
in the taxicab a supply of rate cards issued pursuant to this chapter,
which rate cards shall be furnished to any passenger requesting
the same and be displayed in a place designated by the Chief of
Police.
(11)Work schedule: not operate any vehicle:
(a) For longer than 12 hours of any twenty-four-hour period.
(b) For longer than 12 hours in any one tour or shift of duty.
(c) With less than eight hours' relief from duty after working 12
hours of the twenty-four-hour period preceding the
commencement of such relief from duty.
(12) Examination and testing: submit, upon reasonable notice, at the
request of the Chief of Police, to a physical examination during any
license year, to be conducted by a City-appointed physician at City
expense, and submit to the taking of a practical test to demonstrate
capacity to operate a taxicab, which test shall be supervised by the
Chief of Police.
(13) Cooperation with police: not conceal any evidence of crime, nor
voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. A driver shall report as
soon as possible to the police any unlawful act connected with such
driver's vehicle or any attempt to use that vehicle to commit a
crime or escape from the scene of a crime.
(14) Receipts to passengers: upon request of a passenger, issue a
receipt for fares paid by the passenger.
(15) Nonpaying passengers: not permit any passengers in a taxicab
except a paying-fare passenger during such time as the taxi is
being used for business purposes or is being made available for the
carrying of paying passengers.
(16) Locked doors: not operate a taxicab in which the doors in each
compartment cannot be unlocked from the inside.
B. The owner of every vehicle licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall adhere to the following rules:
§ 268-24 AUBURN CODE § 268-24
248:650
(1) Vehicle cleanliness: maintain the interior and exterior of the
taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Safety inspections: inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least
daily and make such repairs as may be required by the condition of
the vehicle and not allow any vehicle to be operated until repairs
are made to maintain safety of passengers and the public in
general.
(3) Authorized driver employees: employ only drivers who present and
have with them during the time of employment a currently valid
City of Auburn taxi driver's license.
(4) Work shift limitation: prohibit any taxi driver from operating any
vehicle:
(a) For longer than 12 hours of any twenty-four-hour period.
(b) For longer than 12 hours in any one tour or shift of duty.
(c) With less than eight hours' relief from duty after working 12
hours of the twenty-four-hour period preceding the
commencement of such relief from duty.
(5) Report on driver: report any driver to the Chief of Police who
would, in the opinion of the owner, not be qualified to hold a
driver's license, stating the reason therefor.
(6) Municipal inspections: submit vehicles for inspection whenever
required by the Chief of Police.
(7) Rate cards for passengers: maintain a supply of City taxicab rate
cards to be furnished to drivers in such owner's employ in sufficient
quantities so that the driver of a taxicab may be able to deliver a
rate card to each passenger that requests the same.
(8) Operation records:
(a) Provide each driver with a manifest and require the following
entries to be recorded thereon in ink during the course of daily
operation:
[1] The make, year and vehicle registration number.
[2] The name of the driver.
[3] The time the vehicle commenced operation.
[4] A record of all trips made in chronological order, showing
the destination, the time of dispatch, the time returned
and the amount of the fare.
§ 268-24 SIDEWALK CAFES § 268-24
248:651
§ 268-25. Penalties for offenses.
[5] A statement of the licensee whether or not the vehicle is
clean and in safe operating condition at the start and end
of each work tour.
[6] A record of all accidents and any other incident, such as
lost property or assistance to police, including all times
and places.
(b) These records shall be retained by the owner for at least three
years and shall be furnished to the Chief of Police within five
working days after written request.
(9) Interior light: provide each taxicab with sufficient interior light so
that when any door of the taxicab is open the light shall
automatically operate.
(10) Seat belts: provide each taxicab with seat belts in a number
sufficient for each passenger therein.
(11) Driver employees list: furnish current lists of driver employees with
the Chief of Police upon demand.
(12) Driver delinquency reports: furnish reports to the Chief of Police
upon the discharge of any driver where the discharge is based on
the conduct of the driver in violation of this chapter.
(13) Driver hiring procedure: inquire at the office of the Chief of Police
prior to hiring any driver in order to ascertain that the driver has a
current City of Auburn taxi driver's license.
(14) Vehicle transfer: promptly report to the Chief of Police the transfer
of ownership of any vehicle licensed hereunder and concurrently
turn in to the Chief of Police the taxicab license issued for the use of
such vehicle.
(15) Supervisory responsibility: be responsible for diligently
supervising all employees to assure compliance by them with this
chapter. The failure to do so may be cause for revocation or
suspension of the owner's taxicab license or licenses.
A. Punishment. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine to be set of not more than $500, but no less than
$50, or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
B. Suspension or revocation. In addition to the fine or imprisonment, any
licensee shall be liable to the suspension or revocation of his or her
license upon conviction for a violation of this chapter.
C. Action by Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may, in his or her
discretion, for cause, suspend or revoke any license hereunder pending
the criminal prosecution of the charge.
§ 268-24 AUBURN CODE § 268-25
248:652
Chapter 273
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 109.
Collateral loan brokers — See Ch. 140.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
§ 273-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership or corporation seeking to conduct a
transient retail business and his or its agents, servants and/or employees.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — A person, whether a resident of the
City or not, who engages in a temporary or transient business for the
sale of, at retail or wholesale, goods, wares or merchandise, except food
products, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building, structure, lot, tent, public room in a hotel, lodging
house, apartment or shop on any street, alley or other place within the
City for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise,
which is intended to be conducted for a temporary period of time and not
permanently.
§ 273-2. Presumptive evidence of transient business.
If the place in which a business is conducted is rented or leased for a period
of six months or less, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the
business carried on therein is a transient business.
§ 273-3. Permit required; contents; term; fee.
A. Required. Before any person shall commence the conduct of a transient
retail business, as herein defined, in the City, such person shall obtain
from the City Manager a permit for such business, which permit shall
state the place where such business is to be conducted and the period
of time covered by the permit.
B. Extensions. The time in such permit may be extended by the City
Manager from time to time.
C. Permit fee. The permit fee shall be $75 plus $15 per day for each day of
operation.
§ 268-25 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS § 273-4
273:653
§ 273-4. Application for permit.
Each person desiring to conduct a transient retail business in the City
shall present to the City Manager an application on a form approved by
the City Manager which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
§ 273-5. Bond or cash deposit required.
A. In the case of a corporation:
(1) Corporation name, date of incorporation, the state in which
incorporated and corporate address.
(2) Full name and residence address of each officer of the corporation.
(3) The name of the article or articles to be sold.
(4) Place where the business is to be conducted.
(5) Dates and times during which said business is to be conducted.
(6) Affidavit and acknowledgment of the foregoing facts signed by one
officer of the corporation.
B. In the case of a partnership:
(1) The assumed business name by which the business will be known,
date of organization, and date of registration of name.
(2) The full name and residence address of each partner.
(3) The name of the article or articles to be sold.
(4) Place where the business is to be conducted.
(5) Dates and times during which said business is to be conducted.
(6) Affidavit and acknowledgment of the foregoing facts signed by one
of the partners.
C. In the case of an individual:
(1) The assumed business name by which the business will be known
and date of registration of the name.
(2) The full name and residence address of the individual.
(3) The name of the article or articles to be sold.
(4) Place where the business is to be conducted.
(5) Dates and times during which said business is to be conducted.
(6) Affidavit and acknowledgment of the foregoing facts signed by the
individual.
§ 273-4 AUBURN CODE § 273-5
273:654
§ 273-6. Display of permit.
All transient merchants shall display in a conspicuous place at the location
of the transient retail business the permit issued pursuant to this chapter
and readable and shall have it readily available for inspection by the Fire
Department and/or Police Department.
§ 273-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or
any part thereof, or makes a false or fraudulent representation on any
application required to be filed by this chapter, or falsely represents by
advertising otherwise that such property is in whole or in part damaged
goods, or makes any false statements as to the previous history or character
of such personal property, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
A. Amount; terms; conditions. Before any permit hereunder is issued, the
person applying shall file with the City Clerk an approved surety bond
in an amount of not less than $1,000 to be executed by a bonding
company authorized to do business in the State of New York, which
bond shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) The person applying shall fully comply with all the provisions of the
ordinances of the City of Auburn and the statutes of the State of
New York respecting the business of the person applying.
(2) The bond shall provide for payment of all judgments and costs
rendered against the person applying for any violation of said
ordinances and statutes.
(3) All money paid down as a down payment will be accounted for and
applied according to the representation of the person applying, his
agents, servants or employees and further guarantee to any
purchaser doing business with said person applying that the
property purchased will be delivered according to the
representation of the person applying.
B. Approval. Such bond shall be approved by the Corporation Counsel as
to form and execution and by the City Manager as to its sufficiency.
C. Deposit in lieu of bond. In lieu of any such surety bond, the applicant
may make a cash deposit with the City Manager in an amount to be
fixed by the City Manager, which deposit shall be deemed to be surety
to the same extent as such surety bond.
§ 273-5 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS § 273-7
273:655
Chapter 277
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 230.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259, Art.
IV.
§ 277-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks and all areas owned by the City or to which the public has free
access as a park.
STREET TREES — Shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the City.
§ 277-2. Official plan.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for developing,
updating and administering a written plan for the inventory, care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall
be presented to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval,
shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the City of Auburn.
§ 277-3. Official tree list.
A list of official tree species for the City of Auburn may change from time to
time due to the introduction of new species and hybrids. The Department of
Public Works is charged with creating and continually updating an official
tree list of small, medium and large species appropriate for urban planning.
As a long-term goal in protection against epidemic and widespread loss
from ice storms, those species should represent no more than 10% of the
total number of street trees and park trees owned by the City of Auburn.
§ 277-4. Spacing of street trees.
The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the species size
classes developed in § 277-3 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted
closer together than the following, except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape architect:
A. Small trees: 20 feet.
B. Medium trees: 30 feet.
§ 273-7 AUBURN CODE § 277-4
277:656
§ 277-5. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
shall be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 277-3,
and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following:
§ 277-6. Distance from street corners and fireplugs, stop signs and
streetlights.
No street trees shall be planted closer than 40 feet to any street corner,
measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug, stop sign or
streetlight.
§ 277-7. Distance from utilities.
No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in § 277-3
of this chapter, may be planted over or within five lateral feet of any
underground waterline, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
§ 277-8. Public tree care.
§ 277-9. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person or firm to top
any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. "Topping" is
defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms
or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions or
C. Large trees: 40 feet.
A. Small trees: one foot.
B. Medium trees: 11/2 feet.
C. Large trees: two feet.
A. The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
B. The City may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines or
other public improvement or is infected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.
§ 277-4 TREES § 277-9
277:657
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
section at the determination of the Department of Public Works.
§ 277-10. Pruning.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any streetlamp, obstruct the view of any street intersection or
interfere with visibility of any traffic control device or sign and so that there
shall be a clear space of 12 feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk.
In the event that the owner fails to prune the offending branches after five
days' written notice from the Department of Public Works, the City shall
have the right, at its own cost, to prune the offending branches and remove
the obstruction.
§ 277-11. Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property.
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any broken or decayed
limbs or any dead or diseased tree on private property within the City, when
such tree or part thereof constitutes a hazard to life and property or harbors
insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within
the City. The City will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal
shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the
date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with
such provisions, the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and
charge the cost of removal to the property owner. Said cost shall constitute
a lien on the property upon which the tree is located and may be collected
in the same manner as the collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 277-12. Removal of trees on public property; trimming of street
trees.
A. An abutting landowner seeking removal of a dead, diseased, healthy or
live tree situate on a public right-of-way shall file a petition with the
Department of Public Works seeking permission for removal.
B. Petitions for removal of a healthy or live tree must demonstrate that
removal will be of greater benefit to the inhabitants of the City than the
existing tree or trees sought to be removed.
C. In determining whether removal of a healthy or live tree is in the best
interest of the City, the Department of Public Works may recommend to
the City Manager the removal of same if it determines that:
(1) Said tree is damaging public property and such damage cannot be
permanently repaired save for tree removal; and
(2) Such tree is damaging abutting private property and such damage
could result in liability to the City and such damage cannot be
permanently repaired save for tree removal.
§ 277-9 AUBURN CODE § 277-12
277:658
§ 277-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 285
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 115.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 268.
Vendors — See Ch. 289.
D. Trees that are ordered removed by the City Manager upon the
recommendation of the Department of Public Works pursuant to this
section must be replaced two trees for one.
E. No person or entity shall cut down any park or street tree, or cut any
branch or limb therefrom, or otherwise disrupt or degrade tree form or
health, without a written permit from the Department of Public Works
arborist or his/her designee. [Added 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
F. No public service corporation or agent thereof shall trim trees in or on
City street rights-of-way or public places for overhead utility line
clearance without a written permit from the Department of Public
Works arborist or his/her designee. [Added 4-13-2006 by Ord. No.
7-2006]
G. Persons, entities and/or City departments conducting regular
maintenance work on street trees and/or shrubs may be granted
general permits to cover their work on a yearly basis. [Added
4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 277-12 TREES § 277-13
277:659

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 285-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn Traffic
and Vehicles Ordinance."
§ 285-2. Definitions.
§ 285-3. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works and Parks shall install and maintain traffic
control devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter to
make effective the provisions of this chapter and shall install and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as the Council may deem necessary
to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 285-4. Delegation of powers to City Manager.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 1603(a) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, power
is hereby delegated to the City Manager to exercise, by official order, rule
or regulation, the following powers granted to the Council of this City in
Article 39 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, subject to the limitations imposed
by §§ 1643 and 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and not inconsistent with
any ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted:
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAY — Includes such days designated as public holidays as
provided in § 24 of the General Construction Law.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this City, not including highways, upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking meters.
A. To provide for the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and
supervision of parking meters.
§ 285-1 TREES § 285-4
277:661
B. To provide for pedestrian crossings and safety zones in the congested
district established in § 60.5 of this chapter.61
61.Editor's Note: Original § 60.5, Congested District established; § 60.6, Parking time limit in
Congested District; § 60.7, Parking permits within Congested District; and § 60.8,
Issuance of parking permits within Congested District, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 10-2-1997 by Ord. No. 26-1997.
§ 285-4 AUBURN CODE § 285-4
277:662
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 285-5. Traffic control signals.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated as
follows:
(1) Genesee Street and Lexington Avenue. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
[2] From 10:30 p.m. to 5:30 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on Genesee Street and flashes red on
Lexington Avenue and the entrance to Westside Plaza.
(2) Genesee Street and Dunning Avenue. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(3) Genesee Street and Baker Avenue. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
[2] From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on Genesee Street and flashes red on Baker
Avenue.
[3] Pedestrian push buttons provide an exclusive pedestrian
phase under "all red" vehicle indications and appropriate
walk indications. Normal vehicle sequence will resume
with a green indication for Baker Avenue.
(4) Genesee Street and Washington Street. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
§ 285-5 TREES § 285-5
277:663
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(5) (Reserved)62
(6) Genesee Street and William Street. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: [Amended 7-10-2003 by Ord. No.
13-2003]
[1] Normal operation:
[a] Fully automatic traffic control signal with concurrent
pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
[b] One green arrow provides for left turns onto Genesee
Street at the end of the William Street green timing.
[c] The left lane on William Street proceeding north is
designated as a "Left Turn Only" lane and vehicular
traffic is prohibited from proceeding north onto Dill
Street.
[2] From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on Genesee Street and flashes red on
William Street.63
(7) Genesee Street and South Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal
with concurrent pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
[2] From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on Genesee Street and flashes red on North
Street and South Street.
(8) Genesee Street and Osborne Street. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(5), which provided for a traffic control signal at the
intersection of Genesee Street and James Street, was repealed 5-23-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002.
63.Editor's Note: Original § 60.9G, establishing a flashing amber traffic control signal at
Genesee Street and Exchange Mall, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 7-29-1993 by Ord. No. 17-1993.
§ 285-5 AUBURN CODE § 285-5
277:664
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal
with concurrent pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
(c) An advanced green indication is visible to southbound traffic
on Genesee Street.
(9) East Genesee Street and Seminary Avenue. A pre-timed traffic
control signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(10) East Genesee Street and North Seward Avenue. A pre-timed traffic
control signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
[2] From 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on East Genesee Street and flashes red on
North Seward Avenue and South Seward Avenue.
(11) East Genesee Street and Hoopes Avenue. Two continuously
flashing amber indications used to denote the presence of a median
divider.
(12) East Genesee Street and Hunter Avenue. Two continuously flashing
amber indications used to denote the presence of a median divider.
(13) South Street and Lincoln Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal
with concurrent pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
(14) South Street and Elizabeth Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
§ 285-5 TREES § 285-5
277:665
(15) South Street and Clymer Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) One vehicular signal face visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(16) North Street and Loop Road. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal
with concurrent pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
(17) State Street and Loop Road. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal
with concurrent pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
(18) State Street and Seymour Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(19) (Reserved)64
(20) State Street and Perrine Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(21) (Reserved)65
(22) State Street and York Street. One continuously flashing red
indication visible on each approach of the intersection.
(23) North Division Street and Perrine Street. A pre-timed traffic
control signal consisting of the following:
64.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(19), regarding a pre-timed traffic control signal at
State Street and Cottage Street, was repealed 1-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018.
65.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(21), regarding a pre-timed traffic control signal
located at State Street and Pulaski Street, was repealed 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012.
§ 285-5 AUBURN CODE § 285-5
277:666
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
[2] From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on North Division Street and flashes red on
Perrine Street and Perrine Avenue.
[3] Pedestrian push buttons provide an exclusive pedestrian
phase under "all red" vehicle indications and appropriate
walk indications. Normal vehicular sequence will resume
with green indications for Perrine Street and Perrine
Avenue after proper pedestrian clearances.
(24) (Reserved)66
(25) (Reserved)67
(26) Owasco Street and Frederick Street. A pre-timed traffic control
signal consisting of the following:
(a) One vehicular signal face visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(27) Lake Avenue and Osborne Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) One vehicular signal face visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
(28) Lake Avenue and Swift Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Two additional vehicular signal faces located in line with the
north end of Lake Avenue median strip visible on the
northbound approach of Lake Avenue.
(c) Sequence of operation:
[1] Fully automatic traffic control signal.
66.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(24), regarding a pre-timed traffic control signal
located at Washington Street and Seymour Street, was repealed 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012.
67.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(25), regarding a pre-timed traffic control signal
located at Washington Street and Wall Street, was repealed 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012.
§ 285-5 TREES § 285-5
277:667
[2] Pedestrian push buttons provide an exclusive pedestrian
phase under "all red" vehicle indications and appropriate
walk indications at all crosswalks. Sequence will resume
with a green indication on Lake Avenue.
(29) Franklin Street and North Marvine Avenue. A pre-timed traffic
control signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation: fully automatic traffic control signal.
[2] From 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday through Thursday
and 11:00 p.m. Friday to 7:00 a.m. Monday signal is on
flash operation; it flashes amber on Franklin Street and
flashes red on North Marvine Avenue and the entrance of
Cayuga Community College.
(30) Franklin Street and Prospect Street. One continuously flashing
indication visible on each approach to the intersection; it flashes
amber on Franklin Street and flashes red on Prospect Street.
(31) Loop Road at Stryker Homes. A mid-block semi-actuated traffic
control signal consisting of the following:
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Pedestrian indications and push buttons at the crosswalk.
(c) Sequence of operation: remains green on Loop Road until
activated by pedestrian push buttons; changes through proper
clearance to red with appropriate walk signals; then reverts to
green on Loop Road.
(32) Genesee Street and Dill Street. A pre-timed traffic control signal
consisting of the following: [Added 7-10-2003 by Ord. No.
13-2003]
(a) Two vehicular signal faces visible on each approach of the
intersection.
(b) Sequence of operation:
[1] Normal operation:
[a] Fully automatic traffic control signal with concurrent
pedestrian indications at all crosswalks.
[b] One green arrow provides for left turns onto Genesee
Street at the end of the Dill Street green timing.
§ 285-5 AUBURN CODE § 285-5
277:668
[c] The left lane on Dill Street proceeding south is
designated as a "Left Turn Only" lane and vehicular
traffic is prohibited from proceeding south onto
William Street.
[2] From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. signal is on flash operation; it
flashes amber on Genesee Street and flashes red on Dill
Street.
(33) Genesee Street at Loop Road. The left lane at the intersection of
Genesee Street in a westerly direction shall designate the left lane
as a left-turn only lane, and proper signage shall be installed on the
street surface. [Added 7-5-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(34) Left turn lane North Street at Genesee Street. The easternmost
lane on North Street traveling south at the intersection of Genesee
Street shall be designated as a left-turn only lane with proper
signage being installed on the street surface. [Added 7-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 7-2012]
B. The following intersections are controlled by traffic control signals
established by the New York State Department of Transportation:
Intersection
East Genesee Street and Fulton Street
East Genesee Street and Owasco Street
Genesee Street and Route 326
Grant and McIntosh Drive
Grant and Seward Avenue
Grant and Seymour Street
North Street and Lansing Street
North Street and Routes 5 and 20 East
North Street and Routes 5 and 20 West
North Street and Seymour Street
North Street and Standart Avenue
Routes 5 and 20 and Columbus Street
Routes 5 and 20 and Fulton Street
Routes 5 and 20 and John Street
Routes 5 and 20 and railroad
Routes 5 and 20 and Seminary
Routes 5 and 20 and Washington Street
State Street and Routes 5 and 20 East
State Street and Routes 5 and 20 West
§ 285-5 TREES § 285-6
277:669
§ 285-6. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for one-way
traffic in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Arterial East From the westerly City line to
Seymour Street
Arterial West From Seymour Street to westerly
City line
Benton Street North From Orchard Street to Clark
Street
Clark Street East From James Street to Loop Road
Court Street South From Genesee Street to Westlake
Avenue
Green Street North From Genesee Street to Clark
Street
Guilfoil Street West From Washington Street to
Mahaney Avenue
James Street [Added
5-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
North From Genesee Street to Orchard
Street
John Street South From Arterial East to East Genesee
Street
Mahaney Avenue North From Van Anden Street to Seymour
Street
Owasco Street South From East Genesee Street to
Walnut Street
Pimm Avenue East From Howard Street to Sheridan
Street
Pine Street North From Church Street to Clark Street
School Street North From Grover Street to Lincoln
Street
South Fulton Street North From Walnut Street to the Arterial
West
State Street [Added
11-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 17-2004]
North From Genesee Street to Dill Street
Van Anden Street West From State Street to Cross Street
Wadsworth Street Northwest From Canoga Street to Aurelius
Avenue
§ 285-6 AUBURN CODE § 285-7
277:670
§ 285-7. Turning movements. [Amended 5-28-1991; 7-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 13-2003; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 17-2004; 12-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 19-2006; 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012; 3-16-2017 by L.L.
No. 1-2018]
A. Prohibition of right turns on red. The right turning of vehicles facing a
steady red indication is prohibited at the following intersections:
(1) Traffic from the south on North Fulton Street onto Arterial East.
(2) Traffic from the north on Loop Road onto Genesee Street.
(3) Traffic from the east and west at both intersections on Genesee
Street onto Loop Road.
(4) Traffic from the north and south on South Street onto Loop Road.
(5) Traffic from the east and west on Loop Road onto South Street.
B. Prohibition of U-turns. In the Congested District established in § 60.5,68
the turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is
hereby prohibited.
C. Prohibition of left turns. The left turning of vehicles is prohibited at the
following intersections or other designated locations:
(1) Traffic from the south on State Street onto Dill Street.
(2) Traffic from the east on Standart Avenue onto the Dunkin Donuts
drive-through lane, and/or the drive-through lane of any other
successor business at that location.
(3) Traffic from the east on Standart Avenue, 200 feet west of the
intersection with Grant Avenue.
(4) Traffic from the south on Garrow Street onto Genesee Street
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. from September 1 through June 30.
68.Editor's Note: Original § 60.5 was repealed 10-2-1997 by Ord. No. 26-1997.
§ 285-7 TREES § 285-7
277:671

ARTICLE III
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 285-8. Stop intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections and
stop signs shall be erected on entrances thereto as indicated.
A. One-way stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as one-way stop intersections, and stop signs shall be
erected on entrances thereto as indicated:
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Franklin Street Adams Street North
Burgess Street Akin Drive East
Quill Avenue Akin Drive West
Standart Avenue Albany Street South
Genesee Street Alden Avenue North
North Division Street Allen Street East
Lake Avenue Amherst Avenue East
Garrow Street Anderson Circle North East
Garrow Street Anderson Circle South East
Frances Street Anna Street North
Owasco Street Anna Street Northeast
Chapman Avenue Arch Street South
Garrow Street Arch Street East
Genesee Street Arlington Avenue North
West Clymer Street Arlington Avenue South
Garrow Street Ashbaugh Avenue West
Delevan Street Aspen Street East
Dexter Avenue Aspen Street West
Clark Street Auburn Avenue North
Frederick Street Augustus Street West
North Seward Avenue Augustus Street East
Clark Street Aurelius Avenue Southwest
North Division Street Aurelius Avenue Northeast
Murray Street Ext. Austin Drive Southeast
Fitch Avenue Bailey Street North
Orchard Street Baker Avenue North
Washington Street Barber Street East
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:673
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Franklin Street Beach Avenue South
Grant Avenue Beach Avenue North
North Seward Avenue Beardsley Street East
Perry Street Beardsley Street West
Lake Avenue Belle Avenue East
Woodruff Place Bellevue Place South
Clark Street Bellmont Avenue South
North Fulton Street Benham Avenue West
Clark Street Benton Street North
Peacock Street Boston Avenue West
Fort Street Bostwick Avenue West
Prospect Street Boyle Avenue East
Maple Street Bradford Street East
Owasco Street Bradford Street West
Canoga Road Bradley Street Northwest
Burgess Street Briggs Drive East
Quill Avenue Briggs Drive West
Prospect Street Brister Avenue East
Clark Street Brookfield Place North
Grant Avenue Brookside Drive Northwest
Cayuga Street Bundy Avenue East
Foote Street Bundy Avenue West
Clymer Street Burgess Street North
Clark Street Burkhardt Drive North
Elizabeth Street Burt Avenue North
Swift Street Burt Avenue South
North Fulton Street Button Street West
Nelson Street Cady Street West
North Fulton Street Cady Street East
Standart Avenue Cameron Street North
Lake Avenue Camp Street West
Osborne Street Camp Street East
Wadsworth Street Canoga Street Southeast
Franklin Street Capital Street North
North Street Carpenter Street East
Bradley Street Case Avenue West
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:674
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
North Division Street Case Avenue East
Grant Avenue Catlin Street Southeast
Lewis Street Catlin Street Northwest
Franklin Street Cayuga Street North
Genesee Street Cayuga Street South
Dunning Avenue Center Street West
Thornton Avenue Center Street East
North Street Chapel Street East
Arch Street Chapman Avenue West
Dunning Avenue Chapman Avenue West
South Street Chapman Avenue East
Thornton Avenue Chapman Avenue East
Pulaski Street Chase Street South
York Street Chase Street Ext. North
Wall Street Chestnut Place North
Genesee Street Chestnut Street North
Walnut Street Chestnut Street South
James Street Church Street West
Columbus Street Clark Street West
Loop Road Clark Street East
North Division Street Clark Street East
Dunning Avenue Clymer Street West
West Street Colburn Avenue South
Lake Avenue Copley Street West
Pulsifer Drive Copley Street East
Clark Street Corcoran Drive North
Dayton Street Cornwall Avenue North
Standart Avenue Cornwall Avenue South
North Division Street Cottage Street West
North Street Cottage Street East
Garrow Street Cottrell Street East
Oak Street Cottrell Street East
Westlake Avenue Court Street South
Lake Avenue Crescent Avenue West
Pulsifer Drive Crescent Avenue East
Cottage Street Cross Street North
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:675
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Wall Street Cross Street South
Liberty Street Curtis Place East
North Street Curtis Place North
Palmer Street Dawson Street West
North Street Dayton Street West
Rochester Street Dayton Street East
Arch Street Delevan Street South
Genesee Street Delevan Street North
Lake Avenue Dennis Street East
Kearney Avenue Dennis Street West
Lake Avenue Densmore Avenue West
Wall Street Derby Avenue North
West Street Derby Avenue South
Dayton Street Devon Street North
Standart Avenue Devon Street South
North Division Street Dewey Street East
Chapman Avenue Dexter Avenue South
Warren Avenue Dexter Avenue Northeast
Chedell Place Easterly Avenue South
Westlake Avenue Easterly Avenue North
Woodruff Place Easterly Avenue South
Osborne Street Elizabeth Street East
Capitol Street Elm Street South
Arlington Avenue Englewood Avenue East
Lexington Avenue Englewood Avenue West
Genesee Street Evans Street North
Walnut Street Evans Street South
South Street Fitch Avenue East
Lake Avenue Fleming Street West
Pulsifer Drive Fleming Street East
Mary Street Florence Street West
Mattie Street Florence Street East
Franklin Street Foote Street North
Genesee Street Fort Street North
Owasco Street Frances Street West
Canoga Road Frazee Street West
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:676
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
North Division Street Frazee Street East
Augustus Street Frederick Street Northeast
Bradford Street Frederick Street North
North Street Garden Street East
State Street Garden Street West
Clark Street Garfield Street North
Genesee Street Garrow Street North
East Genesee Street Gaylord Street North
Walnut Street Gaylord Street South
Genesee Street Genesee Place South
Wright Avenue Gould Drive North
North Fulton Street Grant Avenue Southwest
Clark Street Green Street North
State Street Grant Street East
Washington Street Grant Street West
Hamilton Avenue Grove Avenue North
Mary Street Grove Avenue South
Osborne Street Grover Street East
South Street Grover Street West
Mahaney Avenue Guilfoil Avenue West
Osborne Street Hamilton Avenue East
South Street Hamilton Avenue West
Baker Street Hardenburg Avenue East
Genesee Street Hardenburg Avenue West
Boston Avenue Harden Street South
Standart Avenue Harden Street North
Lake Avenue Harvard Avenue East
Owasco Street Havens Avenue West
Westwood Drive Henry Drive West
Franklin Street Herman Avenue North North
East Genesee Street Herman Avenue South North
Walnut Street Herman Avenue South South
South Marvine Avenue Highland Street West
Taber Drive Hillside Terrace North
Lake Avenue Hobart Avenue East
Munro Avenue Hobson Avenue North
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:677
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
South Seward Avenue Hockeborne Avenue West
East Genesee Street Hoffman Street North
Walnut Street Hoffman Street South
Lansing Street Holly Street North
East Genesee Street Hoopes Avenue North South
Franklin Street Hoopes Avenue North North
East Genesee Street Hoopes Avenue South North
Frances Street Hoopes Avenue South South
Bradford Street Howard Street South
East Genesee Street Howard Street North
Arterial East Hulbert Street South
State Street Hulbert Street East
East Genesee Street Hunter Avenue North South
Marvine Avenue
North
Hurd Circle North West
Marvine Avenue South Hurd Circle South West
Clark Street James Street North
Elizabeth Street Janet Street South
Lake Avenue Jarvis Street West
Pulsifer Street Jarvis Street East
Clark Street Jefferson Street North
Genesee Street Jefferson Street South
Swift Street Kearney Avenue North
Genesee Street Kensington Avenue North
West Clymer Street Kensington Avenue South
Grant Avenue Kitchell Street Southeast
Lewis Street Kitchell Street West
McIntosh Drive Koenig Court Southeast
Columbus Street Lafayette Street East
Pulsifer Drive Lakehurst Drive East
Throop Avenue Lakehurst Drive West
Grant Avenue Lansing Street Southeast
Lewis Street Lawton Street West
Owasco Street Lizette Street East
Chapman Avenue Leavenworth Avenue North
Clymer Street Leavenworth Avenue South
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:678
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Arterial West Lewis Street South
Dawson Avenue Lewis Street North
East Genesee Street Lewis Street South
Franklin Street Lewis Street North
Lansing Street Liberty Street North
Seymour Street Liberty Street South
Osborne Street Lincoln Street East
Dunning Avenue Linen Place East
Genesee Street Linn Avenue North
Lake Avenue Locust Street West
Pulsifer Drive Locust Street East
Osborne Street Logan Street East
South Street Logan Street West
Center Street Lorraine Avenue North
Clymer Street Lorraine Avenue South
Hamilton Avenue MacDougall Street North
Swift Street MacDougall Street South
Baker Avenue Madison Avenue West
Jefferson Street Madison Avenue West
Seymour Street Mahaney Avenue North
Lawton Avenue Mann Street South
Mattie Street Maple Avenue West
East Genesee Street Maple Street North
Frances Street Maple Street South
Genesee Street Market Street Southeast
North Street Market Street West
Franklin Street Marvine Avenue
North
North
Logan Street Mary Street North
Metcalf Avenue Mary Street South
Elizabeth Street Mattie Street North
Swift Street Mattie Street South
Washington Street McConnell Avenue West
Austin Drive McIntosh Drive Northeast
Arterial East McMaster Street South
Cottrell Street Meadowbrook Drive North
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:679
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Valley Drive Meadowbrook Drive South
Norris Avenue Mead Street Southwest
Thornton Avenue Merrimen Street West
Lake Avenue Metcalf Drive East
Arch Street Milligan Street Northwest
Owasco Street Mill Street East
Capitol Street Morris Street North
East Genesee Street Morris Street South
West Street Mundt Avenue West
State Street Munro Avenue East
Standart Avenue Murray Street East
Aurelius Avenue Myrtle Avenue South
Frazee Street Myrtle Avenue North
Park Avenue Nelson Street North
Seminary Street Nelson Street South
Clymer Street Norma Drive South
Frances Street Norman Avenue South
Walnut Street Norman Avenue North
Palmer Street Norris Avenue West
North Street North Park Avenue West
Clymer Street Oak Street North
Lake Avenue Oakwood Avenue West
Throop Avenue Oakwood Avenue East
State Street Olympia Avenue East
Orchard Street Orchard Avenue North
Washington Street Orchard Avenue East
Columbus Street Orchard Street West
James Street Orchard Street East
Standart Avenue Palmer Street South
North Fulton Street Park Avenue East
North Street Park Avenue West
North Street Park Avenue West East
Fitch Avenue Parker Street South
Genesee Street Parker Street North
Fitch Avenue Park Place South
Genesee Street Park Place North
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:680
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Seminary Street Parsons Street North
Lansing Street Paul Street North
Seymour Street Paul Street South
Park Avenue Peacock Street South
Standart Avenue Peacock Street North
Genesee Street Pearce Avenue South
Hardenburg Avenue Pearce Avenue North
Bradley Street Perrine Avenue West
North Street Perrine Street East
East Genesee Street Perry Street South
Franklin Street Perry Street North
Howard Street Pimm Avenue West
Clark Street Pine Street North
Baker Street Pleasant Street West
Genesee Street Pleasant Street South
Pleasant Street Pleasant Street North
Brookside Drive Prospect Street South
Franklin Street Prospect Street South
Grant Avenue Prospect Street North
Perrine Street Pulaski Street South
North Street Quarry Street East
York Street Quarry Street South
Chapman Avenue Quill Avenue North
Clymer Street Quill Avenue South
Quill Avenue Quill Avenue South
Munro Avenue Rathbun Street North
Olympia Avenue Rathbun Street South
Mary Street Richardson Avenue East
South Street Richardson Avenue West
Pulsifer Drive Roberts Road East
Throop Avenue Roberts Road West
Standart Avenue Rochester Street South
Perrine Street Rock Avenue South
Pulaski Street Rock Avenue North
Genesee Street Ross Place North
Woodlawn Avenue Ross Place South
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:681
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
North Marvine
Avenue
Ross Street West
Perry Street Ross Street West
Dunning Avenue St. Anthony Street West
Thornton Avenue St. Anthony Street East
Frances Street Scamell Avenue South
Walnut Street Scamell Avenue North
Lincoln Street School Street North
McIntosh Drive Schwartz Drive Northeast
Standart Avenue Schwartz Drive Southwest
Seminary Street Seminary Avenue North
Holley Street Seminary Street East
North Street Seminary Street West
Prospect Street Seneca Parkway West
Havens Avenue Seward Avenue South South
North Division Street Seymour Street West
Wall Street Sheldon Avenue North
East Genesee Street Sheridan Street North
Walnut Street Sheridan Street South
East Genesee Street Sherman Street North
Walnut Street Sherman Street South
Aspen Street Sherwood Street South
Genesee Street Sherwood Street North
Perrine Street Shevchenko Avenue South
Pulaski Street Shevchenko Avenue North
Lake Avenue Silver Avenue West
Pulsifer Drive Silver Avenue East
Dayton Street Somerset Avenue North
Standart Avenue Somerset Avenue South
Barber Street Spring Street South
Wall Street Spring Street North
Grover Street Steel Street North
Swift Street Steel Street South
Adam Street Sumner Street West
Elm Street Sumner Street East
Pulsifer Drive Swift Street East
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:682
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
South Street Swift Street West
South Street Taber Drive East
North Division Street Technical Park
Boulevard
East
Walnut Street Teller Avenue North
Richardson Avenue Train Drive North
Grover Street Tuxill Square North
Logan Street Tuxill Square South
North Herman Avenue Tyler Drive West
Columbus Street Underwood Street East
Wallace Avenue Underwood Street Southwest
State Street Union Street East
Garrow Street Valley Drive West
Oak Street Valley Drive East
North Division Street Van Anden Street West
State Street Van Anden Street East
Lake Avenue Vandenbosch Avenue East
Mattie Street Vandenbosch Avenue West
Genesee Street Van Patten Street North
Barber Street Venice Street North
West Street Venice Street South
Standart Avenue Vista Street South
Aurelius Avenue Wadsworth Street Southeast
Columbus Street Wallace Avenue East
Aurelius Avenue Wall Street West
State Street Wall Street East
South Fulton Street Walnut Street West
South Marvine Avenue Walnut Street East
Aspen Street Warren Avenue South
Genesee Street Warren Avenue North
State Street Water Street West
Dunning Avenue West Clymer Street East
William Street Westlake Avenue East
North Division Street West Street West
Washington Street West Street East
Clymer Street Westwood Drive North
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:683
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Clark Street Wheeler Street South
Lake Avenue Wilbur Avenue West
Pulsifer Drive Wilbur Avenue East
Arch Street Willard Street East
York Street Willey Street North
Peacock Street Wilson Avenue East
Fort Street Woodlawn Avenue East
Parker Street Woodlawn Avenue West
Easterly Place Woodruff Place East
Arch Street Wood Street South
Genesee Street Wood Street North
Chapman Avenue Worden Avenue North
Columbus Street Wright Avenue East
Kearney Avenue Yale Avenue West
Lake Avenue Yale Avenue East
North Division Street York Street West
North Street York Street East
B. Two-way stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as two-way stop intersections, and stop signs shall be
erected on the designated entrances thereto as indicated: [Amended
8-19-1993 by Ord. No. 23-1993; 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012;
3-16-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Highland Avenue Alden Avenue North and south
Meadowbrook Drive Ashbaugh Avenue East and west
Oak Street Ashbaugh Avenue East and west
Derby Avenue Barber Street East and west
Albany Street Benham Avenue East and west
North Fulton Street Boston Avenue East and west
Hamilton Avenue Burt Avenue North and south
Throop Avenue Camp Street East and west
North Marvine
Avenue
Charles Street East and west
State Street Cottage Street East and West
Seymour Street Cross Street North and south
Throop Avenue Densmore Avenue East and west
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:684
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
North Marvine
Avenue
Drummond Street East and west
Mary Street Elizabeth Street East and west
Franklin Street Elm Street North and south
Kensington Avenue Englewood Avenue East and west
Capitol Street Foote Street North and south
Clymer Street Garrow Street North and south
Washington Street Grant Street East and west
Swift Street Grove Avenue North and south
Lake Avenue Hamilton Avenue East and west
South Hunter Avenue Highland Street and
South Hunter Avenue
North and west
Seymour Street Holley Street North and south
Metcalf Drive Kearney Avenue North and south
Center Street Leavenworth Avenue North and south
St. Anthony Street Leavenworth Avenue North and south
Lansing Street Lewis Street North and south
Seymour Street Lewis Street North and south
Highland Street Linn Avenue North and south
Elizabeth Street Mary Street North and south
Hamilton Avenue Mattie Street North and south
Arterial West McMaster Street North and south
Chapman Avenue Milligan Street North and south
Capitol Street North Hunter Avenue
and Capitol Street
North and west
Ross Street North Hunter Avenue
and Ross Street
North and west
Capitol Street Perry Street North and south
State Street Pulaski Street East and west
Throop Avenue Silver Avenue East and west
Fleming Street Throop Avenue North and south
Tuxill Square Tuxill Square North and south
Washington Street Union Street East and west
Washington Street Van Anden Street East and west
Dayton Street Vista Street East and west
Pulaski Street Washington Street East and west
Dexter Avenue Willard Street East and west
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:685
C. Three-way intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as three-way stop intersections, and stop signs shall be
erected on the designated entrances thereto as indicated:
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Capitol Street Franklin Street South
Mann Street West
Capitol Street East
Dawson Avenue Murray Street West
Dawson Avenue North and south
Fitch Avenue Garrow Street East
Fitch Avenue North and south
Hoopes Avenue North Capitol Street North and south
Hoopes Avenue North West
Murray Street Morris Avenue North and south
Murray Street West
D. Four-way intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as four-way stop intersections, and stop signs shall be
erected on the designated entrances thereto as indicated:
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Anna Street Augustus Street East and west
Anna Street North and south
Bundy Avenue Morris Street North and south
Bundy Avenue East and west
Capitol Street Cayuga Street North and south
Capitol Street East and west
Capitol Street Seward Avenue North and south
North Capitol Street East and west
Chapman Avenue Garrow Street North and south
Chapman Avenue East and west
Clymer Street Thornton Avenue North and south
Clymer Street East and west
Copley Street Throop Avenue North and south
Copley Street East and west
Crescent Avenue Throop Avenue North and south
Crescent Avenue East and west
Cross Street Van Anden East and west
Street Cross Street North and south
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:686
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Frances Street South SewardAvenue North and south
Frances Street East and west
Franklin Street North Seward Avenue North and south
Franklin Street East and west
North Fulton Street Lansing Street East and west
North Fulton Street North and south
North Fulton Street Seymour Street East and west
North Fulton Street North and south
North Fulton Street Standart Avenue East and west
North Fulton Street North and south
Hamilton Avenue
[Added 9-2-1993 by
Ord. No. 24-1993]
Mary Street North and south
Hamilton Avenue East and west
Howard Street Walnut Street East and west
Howard Street North and south
Jarvis Street Throop Avenue North and south
Jarvis Street East and west
Jefferson Street Orchard Street East and west
Jefferson Street North and south
Lansing Street Nelson Street North and south
Lansing Street East and west
Locust Street Throop Avenue North and south
Locust Street East and west
Logan Street [Added
5-20-1999 by Ord.
No. 8-1999]
Janet Street North and south
Logan Street East and west
Logan Street [Added
5-20-1999 by Ord.
No. 8-1999]
Steel Street North and south
Logan Street East and west
Maple Street Walnut Street East and west
Maple Street North and south
Mary Street Swift Street East and west
Mary Street North and south
McIntosh Drive Murray Street North and south
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-8
277:687
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
McIntosh Drive East and west
Nelson Street Seymour Street East and west
Nelson Street North and south
North Division Street
[Added 8-19-1993
by Ord. No.
22-1993]
Wall Street North East and west
Division Street North and south
North Marvine
Avenue [Added
10-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 10-2012]
Drummond Street East and west
North Marvine
Avenue
North and south
Orchard Street Washington Street North and south
Orchard Street East and west
Perrine Street Washington Street North and south
Perrine Street East and west
Pulaski Street [Added
1-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 1-2012]
State Street East and west
Pulaski Street North and south
Ross Street North Hoopes Avenue East and west
Ross Street North and south
Ross Street North Seward Avenue North and south
Ross Street East and west
South Hoopes Avenue
[Added 1-12-1995
by Ord. No. 1-1995]
Walnut Street South East and west
Hoopes Avenue North and south
South Seward Avenue Walnut Street South East and west
Seward Avenue North and south
State Street York Street East and west
State Street North and south
Swift Street Throop Avenue North and south
Swift Street East and west
Wilber Avenue Throop Avenue North and south
Wilber Avenue East and west
§ 285-8 AUBURN CODE § 285-8
277:688
§ 285-9. Yield intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections,
and yield signs shall be erected on entrances thereto as indicated:
Intersection of With Yield Sign(s) on Entrance
Arterial East off-ramp Clark Street East
Clark Street Pine Street North
Fort Street Westlake Avenue West
Loop Road Lincoln Street turnoff Northwest
Loop Road Lincoln Street turnoff Southeast
Loop Road Osborne Street North
Metcalf Avenue Lake Avenue divider East and west
South Street (right-turn
lane)
Loop Road North Northwest
South Street William Street Southeast
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance
Washington Street Pulaski Street East and west
Washington Street North and south
Washington Street
[Added 1-12-2011
by Ord. No. 1-2012]
Seymour Street East and west
Washington Street North and south
Washington Street
[Added 1-12-2011
by Ord. No. 1-2012]
Wall Street East and west
Washington Street North and south
§ 285-8 TREES § 285-9
277:689

ARTICLE IV
Speed Regulations
§ 285-10. Maximum speed limits.
§ 285-11. Maximum school speed limits. [Amended 9-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 7-2011; 10-27-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011; 8-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 10-2016; 3-16-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Maximum school speed limits at which vehicles may proceed on or along
highways within this City are hereby established as follows:
A. Thirty miles per hour. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the
maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate
limits of this City except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour. Thirty-five miles per hour is hereby
established as the maximum speed limit at which vehicles may proceed
within the corporate limits of this City on the following streets and
highways:
(1) North Street, from a point 1,700 feet south of the north City line to
its intersection with Park Avenue.
(2) State Street, from its intersection with York Street to the northerly
City line.
C. Forty miles per hour. Forty miles per hour is hereby established as the
maximum speed limit at which vehicles may proceed within the
corporate limits of this City on the following streets and highways:
(1) Grant Avenue between the northeast City line and a point 700 feet
east of the intersection of McIntosh Drive with said Grant Avenue.
(2) North Street between the northerly City line and a point 1,700 feet
southerly therefrom.
D. Twenty-five miles per hour. Twenty-five miles per hour is hereby
established as the maximum speed limit at which vehicles may proceed
within the corporate limits of this City on the following streets and
highways: William Street between Genesee Street and South Street.
[Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 31-1997]
A. St. Joseph's School.
(1) Twenty miles per hour on East Genesee Street adjacent to St.
Joseph's School between a point of 300 feet east of the east
building line of said school and a point of 300 feet west of the west
building line of said school.
(2) Twenty miles per hour on Lawton Avenue adjacent to St. Joseph's
School between a point of 300 feet east of the east building line of
§ 285-10 TREES § 285-11
277:691
said school and 300 feet west of the west building line of said
school.
B. Casey Park.
(1) Pulaski Street: Twenty miles per hour adjacent to Casey Park
School between a point 300 feet east of said school (one-way
street).
(2) On Perrine Street 300 feet west of Pulaski Street and on Perrine
Street 300 feet east of Pulaski Street.
C. Herman Avenue School. Twenty miles per hour on East Genesee Street
adjacent to Herman Avenue School between a point 300 feet east of
said school and a point 300 feet west of said school.
D. Tyburn Academy. Twenty miles per hour on Clymer Street adjacent to
St. Mary's School between 300 feet west of the west building line of
said school and 300 feet east of the east building line of said school.
E. East Middle School. Twenty miles per hour on Franklin Street adjacent
to East Middle School between a point 300 feet west of the west
building line of said school and a point 300 feet east of the east building
line of said school.
F. Genesee Elementary School. Twenty miles per hour on Garrow Street
adjacent to West Genesee School between a point 300 feet south of the
south building line of said school and on Genesee Street 100 feet west
of the west building line of said school.
G. Seward School.
(1) Metcalf Avenue. Twenty miles per hour adjacent to Seward School
between a point 300 feet west of the west building line of said
school and 300 feet east of the east building line of said school.
(2) Kearney Avenue. Twenty miles per hour adjacent to Seward School
between a point of 300 feet south of the south building line and 300
feet north of the north building line of said school.
H. YMCA Summit School.
(1) Twenty miles per hour on William Street from Westlake Avenue
north to Lincoln Street.
(2) Twenty miles per hour on Court Street from Genesee Street south
to Westlake Avenue.
I. Cayuga Centers.
(1) Twenty miles per hour on Hamilton Avenue between Lake Avenue
and Osborne Street.
§ 285-11 AUBURN CODE § 285-11
277:692
(2) Twenty miles per hour along Osborne Street from the intersection
of Osborne Street and Lake Avenue and continuing along Osborne
Street to a point 75 feet south of the intersection of Camp Street
and Osborne Street.
J. Cayuga/Seneca Community Action Agency, Inc., Site II, the Early Head
Start and Head Start School Programs. Twenty miles per hour on Clark
Street from Auburn Avenue to Garfield Place and the entire length of
Brookfield Place.
K. Creative Minds Montessori School. Twenty miles per hour on Genesee
Street, 285 feet east and 285 feet west from the front of the school
situated at 169 Genesee Street during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on school days.
L. Westminster Nursery School. Twenty miles per hour on Court Street
from Genesee Street south to Westlake Avenue.
M. Booker T. Washington Community Center. Twenty miles per hour on
Chapman Avenue, beginning 300 feet east and ending 250 feet west of
the Booker T. Washington Community Center located at 23 Chapman
Avenue.
§ 285-11 TREES § 285-11
277:693

ARTICLE V
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 285-12. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 285-13. Alternate parking. [Amended 5-27-1993 by Ord. No.
12-1993; 8-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-1993; 2-3-1994 by Ord. No.
7-1994; 12-12-1996 by Ord. No. 38-1996; 6-12-1997 by Ord. No.
19-1997; 7-10-2003 by Ord. No. 13-2003; 4-12-2007 by Ord. No.
6-2007; 5-22-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008; 10-1-2009 by Ord. No.
9-2009; 10-14-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010]
§ 285-14. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions. [Amended
5-27-1993 by Ord. No. 12-1993; 3-24-1994 by Ord. No. 10-1994;
4-14-1994 by Ord. No. 16-1994; 12-12-1996 by Ord. No. 38-1996;
6-12-1997 by Ord. No. 19-1997; 10-2-1997 by Ord. No. 26-1997;
4-2-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998; 6-18-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998;
7-9-1998 by Ord. No. 10-1998]
A. Year-round. Except where otherwise prohibited, vehicles shall not be
parked on even-numbered sides of streets on odd-numbered days of the
month for a twenty-four-hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. nor on
odd-numbered sides of streets on even-numbered days of the month for
a twenty-four-hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m.
B. There shall be a period of time from 5:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., each day,
during which time the alternate parking regulations will not be
enforced in order to allow vehicles a reasonable period of time to be
legally parked. This provision shall not apply to any emergency
occurrences or situations.
C. Exceptions to year-round alternate side parking. [Added 12-15-2011
by Ord. No. 11-2011]
Name of Street
Havens Avenue
North Hunter Avenue
South Hunter Avenue
A. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions shall apply on the following
streets and highways as follows: [Amended 7-10-2003 by Ord. No.
13-2003; 10-30-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003; 2-22-2007 by Ord. No.
2-2007; 4-12-2007 by Ord. No. 6-2007; 4-12-2007 by Ord. No.
7-2007; 5-22-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008; 10-1-2009 by Ord. No.
9-2009; 10-14-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010; 12-15-2011 by Ord. No.
11-2011; 10-4-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012; 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
§ 285-12 TREES § 285-14
277:695
13-2013; 3-20-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014; 3-16-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Academy Street None
Adams Street None
Aiken Drive None
Albany Street None
Alden Avenue None
Allen Street None
Amherst Avenue None
Anderson Circle None
Anna Street None
Arbor Lane None
Arch Street None
Arlington Avenue None
Ashbaugh Avenue None
Aspen Street None
Auburn Avenue None
Augustus Street None
Aurelius Avenue None
Austin Drive None
Bailey Street None
Baker Avenue None
Baldwin Avenue None
Barber Street None
Beach Avenue None
Beardsley Street None
Belle Avenue None
Bellevue Place None
Belmont Avenue None
Benham Avenue None
Benton Street None
Boston Avenue None
Bostwick Avenue None
Bowen Street None
Boyle Avenue None
Bradford Street None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:696
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Bradley Street None
Briggs Drive None
Brister Avenue None
Brookfield Place East No parking Monday
through Friday from
6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Brookside Drive None
Bundy Avenue None
Burgess Street None
Burkhardt Drive None
Burt Avenue None
Button Street None
Cady Street None
Cameron Street None
Campbell Street None
Camp Street None
Canal Street None
Canoga Street None
Capitol Street None
Carpenter Street None
Case Avenue None
Catlin Street None
Cayuga Street None
Center Street None
Chapel Street None
Chapman Avenue North No parking from west
curbline of Quill
Avenue for a distance
of 300 feet westerly
Charles Street None
Chase Street None
Chedell Place None
Chestnut Place None
Chestnut Street None
Church Street None
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:697
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Clark Street North and south Two-hour parking from
Pine Street to Dill
Street, with the
exception of three
parking spaces located
east from the
southeast corner of
Pine Street
Clark Street South No parking from the
east side of North
Division to the dead
end
Clymer Street North and south No parking between
Thornton Avenue and
Garrow Street
Colburn Avenue None
Columbus Street East and west No stopping from
Genesee Street to the
eastbound Arterial
Copley Street None
Corcoran Drive None
Cornwall Avenue None
Cottage Place None
Cottage Street None
Cottrell Street None
Court Street East No parking from
Genesee Street to
Westlake Avenue
Crescent Avenue None
Cross Street None
Curtis Place None
Dawson Avenue None
Dayton Street None
Delevan Street None
Dennis Street None
Densmore Avenue None
Derby Avenue None
Devon Avenue None
Dewey Avenue None
Dewey Street None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:698
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Dexter Avenue None
Dill Street None
Division Street North West No stopping from
Aurelius Avenue to
Wall Street north
curbline
Drummond Street None
Dunning Avenue None
Easterly Avenue None
Easterly Place None
Elizabeth Street South No parking from Steel
Street to Mary Street
Elm Street None
Englewood Avenue None
Evans Street None
Fitch Avenue South No parking 75 feet
east of the west
curbline to Park Place
Fleming Street South No parking from Lake
Avenue to Throop
Avenue
Florence Street None
Foote Street None
Forgette Street None
Fort Street West No parking from
Genesee Street to
Westlake Avenue
Frances Street None
Franklin Street North No stopping from
entrance to college for
a distance of 500 feet
in a westerly direction
Franklin Street North No parking from
Prospect Street to
entrance of college
Franklin Street South No parking from North
Herman Avenue to
North Marvine Avenue
Frank Smith Street None
Frazee Street None
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:699
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Frederick Street None
Fulton Street (North) West No parking from
Genesee Street to
eastbound Arterial
Fulton Street (South) None
Garfield Street None
Garrow Street None
Gaylord Street None
Genesee Place No parking either side 100 feet south of
Genesee Street
Genesee Street North No parking from
Parker Street to
Garrow Street
Genesee Street North No stopping at
entrance to State
Street Mall
Genesee Street North and south No stopping or
standing from
Columbus Street to
connector road
Genesee Street North and south No parking from James
Street to Owasco
Street and John Street
from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Genesee Street South No stopping from
connector road to City
line
Genesee Street South No stopping at
entrance to Exchange
Street Mall
Genesee Street (East) Alternate side parking
regulations shall
exempt the portion of
Genesee Street East
between the east line
of South Hoopes
Avenue and the west
line of South Hunter
Avenue
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:700
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Genesee Street (East) South No parking, school bus
stop, 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, from
Chestnut Street to
Gaylord Street
Genesee Street (East) South No parking from
Owasco Street to
South Fulton Street
Gould Drive None
Grant Avenue Both No parking from
Seymour Street to City
line
Grant Street None
Green Street East No parking from 10:00
a.m. to 1:00 p.m.,
permit parking for
Meals on Wheels only;
2-hour parking all
other times from
Genesee Street to
Clark Street
Green Street West No parking from
Genesee Street to
Clark Street
Grove Avenue None
Grover Street None
Guilfoil Avenue None
Hamilton Avenue None
Hardenburgh Avenue West No parking from
Genesee Street for a
distance of 300 feet
Harnden Street None
Harvard Avenue None
Havens Avenue None
Henry Drive None
Herman Avenue
(North)
East No parking from
Genesee Street for a
distance of 400 feet
Herman Avenue
(South)
None
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:701
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Hickory Street None
Highland Street None
Hillside Terrace None
Hobart Avenue None
Hobson Avenue None
Hockeborne Avenue None
Hoffman Street None
Holley Street None
Hoopes Avenue
(North)
None
Hoopes Avenue
(South)
None
Howard Street None
Hulbert Street East No stopping from State
Street to eastbound
Arterial
Hunter Avenue
(North)
None
Hunter Avenue
(South)
None
Hurd Circle (North) None
Hurd Circle (South) None
James Street West No parking from
Genesee Street to
Clark Street
Janet Street None
Jarvis Street None
Jefferson Street None
John Street East No parking from
eastbound Arterial to
Genesee Street
Kearney Avenue West No parking from
Metcalf Avenue to
dead end
Kensington Avenue None
Ketchell Street None
Koenig Court None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:702
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Lafayette Place South No parking from
Columbus Street to
dead end
Lake Avenue None
Lakehurst Drive None
Lansing Street Both No parking from North
Street to Nelson Street
Lansing Street North 2-hour parking from
Nelson Street to North
Fulton Street from
8:00 a.m. until 6:00
p.m., subject to the
restrictions set forth in
§ 285-13A
Lansing Street North and south Unrestricted parking
on the north and south
sides of the street from
Nelson Street to North
Fulton Street
Lansing Street South 2-hour parking from
Holley Street to North
Fulton Street from
8:00 a.m. until 6:00
p.m.
Lansing Street None from Grant
Avenue to North Lewis
Street
Lawton Avenue North Parking permitted all
year long
Lawton Avenue South No parking all year
long
Leavenworth Avenue West No parking from
Chapman Avenue to St.
Anthony Street
Lewis Street None
Lexington Avenue None
Liberty Street West None
Lincoln Street North 2-hour parking from
the east curbline of
Loop Road to Osborne
Street
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:703
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Lincoln Street South No parking from South
Street to Osborne
Street
Linen Place None
Linn Avenue None
Lizette Street None
Locust Street None
Logan Street North No parking from Janet
Street to South Street
Loop Road East and west No parking from
Genesee Street to
South Street
Loop Road West No parking from State
Street to Genesee
Street
Lorraine Avenue None
MacDougall Street None
Madison Avenue None
Mahaney Avenue None
Mann Street None
Maple Avenue None
Maple Street None
Market Street North No stopping or
standing from Genesee
Street to North Street
Marvine Avenue
(North)
East No stopping from
Franklin Street for a
distance of 350 feet
southerly therefrom
Marvine Avenue
(South)
None
Mary Street East None
Mattie Street None
McConnell Avenue None
McConnell Terrace None
McIntosh Drive None
McMaster Street None
Meadowbrook Drive None
Mead Street None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:704
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Merriman Street None
Metcalf Drive None
Miles Avenue None
Miller Street None
Milligan Street None
Mill Street None
Morris Street None
Mundt Avenue None
Munro Avenue None
Murray Street None
Murray Street
Extension
None
Myrtle Avenue None
Near Place None
Nelson Street East No parking on the
even side of Nelson
Street between
Lansing Street and
Park Avenue
Nelson Street West 2-hour parking on the
(odd) west side of
Nelson Street between
Lansing Street and
Park Avenue between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
Nelson Street West No parking Monday
through Thursday, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., road
test, from Seymour
Street for a distance of
350 feet southerly
therefrom
Norma Drive None
Norman Avenue None
Norris Avenue None
North Park None
North Street Both No stopping from
Genesee Street to City
line
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:705
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Oak Street None
Oakwood Avenue None
Olympia Avenue None
O'Neil Avenue None
Orchard Avenue South No parking from
Washington Street for
distance of 500 feet
westerly therefrom
Orchard Street Both No stopping from
Baker Avenue to
Columbus Street
Orchard Street South Fifteen-minute parking
from east curbline of
Washington Street for
a distance of 75 feet
easterly therefrom
Osborne Street East No parking from Lake
Avenue to Lincoln
Street
Osborne Street North No parking on the east
side from Lincoln
Street North to Loop
Road
Owasco Street West No parking from City
line to South Fulton
Street
Owasco Street West No parking from
Lizette Street to Lake
Avenue bridge
Owasco Street West No parking from
Owasco Street to Mill
Street
Palmer Street None
Park Avenue None
Park Avenue (West) None
Parker Street None
Park Place None
Parsons Street None
Paul Street None
Peacock Street None
Pearce Avenue None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:706
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Perrine Avenue None
Perrine Street None
Perry Street None
Pimm Avenue None
Pine Street West No parking from
Church Street to Clark
Street
Pleasant Street None
Prospect Street Both No parking from Grant
Avenue to Brookside
Drive
Pulaski Street Both No parking from Chase
Street to State Street
Pulaski Street South and east as
extended to Perrine
Street
Fire lane from
Washington Street to
Perrine Street; no
parking from
Washington Street to
State Street
Pulsifer Drive Both No stopping from
Fleming Street to end
of street, a distance of
100 feet
Quarry Street Both No parking from York
Street to North Street
Quill Avenue East No stopping from
Chapman Avenue to
Clymer Street
Rathbun Street None
Richardson Avenue None
Roberts Road None
Rochester Street None
Rock Avenue None
Ross Street None
St. Anthony Street None
Scammell Avenue None
School Street None
Schwartz Drive Both No stopping from
Standart Avenue to
McIntosh Drive
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:707
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Seminary Avenue East No parking from
westbound Arterial to
Seminary Street
Seminary Avenue West No stopping from
Genesee Street for a
distance of 500 feet
northerly therefrom
Seminary Street North No parking from North
Street to Nelson Street
Seneca Parkway None
Seward Avenue
(North)
Both No parking from
Franklin Street to
Grant Avenue
Seward Avenue
(South)
None
Seymour Street Both No parking from
Franklin Street to
North Lewis Street
Seymour Street South No parking from
Nelson Street to North
Street
Sheldon Avenue West No parking from Wall
Street to Dewey
Avenue
Sheridan Street None
Sherman Street None
Sherwood Street None
Shevchenko Avenue None
Silver Avenue None
Sommerset Avenue None
South Street Both No parking from
Clymer Street to City
line
South Street East No parking, 3:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, from
Genesee Street to
Loop Road
Spring Street None
Standart Avenue None
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:708
Name of Street Side Restrictions
State Street Both No stopping from Loop
Road to westbound
Arterial
Steel Street None
Sumner Street None
Swift Street None
Taber Drive None
Tech Park Boulevard None
Tehan Avenue North No parking from
Washington Street to
dead end
Teller Avenue None
Thornton Avenue West No parking from
Center Street to
Clymer Street
Throop Avenue None
Train Drive None
Tubman Lane None
Tuxill Square None
Tyler Drive North No parking from North
Herman Avenue to
dead end
Underwood Street None
Union Street None
Valley Drive None
Van Anden Street No stopping from State
Street to Cross Street
Vandenbosch Avenue None
Van Patten Street None
Venice Street None
Vista Street West No parking from
Dayton Street to north
end
Wadsworth Street None
Wallace Avenue None
Wall Street North No stopping from State
Street for a distance of
500 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-14
277:709
Name of Street Side Restrictions
Walnut Street None
Warren Avenue None
Washington Street East No parking from
westbound Arterial to
Tehan Avenue
Washington Street East No parking from
Seymour Street to
Union Street
Water Street North No stopping from State
Street to dead end
West Garden Street South No parking from State
Street to the Arterial
west
Westlake Avenue Both No stopping from
William Street to Court
Street
West Street None
Westwood Drive None
Wheeler Street None
Wilbur Avenue None
Willard Street None
Willey Street None
William Street Both No stopping from Loop
Road to Genesee
Street
Wilson Street None
Woodlawn Avenue North No stopping from Fort
Street for a distance of
250 feet westerly
therefrom
Woodruff Place South No parking from
Easterly Avenue to
dead end
Worden Avenue None
Wright Avenue None
Yale Avenue None
York Street South No stopping from
North Street for a
distance of 75 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 285-14 AUBURN CODE § 285-14
277:710
§ 285-15. Bus stops, taxicab stands, loading zones and handicapped
parking spaces.
Pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1603(a) and subject to the limitations
imposed by Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 1645 and 1684, the City Manager or
Chief of Police may designate no parking, standing or stopping zones for
bus stops, taxicab stands, loading zones and handicapped parking spaces.
§ 285-16. Municipal parking lot regulations. [Amended 1-12-2011
by Ord. No. 1-2012]
§ 285-17. Parking time limit on all streets. [Added 12-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 39-1996]
No vehicle shall be parked on any City street for a period in excess of 72
hours at any one time, except where otherwise permitted.
B. Any and all recreational vehicles (also known as "campers" and "mobile
homes"), motorized or otherwise, are prohibited from parking upon any
highway within the City for more than two hours within a twenty-fourhour
period. The City Manager or his or her designee may, at his or her
discretion, extend the aforementioned two-hour period by permit only
for a period not to exceed 24 hours. [Added 5-16-2002 by Ord. No.
9-2002]
C. There is created a Variance and Exemption Board composed of five
individuals, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council; in
particular, the Mayor and each member of Council shall appoint one
member to serve on the Board, which shall be empowered to grant
variances and waivers from the provisions of the year-round alternateside
parking set forth in Article V of Chapter 285 of the Auburn
Municipal Code. The Board shall create a form to be used as an
application for a variance or waiver from the year-round alternate-side
parking. The Board shall meet at least every six months to evaluate the
impact of the granting of prior variances and waivers that have been
issued. The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall serve on the Board as
nonvoting, ex officio members. [Added 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
A. Parking time limits.
(1) Dill Street Parking Lot: eight or more hours.
(2) Seminary Avenue Parking Lot: 10 hours.
(3) Seward Lot: 10 hours.
B. Parking restricted. The parking of vehicles, except for City Hall
employees and visitors to City Hall, in areas designated by the City
Manager, is hereby prohibited in the following locations: Lincoln South
(City Hall) Parking Lot.
§ 285-14 TREES § 285-17
277:711

ARTICLE VI
Parking Meters
§ 285-18. Parking meter zones. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012; 3-20-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014; 3-16-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
A. Parking meter zones, which are regulated by permits, meters and/or
kiosks, shall be located on City streets as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Court Street
Dill Street North and south From Genesee Street
to North Street
Genesee Street North and south From Fort Street to
Market Street
East Genesee Street North and south From Market Street to
Owasco Street and
John Street
South Green Street East From Genesee Street
to Clark Street
Lincoln Street North and south
Market Street North and south
Seward Lot
South Street East and west From Genesee Street
to Lincoln Street
State Street East and west From west Arterial to
Van Anden Street
State Street Mall Area East and west From Genesee Street
to Dill Street
Seminary Avenue East and west
West Garden Street North From State Street to
Arterial west
William Street East and west From Genesee Street
to South Street
B. Public parking lots and garages. Parking meter zones, which are
regulated by permits, meters and/or kiosks, are hereby established in
public parking lots and garages as follows:
(1) Municipal Parking Garage, located on the lower floor of the garage,
with entrance on Lincoln Street.
§ 285-18 TREES § 285-18
277:713
§ 285-19. Parking time limits.
(2) Municipal Parking Lot No. 1 (Seward Lot): south side from William
Street to South Street, with entrances and exits on Lincoln Street.
(3) Municipal Parking Lot No. 2 (Memorial City Hall Lot) with
entrances and exits on Lincoln Street and Grover Street.
(4) Municipal Parking Lot No. 3 (Court Street Lot): located between 15
Court Street and 21 Court Street.
(5) Municipal Parking Lot No. 4 (Seminary Avenue Lot) with entrances
and exits on Seminary Avenue.
(6) Municipal Parking Lot No. 5 (Dill Street Lot) with entrances and
exits on Dill Street.
A. Public highways. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a
period of time as hereinafter designated from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
except Sundays, as follows:
(1) Genesee Street.
(a) Two hundred four spaces: two hours.
(b) Three spaces: 15 minutes. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
(c) Three spaces: 15 minutes. [Added 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
(d) One space: one hour. [Added 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
(2) Court Street. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
(a) Twelve spaces: one hour.
(b) Five spaces: one hour.
(3) William Street.
(a) Ten spaces: two hours.
(b) Fourteen spaces: 10 hours.
(4) South Street.
(a) Forty-eight spaces: two hours.
(b) Six spaces: 10 hours.
(c) One space: 15 minutes. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
(5) State Street.
§ 285-18 AUBURN CODE § 285-19
277:714
§ 285-20. Hours of meter operation.
Unless otherwise specified, parking meters shall be in operation during
hours coincidental with those hours specified for parking time limits in
§ 285-19 of this chapter, in the respective parking meter zones, unless
parking, standing or stopping is otherwise prohibited during those hours.
§ 285-21. Fees. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
§ 285-22. Installation and operation of meters.
The parking meter repairman shall be responsible for the installation,
operation, maintenance, policing and supervision of parking meters in this
City.
(a) Thirty-six spaces: two hours.
(b) Seven spaces: 10 hours.
(c) One space: 15 minutes. [Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
(6) Market Street.
(a) Twenty spaces: two hours.
B. Public parking lots and garages. The parking of vehicles is hereby
prohibited for a period of time as hereinafter designated from 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays, as follows: [Amended
1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
(1) Municipal Parking Garage.
(a) Thirty-six spaces: two hours.
(2) Seward/Loop Lot (Lot No. 1).
(a) Thirty-three spaces: 10 hours.
(3) Court Street Lot (Lot No. 2).
(a) Twenty-two spaces: 10 hours.
C. Designation of parking meter spaces. The City Manager shall designate
the specific parking spaces as above provided.
A. Fifteen-minute meters. A fee of $0.10 for every 15 minutes is hereby
established.
B. Two-hour and ten-hour meters. A fee of $0.50 for every hour is hereby
established. In all parking lots permitting parking up to 10 hours, the
fee shall be $0.50 per hour.
A. Installation.
§ 285-19 TREES § 285-22
277:715
§ 285-23. Disposition of fees.
The City Treasurer shall keep a record of the collection of fees made from
all parking meters in this City and shall credit such fees to the general fund.
§ 285-24. Use of meters.
(1) Pavement markings shall be applied, where practicable, outlining
parking spaces in the parking meter zones established in this
article.
(2) Parking meters, either double or single, shall be installed
immediately adjacent to the parking spaces.
(3) No parking spaces shall be applied at, nor meters installed adjacent
to, locations where parking, standing or stopping is prohibited
pursuant to § 1202 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or this chapter or
other law or ordinance of this City where parking spaces are in
conflict with such prohibitions.
B. Operation.
(1) Each parking meter shall operate so to indicate that the
appropriate fee has been deposited in such meter.
(2) Each parking meter shall display a signal indicating the expiration
of the time period associated with the deposit of fees.
A. Deposit of fee required.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking
meter zone adjacent to a parking meter during the hours of parking
meter operation unless the appropriate fee is immediately
deposited in such meter.
(2) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking
meter zone adjacent to a parking meter during the hours of parking
meter operation while such meter is displaying a signal indicating
the expiration of the time period associated with the deposit of
fees.
B. Legal currency required. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit
in any parking meter any slug, button, or any other device or substance
as substitutes for coins of United States currency.
§ 285-22 AUBURN CODE § 285-24
277:716
ARTICLE VII
General Regulations
§ 285-25. Pedestrian crossings.
Between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. no pedestrian shall cross any street in
the congested district as established in § 60.569 except at or upon such
designated crossings or to reach designated safety zones established
pursuant to § 285-4 of this chapter.
§ 285-26. Removal of vehicles.
§ 285-27. Storage of vehicles; charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Police
Department may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of
the owner. Such owner, or person in charge of the vehicle, may redeem the
same upon payment to the towing company of the amount of all expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal.
§ 285-28. Notice of removal.
The members of the Police Department causing such removal shall without
delay report the removal and the disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided in this article to the Police Department, and it shall be the duty
of such Police Department to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of
the vehicle or person having the same in charge and notify him or her of
the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be
required to redeem the same.
§ 285-29. Disposition of abandoned vehicles.
Disposition of all abandoned vehicles shall be made by the Chief of Police in
accordance with § 1224 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
City during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the Police
Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this City
where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may
be removed by the Police Department.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
City where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle may
be removed by the Police Department.
69.Editor's Note: Original § 60.5 was repealed 10-2-1997 by Ord. No. 26-1997.
§ 285-25 TREES § 285-30
277:717
§ 285-30. Truck route system. [Amended 10-21-1993 by Ord. No.
35-1993; 4-14-1994 by Ord. No. 15-199470 ]
A. A truck route system has been developed, upon which all trucks,
tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a combined gross
weight of vehicle plus load in excess of five tons are permitted to travel
and operate on the following highways:
Street Location
Allen Street Entire length
Connector Road (Route 326) Entire length
East Genesee Street (Route 20)
[Amended 10-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 16-2002]
Between Loop Road and the
easterly City line
Fulton Street Between Owasco Street and the
Arterial
Grant Avenue (Route 5) Entire length
John Street Between East Genesee Street
(Route 20) and the Arterial
Lake Avenue (Route 38) Between Swift Street and the
southerly City line
Loop Road [Added 10-3-2002
by Ord. No. 16-2002]
Between Genesee Street (Route
20) and the Arterial
North Division Street From the intersection of Allen
Street to the northerly City line
North Street (Route 34) Entire length
Owasco Street (Route 38A) Entire length
Route 5 Arterial [Amended
10-3-2002 by Ord. No.
16-2002]
Between North Street and Grant
Avenue
South Street (Route 34) Entire length
State Street (Route 38) Between York Street and the
northerly City line
Swift Street (Route 38) Entire length
York Street Entire length
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a combined
gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of five tons are hereby
excluded from all highways within the City except for those highways
listed in Subsection A, except that this exclusion shall not be construed
to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property
along any highway from which such vehicles and combinations are
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance included a sunset clause to expire 4-30-1995. This section
was readopted 4-27-1995 by Ord. No. 10-1995.
§ 285-30 AUBURN CODE § 285-30
277:718
§ 285-31. Scanner permits. [Added 5-2-1991]
excluded. However, such exception shall require that any such delivery
or pickup of merchandise be made along a route incorporating the
shortest direct route possible from the designated truck route system.
C. Governmental and public utility vehicles or any vehicles used for the
purpose of public conveyance will be specifically exempt from the
weight restrictions otherwise imposed on City streets as set forth in
Subsection B hereof. [Added 6-30-1994 by Ord. No. 24-1994]
D. All tractors and tractor-trailer combinations, tractor semitrailer
combinations and tractor-trailer semitrailer combinations are hereby
prohibited from parking upon any highway within the City unless
actually engaged in the delivery or pickup of goods or merchandise.
[Added 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 3-1995]
E. Agricultural vehicles will be specifically exempt on City streets, as set
forth in Subsection B hereof, on Dunning Avenue, Columbus Street and
North Division Street only. [Added 4-27-1995 by Ord. No. 11-1995]
F. Business deliveries. [Added 11-13-1997 by Ord. No. 28-1997]
(1) All trucks and tractor-trailer combinations having a combined
gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of five tons owned and/
or operated by a company with its principal place of business
located within the County of Cayuga, but outside the corporate
limits of the City of Auburn, entering the City of Auburn for
commercial delivery of materials and/or products to job sites or
businesses located within the City of Auburn are exempt from the
weight restrictions otherwise imposed on City streets as set forth in
Subsection B hereof.
(2) Companies using this exception granted by this Subsection F are
required to have a copy of an invoice or work order containing the
address the delivery is being made to and the specific products or
materials being delivered.
A. Pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 397, the Chief of Police is hereby
designated as the permit authority to grant and issue permits for the
equipping of motor vehicles with radio receiving sets capable of
receiving signals on the frequencies allocated to the Police Department
of the City of Auburn for police use.
B. Any applicant denied a permit by the Chief of Police shall have the right
to appeal to the City Manager within seven days of denial. The City
Manager shall have the authority to sustain or reverse the decision of
the Chief of Police.
§ 285-30 TREES § 285-32
277:719
§ 285-32. Parking between sidewalk and curb. [Added 8-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 20-1993]
No person shall park any vehicle in the space between the sidewalk and the
curb of any street.
§ 285-32 AUBURN CODE § 285-32
277:720
ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Violations Bureau
§ 285-33. Establishment.
The City Court of the City and the Judges thereof are hereby authorized to
establish a Traffic Violations Bureau in the City, pursuant to the provisions
of Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York,
to assist the City Court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic
violations.
§ 285-34. Personnel.
§ 285-35. Scope of authority.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized and empowered to
dispose of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when
such offenses shall not constitute the traffic infraction known as "speeding"
or a misdemeanor or felony by permitting a person charged with an offense,
within the limitations above stated, to answer, within 14 days except as
otherwise provided for parking violations, at the Traffic Violations Bureau,
either in person or by written power of attorney in the form hereinafter
set forth, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in
Court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in charge
of the Bureau to make such plea and pay the fine prescribed therefor in the
City Court. Acceptance by the Traffic Violations Bureau of the prescribed
A. Operation; hours. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be in charge of
such person or persons and shall be open at such hours and on such
days as the City Court or the Judges thereof may designate.
B. Duties of personnel. Personnel shall:
(1) Fines, receipts and pleas. Accept designated fines, issue receipts
and represent in Court such violators as are permitted to plead
guilty in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and who
desire to so plead guilty, waive court appearance and give power of
attorney.
(2) Records of proceedings. Keep a record of all persons who must or
wish to be heard in Court, enter the time of their appearance on the
Court docket, and notify the apprehending officer and witnesses, if
any, to be present.
(3) Records of violations. Keep an easily accessible record of all the
violations of which each person has been guilty during the current
calendar year, whether such guilt was established in the Court or in
the Traffic Violations Bureau.
(4) Additional duties. Perform such other or additional duties and keep
such other and additional records as shall be prescribed by the City
Court.
§ 285-33 TREES § 285-35
277:721
fine and power of attorney shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the
violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
§ 285-36. Form of power of attorney and waiver.
The written power of attorney and waiver provided for in § 285-35 shall be
in substantially the following form:
I, the undersigned, do hereby enter my appearance on the complaint of
the traffic violation charge against me. I have been informed of my right
to a trial, that my signature to this plea of guilty will have the same force
and effect as a judgment of Court, and that this record may be sent to the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of New York or to the proper
authorities of the state where I received my license to drive. I do hereby
plead guilty to said offense as charged, waive my right to hearing by the
Court and agree to pay the penalty or fine prescribed for my offense. I also
authorize the person in charge of the Traffic Violations Bureau of the City
of Auburn to make a plea of guilty and pay said fine in Court.
Defendant's name
Address
Driver's license number
§ 285-37. Arrest of violator.
If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as hereinbefore
prescribed within the fourteen-day period prescribed therefor, except for
parking violations, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall cause a complaint to
be entered against him or her forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his
or her arrest and appearance before the City Court.
§ 285-38. Multiple violations. [Amended 12-2-2004 by Ord. No.
19-2004]
Any person who within the preceding 12 months, is issued a number of
parking violations in excess of such maximum number as may be designated
by the Auburn City Court shall not be permitted to appear and answer to
any subsequent violation(s) at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear
in the Auburn City Court at a date and time specified by the Bureau.
§ 285-39. Designation of fines.
The City Court and the Judges thereof shall designate the fines to be
paid for offenses which may be satisfied at the Traffic Violations Bureau
as hereinbefore set forth, provided such fines are within the limitations
established by law as penalties for such offenses.
§ 285-35 AUBURN CODE § 285-40
277:722
§ 285-40. Records; other duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of which
each person has been found guilty, whether such guilt was established in
Court or in the Traffic Violations Bureau, and also a record of all fines
collected and the dispositions thereof. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall
also perform such other or additional duties and keep such other or
additional records as shall be prescribed from time to time by the City Court
and the Judges thereof.
§ 285-41. Disposition of parking violations.
Parking violations shall be disposed of substantially in the following
manner:
A. Written notice for failure to appear. If the violator of any parking
offense under the traffic ordinances, rules and regulations of the City,
or the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, which are
within the jurisdiction of the Traffic Violations Bureau, does not appear
in response to a notice affixed to his or her motor vehicle within a
period of 14 days, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall send to the owner
of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter or notice
informing him or her of the violation and warning him or her that he or
she will be held responsible for the appearance of the offender, and in
the event that such letter or notice is disregarded for a period of seven
days, a complaint will be filed.
B. Entry of complaint; arrest of violator. In the event the complaint has
been filed, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall then send a notice or
subpoena to the violator, informing him or her that complaint has been
filed and directing an appearance in the Traffic Violations Bureau, and
if such person fails to appear within the time specified, or upon
appearance refuses to deposit bail, said Traffic Violations Bureau shall
forthwith have a complaint entered against such person and secure and
issue a warrant for his or her arrest. Upon the issuance of such a
warrant, the Bureau shall not accept any fine or bail for or from such
person but shall consider every such person entirely under the
jurisdiction of the Court.
§ 285-40 TREES § 285-41
277:723

ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 285-42. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment of not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction within 18 months after the first conviction such person shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 285-42 TREES § 285-42
277:725

ARTICLE X
Enforcement of Non-Moving Traffic Violations
[Added 12-23-1992]
§ 285-43. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Non-Moving Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the City of Auburn."
§ 285-44. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to give authority to the Auburn Fire Inspector
and/or his designee(s), in certain instances, to issue non-moving vehicle
and traffic violations to motor vehicles located at private or public areas.
It is the purpose of this article to improve the public safety, health and
welfare by controlling various non-moving vehicle and traffic infractions
which threaten fire prevention and public safety in the City of Auburn.
§ 285-45. Violations.
The following violations will be enforced under this article:
Violation State Fire Code
Vehicle and Traffic
Law
Obstructing (parking or
blocking) fire hydrants
§ 1202(b)
Obstructing Fire Department
connection
§ 1191.2(b)(4)
Parking too close to fire
equipment
§ 1217
Obstructing fire lane or
emergency access road
§ 1161.2(d)
Obstructing exterior egress § 1162.6(a)
Handicapped parking
violations
§ 1203(b) and (c)
Obstructing emergency
access
§ 1161.1
§ 285-46. Enforcement. [Amended 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 28-1995]
Upon violation of any part of this article, the Fire Chief and the Fire Chief's
designees are authorized to issue tickets in the same manner as the Auburn
parking meter enforcement personnel. Tickets will be processed according
to Article VIII, Traffic Violations Bureau, of this chapter.
§ 285-43 TREES § 285-47
277:727
§ 285-47. Fines.
Any violation under this article shall be fined in the amount of $25, with the
exception of a second violation of a handicapped parking violation, wherein
the fine shall be $50. Moneys due under this section are to be paid and
enforced in the same manner as Article VIII, Traffic Violations Bureau, of
this chapter.
§ 285-47 AUBURN CODE § 285-47
277:728
ARTICLE XI
Parking of Unregistered Motor Vehicles71
[Added 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007]
§ 285-48. Parking restrictions.
It shall be illegal to park upon any street within the City of Auburn a vehicle
which is not registered pursuant to Article 14 of the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law or has had its registration suspended or revoked pursuant
to the said Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 285-49. Removal of vehicle; redemption requirements.
The members of the Auburn Police Department shall have the authority to
remove any vehicle referenced in this article, and may store such vehicle in
a suitable place and at the expense of the owner. Such owner, or person in
charge of the vehicle, may redeem the same upon payment to the towing
company and storage companies of all expenses actually or necessarily
incurred in effecting such removal.
§ 285-50. Notification.
The members of the Auburn Police Department causing such removal shall
without delay report the removing and disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided in this article to the Police Department and it shall be the duty of
such Police Department to ascertain, to the extent possible, the owner of the
vehicle or person having the same in charge and notify them of the removal
and disposition of said vehicle and of the amount which will be required to
redeem the same.
71.Editor's Note: A resolution adopted 2-18-2010 provided that former Art. XI, Impounding
and Towing, consisting of §§ 285-48 through 285-53, be redesignated as Art. XII and its
sections renumbered as §§ 285-51 through 285-56. This resolution also provided that
former Art. XII, Parking of Unregistered Motor Vehicles, consisting of §§ 285-54 through
285-56, be redesignated as Art. XI and its sections renumbered as §§ 285-48 through
285-50.
§ 285-48 TREES § 285-50
277:729

ARTICLE XII
Impounding and Towing
[Added 8-23-2007 by L.L. No. 9-2007]
§ 285-51. Title.
This article way be cited as the "Booting and Towing Law of the City of
Auburn, New York."
§ 285-52. Legislative intent.
§ 285-53. Immobilization, impounding and/or towing of vehicles.
A. The City Council finds that significant numbers of vehicle owners fail to
respond to parking summonses issued for violations of parking orders,
rules, regulations and local laws; that a significant number of such
owners are persistent violators; and that by reason of out-of-state
registration of such vehicles, transfer of ownership and reregistration
of such vehicles and other devices, violators frequently are able to
evade existing enforcement measures.
B. By reason of the foregoing the City Council finds that the health,
welfare and safety will be served by adoption of a local law providing
additional means of enforcing parking orders, rules, regulations and
local laws in the case of vehicle owners who fail to timely respond to
summonses issued for parking vehicles or have outstanding fines for
parking violations.
C. The City Council does hereby enact this article as a local law to
accomplish the aforesaid purposes.
A. The Chief of Police, and/or any police officer, is hereby authorized to
provide for immobilization or towing of vehicles against which there are
fines or charges for parking violations in excess of $100 wherein
notification has been issued and has not been answered within 45 days
of the issuance date or dates shown on the notice of upon which there
are outstanding fines for parking violations which have not been paid.
B. Such vehicles may be immobilized and left where found secured by the
use of a steel lock or such other immobilization device as may be
designated by the Chief of Police, and/or any police officer, or, in the
alternative, may be towed by the City's authorized towing company to a
specified lot or yard.
C. Such immobilization and/or towing shall be at the expense of the owner
of the vehicle and shall include all storage charges and/or any other
charge attributable thereto, including all fines and penalties due for
parking vehicles.
D. Any vehicle that has been immobilized and not lawfully released or
lawfully removed by the owner of the vehicle for 72 hours from the time
§ 285-51 TREES § 285-53
277:731
§ 285-54. Notice and warning to owner.
When an immobilization device is used, the Police Department and/or the
Traffic Enforcement Department or their agents shall attach to the vehicle,
in such form as may be directed by the Chief of Police and/or the Traffic
Enforcement Officer, a notice containing the following information:
§ 285-55. Tampering or attempted removal; penalties for offenses.
§ 285-56. Vehicle release to owner.
of such initial immobilization may be impounded and towed at the
direction of the Chief of Police and/or any police officer, which removal
and storage shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
E. When a vehicle has been immobilized, it may be towed by the Auburn
Police Department prior to the seventy-two-hour time limit if the
immobilized vehicle, at the direction and discretion of the Chief of
Police, is creating a public safety or traffic hazard. [Added 11-6-2014
by Ord. No. 10-2014]
A. The location and identifying characteristics of the vehicle.
B. The date and time of placement of the device and signature of the
installer.
C. Notice that further parking restrictions will be waived during the
immobilization period for a period of five days from the date of
immobilization.
D. Notice that any person tampering with the device or the vehicle will be
subject to criminal prosecution and liable for any loss to the City.
E. The steps which the owner must take to obtain the release of the
vehicle.
F. Such other information, statements, notices and warnings as the Chief
of Police and/or the Traffic Enforcement Officer may from time to time
determine to be appropriate.
A. No person shall attempt to or tamper with deface, remove or destroy an
immobilization device or move a vehicle immobilized as herein
provided.
B. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$5,000 or by imprisonment for up to 15 days, or both.
A. Any vehicle immobilized as herein provided shall be promptly released
to its owner upon;
(1) Payment of the expenses of immobilization, hereby found to be
$100 and the costs of towing, storage and all incidental charges,
together with payment of all fines and penalties for delinquent
§ 285-53 AUBURN CODE § 285-56
277:732
parking tickets or judgments against the owner arising from such
nonpayment.
(2) An order of the City Court authorizing such release. The City Court
shall coordinate with the Traffic Enforcement Officer to ascertain
that the expense of immobilization and all other costs referenced in
this section have been paid before authorizing the release of the
vehicle.
(3) The owner furnishing security for appearance in the City Court to
answer parking summonses outstanding against such vehicle and
the expense of immobilization or towing and storage.
(4) Proof of ownership and current automobile registration issued to
the City Court Clerk.
B. The operator or owner will be issued a receipt authorizing pickup of the
vehicle or to have the boot removed. Payment shall be by cash, certified
check, bank check or money order.
C. The amount of such security shall not exceed the total of the maximum
fines permitted upon conviction of the offenses charged in outstanding
summonses against the vehicle or the vehicle owner's failure to timely
answer, plus the expense of the immobilization.
D. While a vehicle is immobilized as herein provided, any parking
restriction of which such vehicle may be in violation, except as provided
herein, shall be suspended as they apply to such vehicle for a period of
three days from the initial date of immobilization.
§ 285-56 TREES § 285-56
277:733
Chapter 289
VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 109.
Collateral loan brokers — See Ch. 140.
Noise — See Ch. 210.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 221.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 273.
§ 289-1. Findings.
It is found and declared that:
§ 289-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC WAY — All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, and parks, as well as the
interior and areas surrounding public buildings.
PUSHCART — A cart or barrow, manually propelled, used to vend food
intended for individual portion service.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion, including but not limited to fairs, shows,
exhibitions, City-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically
defined area of the City of Auburn for a period of time not to exceed 10 days.
STAND — Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart
or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and
registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles and is used for the display,
storage or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
VENDOR — Any individual, including an employee or agent of a group
of individuals, partnership or corporation, who sells or offers to sell food,
A. The preliminary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks and other
public ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
B. Vending on such public ways promotes the public interest by
contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment.
C. Reasonable regulation of vending on public ways is necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
D. The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to prohibit or
hamper speech which is protected by the First Amendment but merely
to regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature.
§ 285-56 AUBURN CODE § 289-2
289:734
beverages, goods or merchandise on any public way from a pushcart, stand,
motor vehicle, or from his or her person.
§ 289-3. License required; fees; conditions.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for
sale any food, beverage, goods or merchandise on a public way within
the City of Auburn without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk.
B. Issuance of license.
(1) The City of Auburn will designate a limited number of specific
locations for which licenses will be granted on an annual basis from
January 1 to December 31. The Clerk of the City of Auburn will
begin accepting applications for licenses on the first day of
business following January 1 and continue to accept applications
for 10 business days thereafter. The Clerk of the City of Auburn will
begin accepting applications for 1996 on the first business day
following February 12, 1996, and for 10 business days thereafter. If
the number of applications exceeds one by the 10th day of business
following January 1, then the City Clerk shall conduct a lottery to
assign locations to the applicants. If fewer than two applications
have been received by the 10th day of business following January 1,
locations will be assigned to applicants on a first-come, first-served
basis.
(2) Insurance or bond. No license shall be issued to an applicant unless
the applicant furnishes proof to the City of a public liability bond or
insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000 for property
damage and injuries, including injury resulting in death, caused by
operation of the vending business.
C. Fees. Each vendor granted a license under this chapter shall pay an
annual license fee of $300. Vendors granted temporary vending licenses
for special events shall pay a fee of $100 per day of vending permitted.
[Amended 4-17-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]
D. Licenses.
(1) The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor at
all times when he or she is engaged in the business of vending and
clearly displayed for public display. If the vendor sells food or
beverages, the health permit must also be displayed.
(2) Licenses, permits, and identification badges shall be used only by
the person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to
any other person.
§ 289-2 VENDORS § 289-4
289:735
§ 289-4. Exemptions.
The following vendors are exempt from the license requirements of
§ 289-3A but shall otherwise be required to comply with the provisions of
this chapter:
§ 289-5. Application for license.
The application for a vendor's license shall contain all information relevant
and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued,
including but not limited to:
§ 289-6. Health permits.
The application of any vendor engaged in the sale of food or beverages shall
also be referred to the Cayuga County Health Department for approval of
a health permit in addition to the regular vending license. Such vendor's
equipment shall be subject to inspections by the Health Department at the
time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter.
A. All religious, nonprofit and charitable organizations, including school
groups.
B. The sale of fresh produce by the grower of such produce or at the
farmer's market that is within the Loop Road area.
C. Vendors, merchants, exhibitors and salesmen who exhibit, demonstrate
or solicit orders for goods in conjunction with, and as part of, the
organized program of conventions, professional meetings, seminars,
etc.
D. Any individual selling newspapers or magazines, or distributing free
samples from his or her person.
A. Full name, home address, permanent business address (if any),
telephone number, driver's license number and proof of identity.
B. A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the food,
beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold.
C. The specific location, if any, in which the vendor requests to conduct
business.
D. If the vendor is employed by or is an agent of another, the name and
business address of the principal/hiring person, firm, association,
organization, company or corporation.
E. If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a description of
the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number and the
license number.
F. A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to the
applicant by the City of Auburn within the past five years.
§ 289-4 AUBURN CODE § 289-7
289:736
§ 289-7. Special events.
Vendors wishing to conduct business at any special event shall apply to the
City for a temporary vending license. Application for such a license must
be made at least 14 days prior to the beginning of the event. The license is
valid only for the duration of the special event. Fees for such licenses shall
be as specified in § 289-3C. Vendors granted a temporary license are subject
to the same operating regulations as other vendors, except where otherwise
specified.
§ 289-8. Restrictions applicable to all vendors.
A. Stands. Vendor stands shall not:
(1) Exceed six feet in length, four feet in width or 10 feet in height.
(2) Impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent
building.
(3) Be used to vend food or beverages unless such stand is a pushcart
as defined in this chapter.
(4) Store or place items relating to the operation of a vending stand on
the sidewalk, excepting trash receptacles, unless such items are
secured on, in or under the stand or pushcart.
B. Additional regulation for pushcarts. All pushcarts with cooking
equipment must be equipped with holding pans to keep grease from
dripping onto the sidewalk or ground.
C. Hours of operation. Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business
of vending only between 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. All vending stands
must be removed from public property during nonvending hours. When
temporary vending permits are sought for special events, etc. (see
§ 289-7), the applicant may request from the City an exception to the
usual hours of operation. All stands used for vending must be removed
from public property during nonoperating hours.
D. Handicapped areas. No vendor shall conduct business within 20 feet of
any handicapped parking space or access ramp.
E. Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within 50 feet of any
vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in trash
containers. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash
receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands.
F. Prohibited areas. A vending license issued pursuant to this chapter is
valid only on the public ways of the City of Auburn. The City shall
prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways if it determines
that such prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health
and safety. Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within 50
feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop, loading zone or driveway of
a fire station, police station, or hospital.
§ 289-7 VENDORS § 289-8
289:737
§ 289-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 289-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 289-11. Locations for stands in downtown area.
Locations for stands are as follows:
G. Noise. No vendor may sound any device which produces a loud and
raucous noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address
system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device to attract public
attention.
H. Signs. Signs shall not be electric or neon, nor of comparable substance
and appearance, and shall otherwise be in conformity with the City of
Auburn Sign Article.72
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the
business of vending.
(3) Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of
the license.
(4) Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety
or welfare.
(5) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude while holding a
vending license from the City of Auburn.
(6) Cancellation of Health Department authorization for a food or
beverage vending unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation
violations.
B. Upon suspension or revocation, the City shall deliver written notice to
the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting
such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's
place of business or mailed to the license holder's last known address.
A. North end of Exchange Street Mall, east of fire box.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, § 305-27, Signs.
§ 289-8 AUBURN CODE § 289-11
289:738
Chapter 294
WATER, PROTECTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water service — See Ch. 297.
§ 294-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Auburn
Prevention of Nonindigenous Species Infestation Ordinance."
§ 294-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to thwart the infestation of nonindigenous
species, particularly Zebra Mussels, onto Owasco Lake, to prevent damage
to the public water supply of the City of Auburn and those surrounding
communities serviced by Owasco Lake, to ensure the continued vitality of
Owasco Lake and its watershed and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and to promote the public good.
§ 294-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to Owasco Lake and its tributaries and to
all watercourses tributary thereto or which may ultimately discharge into
Owasco Lake.
§ 294-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONINDIGENOUS SPECIES — Any species or other viable biological
material that enters an ecosystem beyond its historic range, including any
such organism transferred from one country to another.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities capable of being sued.
WATERCOURSE — Every spring, stream, marsh or channel of water of any
kind numbered on the ledge of the Owasco Lake Watershed Base Map of the
Central New York Regional Planning and Development Board.
B. Northwest corner of intersection of Genesee Street and North Street
("Pride Corner").
C. East intersection of Market Street and Genesee Street.
D. Northwest corner of Genesee Street and Green Street.
§ 289-11 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 294-4
294:739
WATERSHED — The entire drainage of watercraft, mechanically propelled
or otherwise, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on
water.
§ 294-5. Prohibited acts.
§ 294-6. Penalties for offenses.
Noncompliance or nonconformance with any provision of this chapter
constitutes a violation punishable on conviction for a first offense by a fine
not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 15 days, or both,
and for a second and subsequent offense by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Chapter 297
WATER SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Drain layers — See Ch. 147.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 242.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 259.
Protection of water — See Ch. 294.
A. No person shall launch or shall cause or allow to be launched a vessel
onto the waters of Owasco Lake, or onto any watercourse tributary to
Owasco Lake, without an inspection sticker issued by a designated and
authorized disinfection/inspection station affixed to said vessel
certifying that said vessel is free of contamination from nonindigenous
species.
B. No person shall launch or shall cause or allow to be launched a vessel
onto Owasco Lake, or onto any watercourse tributary to Owasco Lake,
that has been in nonindigenous species infested waters without proof of
disinfection by a designated and authorized disinfection/inspection
station.
C. No person shall sell, transport, carry, use for bait for fishing purposes or
deposit for any reason live bait from waters other than Owasco Lake, its
watercourse or from approved bait shops on the watershed of Owasco
Lake.
§ 294-4 AUBURN CODE § 294-6
294:740
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 297-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Service
Ordinance of the City of Auburn, New York."
§ 297-2. Purpose.
§ 297-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all property and water users within the
City, and the terms of this chapter shall be applicable to all water users
outside of the City as terms of a contract in accordance with which water is
to be supplied to such outside users.
§ 297-4. Rules and regulations to be part of contract.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be considered a part
of the contract of any person who obtains water from the City, and every
such person shall be considered as having expressed his or her consent to
be bound thereby.
§ 297-5. Application for water service.
Every person desiring a supply of water through the City water mains must
make application at the office of the Water Department for a service pipe
and connection with the City's mains. Such application shall be made in
writing upon blank forms furnished by the Water Department and must be
signed by the owner of the property or his or her duly authorized agent.
§ 297-6. Installation of service connections and service pipes.
A. It is the intent of the City of Auburn to continue to furnish an adequate
supply of pure and wholesome water to the residences and business and
industrial establishments in the City of Auburn and its immediate
vicinity and also to supply sufficient water with sufficient pressure in its
water supply system to adequately protect the buildings in the City
from damage or destruction by fire and to permit the residents of the
City to have the protected rate of the fire rating organizations on their
fire insurance for both their buildings and personal property.
B. This chapter is therefore enacted in order that the water supply system
shall be properly maintained, improved and extended primarily for the
benefit of the water users and taxpayers within the City limits.
A. Responsibility. All service connections with the City mains and service
pipes from said mains to approximately two feet back of the curbline, or
gutter line where there is no curb, including the stop or curb cock or
valve and box for the same, shall be put in and installed only by properly
§ 297-1 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-6
294:741
§ 297-7. Connection with curb cock or valve.
No person shall make any connection with the curb cock or valve, or extend
the same to the meter, located either at the curb or within the cellar, except
an employee of the Water Department, acting under the direction of the
Superintendent, a duly licensed plumber or a person having a special permit
from the Water Department.
§ 297-8. Duty of owner to maintain service pipes.
authorized employees of the Water Department acting under the
direction of the Superintendent of the Department at the expense of the
owner.
B. Costs. The owner of the property shall be charged the actual cost of all
labor and materials entering into such service connections, plus a
reasonable percentage for overhead and use of tools, including also the
repaving and maintenance of the roadway until restored to a condition
equal to the existing roadbed before the excavation was made.
C. Required depth. The owner receiving a permit for the introduction of a
water service into his or her premises will be required to cause such
service to be placed not less than four feet below the surface of the
earth at any place between the water main and the street and the inside
of the foundation wall of the building into which the water service is
introduced.
D. Connection of service pipes to water main. All service pipes from the
water main must be connected with the main by a separate pipe of not
less than 3/4 inch in diameter.
E. Service pipes to be of copper material; exception. All service pipes must
be of Type K copper material or equivalent, except service pipes of
diameter of four inches or larger may be of ductile or cast-iron pipe.
F. All service pipes 25 years or older and not of Type K copper may be
required to be replaced by the City at the expense of the owner.
A. Owner's responsibility. The owner of property into which water is
introduced by a service pipe shall be required to install and maintain, in
perfect order, at his or her own expense, the service pipe from the
principal main to the meter on or for his or her premises, including all
fixtures therein provided for delivering or supplying water for any
purpose.
B. Authority of Water Department. In case such service and fixtures are
not so kept in repair, the Water Department may make all necessary
repairs, and renewals, or parts thereof. The expense of such work, and
all materials and labor required, shall be paid to the City by the owner.
§ 297-6 AUBURN CODE § 297-9
294:742
§ 297-9. Plumber designated agent of owner.
The plumber designated and employed by the owner of the premises shall
be considered the agent of such owner while employed in the prosecution
of the work of introducing water into said premises and not as the agent of
the Water Department. The City shall not be responsible for the acts of such
plumber.
§ 297-10. Valves and gates in water mains, conduits or street pipes.
No person except a duly authorized employee of the Water Department shall
open, close or in any way interfere with any valve or gate in any water main,
conduit or street pipe.
§ 297-11. Obstruction of valve box.
Any person who has disturbed or displaced a valve box so that the valve
stem cannot be reached by a key, or who has covered a valve box or manhole
cover of a valve chamber with dirt, paving, plank or other material, shall
immediately remove the obstruction or, if necessary, pay the City for the
cost of replacing the valve box.
§ 297-12. Right of entry.
Officers or employees of the Water Department, upon presentation of
proper credentials, may enter upon any premises where City water is being
supplied or upon any premises when application is made for a permit to
connect plumbing with the City water main for the purpose of installing,
reading, removing or repairing meters, or for inspecting the plumbing and
fixtures of the water service, and all work in connection with such service.
§ 297-13. Authority to limit water supply.
§ 297-14. No liability for shutting off water.
Neither the Water Department nor the City shall be liable for any damage
which may result to any person or premises from shutting off the water
A. Generally. The Water Department shall have the right to limit the
amount of water furnished to any consumer should circumstances deem
to warrant such action, although no limit may be stated in the
application or permit for use, or the Water Department may entirely
shut off the water supply used for any manufacturing purpose, or for
furnishing power, or for lawn sprinkling, at any time, by giving
reasonable notice to the consumer of such intended action.
B. Repairs; new work. In the case of making or constructing new work, in
making repairs or leakage tests, the right is reserved to shut off the
water from any consumer, without notice, for as long a period as may be
necessary.
§ 297-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-14
294:743
from any main or service, for any purpose whatever, even in cases where no
notice is given.
§ 297-15. No liability for changing water pressure.
The Water Department shall not be liable for any damage or loss of any
name or kind, to property or persons, which may arise from, or be caused
by, any change, either increase or decrease, in pressure of water supplied
from any cause whatever.
§ 297-16. Fire hydrants.
No person shall open any fire hydrant or to draw water therefrom except
under the direction of the Water Department or the Fire Department.
§ 297-14 AUBURN CODE § 297-16
294:744
ARTICLE II
Water Meters
§ 297-17. Metering of water service.
§ 297-18. Installation of meters.
No water meter shall be set or removed or disturbed without a permit from
the Water Department. In general all meters shall be installed and removed
only by duly authorized agents of the Water Department.
§ 297-19. Access to meters.
§ 297-20. Damage to meters.
A. Generally. All water furnished through service pipes, whether for
residential, commercial or industrial use, shall be metered. All meters
5/8 inch or smaller shall be furnished and installed at the expense of the
Water Department, except as otherwise provided. Meters larger than 5/
8 inch should be purchased from the Water Department.
B. Fire protection. At the option of the Water Department, service lines
used exclusively for fire protection may be left unmetered. Wherever
surreptitious use of water by the consumer is discovered from such
connection, the Water Department may either discontinue such service
or compel the owner to install a suitable meter at his or her own
expense.
C. Building purposes.
(1) Generally. Water meters for building purposes shall be set by the
Water Department at the expense of the contractor or person
making such application therefor.
(2) Unmetered water. In case it is impracticable to place meters for
such building purposes, water may be supplied to the contractor or
owner at flat rates duly established.
A. Obstructions. Whenever a water meter is set, whether at the curb or in
the sidewalk or area vault or any part of the basement of any building,
the space occupied by the meter and the meter box shall at all times be
kept free from rubbish or obstructions of any kind.
B. Accessibility. The owner and tenant shall provide ready and convenient
access to the meter so that it may be frequently read and examined by
agents of the Water Department.
A. Responsibility. Any damage which a water meter may sustain resulting
from the carelessness of the owner or his or her agent or tenant or from
neglect of any of them to properly secure and protect the same,
including any damage that may result from allowing said meter to
§ 297-17 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-20
294:745
§ 297-21. Testing meters; fee. [Amended 3-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3-2007]
become frozen or to be injured by hot water or steam, shall be paid to
the Water Department by the owner of the premises.
B. Wear and tear. Ordinary wear and tear of five-eighths-inch meters shall
be the responsibility of the Water Department. All other meters shall be
the responsibility of the owners. Meters shall be repaired only by the
Water Department or its authorized agents.
A. Upon the written application of any residential consumer, with a meter
of less than one and one-half inches, of the City water supply made to
the Water Department and accompanied by an inspection fee of $50,
the Water Department shall remove the meter, bring the same to its
shop and there test the same in the presence of the owner, if he or she
so desires. If upon such inspection the meter is found to be more than
three-percent fast, the Water Department shall return to the consumer
the inspection fee and make such reduction in the current bill as the
facts warrant. If, however, the meter does not overregister more than
the above-mentioned 3%, the Department shall retain the inspection fee
as its expense for the testing.
B. Any meter two inches or larger must be inspected and tested every
three years commencing 10 years after its installation. The testing shall
be conducted by a vendor that is selected and hired by the City at the
owner's expense. The meter must operate within standards
promulgated by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). If the
meter does not operate within the AWWA's standards, it shall be
replaced at the owner's expense.
§ 297-20 AUBURN CODE § 297-21
294:746
ARTICLE III
Water Rates and Charges
§ 297-22. Rates to be fixed by Council. [Amended 6-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 11-2007]
Generally, all water consumed shall be recorded and paid pursuant to
metered registration at the rates fixed by the Council, except as otherwise
provided.
§ 297-23. Schedule of water rates; annual adoption. [Amended
2-22-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996; 5-23-1997 by Ord. No. 17-1997;
6-14-2001 by Ord. No. 19-2001; 7-5-2001 by Ord. No. 22-2001;
12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 18-2004; 6-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006;
6-7-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
§ 297-24. Billing periods; penalty for nonpayment.
A. The meter rates for water service, both inside and outside of the City,
shall be set annually by the Council. The meter rates shall be adopted
and enacted by Council each year as a component of the City's budget
and shall become effective July 1 of each fiscal year.
B. The meter rates so adopted and enacted shall remain in effect until the
end of each designated fiscal year unless amended by City Council.
A. Frequency of billing. All residential rates shall be billed quarterly and
all others monthly.
B. Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a water bill shall not act as a
waiver of penalty.
C. Separate readings. In the event that more than one meter is used upon
the same premises, separate bills shall be rendered for each meter.
D. Penalty. All water rates set out in § 297-23 are net, with a penalty of
10% to be added if not paid within 20 days after the issuance of a bill or
statement therefor. [Amended 5-8-1997 by Ord. No. 13-1997;
6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005; 6-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006;
5-22-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008]
E. The City Treasurer is authorized to waive any penalties assessed for
delinquent water bills provided that the account in question and all
other water accounts in the same customer's name were paid on time
during the previous thirty-six-month period immediately preceding the
billing to the account(s) for which the waiver is requested. [Added
3-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007
F. All billing for water rates shall include the fee for solid waste collection
as promulgated by § 254-36 of this Code. [Added 6-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 11-2007
§ 297-22 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-25
294:747
§ 297-25. Responsibility for charges. [Amended 5-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 13-1997]
All charges for water service pipe installation, repairs, damages caused by
carelessness or neglect, penalties, etc., shall be made against the premises
supplied, and the owner of premises shall be held responsible therefor.
Such charges, if not paid, shall be a lien on the property benefited. All
such unpaid charges, including an additional ten-percent processing fee
computed on the unpaid balance, shall be added to the next City tax against
the property.
§ 297-26. Meters required; exception.
§ 297-27. Installation of new meters and replacement of aged
meters. [Amended 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 11-2014]
A. Generally. Whenever practical a meter shall be placed and the water
consumption paid for at the established meter rates.
B. Building purposes. For building purposes where it is not advisable or
practical to install a meter, the owner or contractor may be furnished
water at a fixed flat rate. In such instances the owner or contractor shall
make written application to the Water Department on a form provided
by the Department giving the information required. The Water
Department may demand payment in advance of the amount of charges
for water at scheduled rates for such work.
A. New residential meters. As meters age, they fail to register correctly;
therefore, the City shall replace meters as necessary. The account
owner and tenant shall provide ready and convenient access to the
premises and meter location for such replacement. Three attempts shall
be made, by mail, to contact the account owner to coordinate the meter
replacement. Failure to make arrangements with the City for
replacement within 30 days of the final notice shall result in additional
fees. The consumer shall be billed for the consumption as metered or
estimated plus an additional fee of 25% per billing period until the
meter is replaced. Additionally, the account owner will be responsible
for the actual cost of the meter installation, and administration fees of
$25.
B. Failure of residential meters to register. If a water meter fails to
register, the account owner shall be billed at the average daily
consumption over the previous years' period, as shown by the meter
when it was in order. There shall be three attempts, by mail, to contact
the account owner to coordinate the meter repair or replacement.
Failure to make arrangements with the City for repair or replacement
within 30 days of the final notice shall result in additional fees. The
account owner shall be billed at the average daily consumption over the
previous years' period, as shown by the meter when it was in order, plus
an additional fee of 25% per billing period until the meter is replaced.
§ 297-25 AUBURN CODE § 297-27
294:748
§ 297-28. Vacancy of premises. [Amended 6-13-2006 by Ord. No.
11-2006]
No abatement of the charges for water rents shall be allowed on account of
the vacancy of any premises supplied with water, unless the water supply is
turned off by the Water Department. For such suspension of service there
shall be a charge of $50 for shutting off and $50 for restoring the service at
such premises, but, in the interval, no charge for service shall be made.
§ 297-29. Charges in case of leaks.
C. New commercial/industrial meters. As meters age, they fail to register
correctly; therefore, the City shall replace meters as necessary. The
account owner and tenant shall provide ready and convenient access to
the premises and meter location for such replacement. Three attempts
shall be made, by mail, to contact the account owner to coordinate the
meter replacement. Failure to make arrangements with the City for
replacement within 30 days of the final notice shall result in additional
fees. The consumer shall be billed for the consumption as metered or
estimated plus an additional fee of 25% per billing period until the
meter is replaced. Additionally, the account owner will be responsible
for the price of the meter, cost of installation, and administration fees of
$25.
D. Failure of commercial/industrial meters to register. If a water meter
fails to register, the account owner shall be billed at the average daily
consumption over the previous years' period, as shown by the meter
when it was in order. There shall be three attempts, by mail, to contact
the account owner to coordinate the meter repair or replacement.
Failure to make arrangements with the City for repair or replacement
within 30 days of the final notice shall result in additional fees. The
account owner shall be billed at the average daily consumption over the
previous years' period, as shown by the meter when it was in order, plus
an additional fee of 25% per billing period until the meter is replaced.
Additionally, the account owner will be responsible for the price of the
meter and actual cost of installation.
A. Owner's responsibility. The owner of the premises to which water is
supplied shall be chargeable with all water taken from the City mains,
and if leaks occur in the service lines between the curb stop and the
meter, the Water Department may estimate the amount of the water lost
by such leaks and charge the same to the owner of the premises.
B. Abatement by City Manager. All water that passes through a meter shall
be charged for, whether used, wasted or lost by leakage. The City
Manager may make such abatement as seems to him or her right and
proper in the case of underground leaks, where it appears that the
owner or user could not reasonably be expected to know of the leak or
to have had a fair opportunity to stop the same. Such reduction shall not
exceed 1/2 of the estimated loss of water.
§ 297-27 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-30
294:749
§ 297-30. Fee for shutting off or turning on water. [Amended
6-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006]
Whenever the owner or occupant requests the City to shut off or turn on the
supply of water, such owner or occupant shall pay a fee of $50 to the City.
§ 297-31. Meter readings.
A. Meters are to be read quarterly by the City.73
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding failure to provide meter readings, was
repealed 3-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007.
§ 297-30 AUBURN CODE § 297-31
294:750
ARTICLE IV
Cross-Connection Control
§ 297-32. Purpose; state regulations; interpretation.
§ 297-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — A physical break between a supply pipe and a
receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case
less than one inch.
APPROVED CHECK VALVE — A check valve that seats readily and
completely. It must be carefully machined to have free moving parts and
assured watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat
must be bronze composition or other noncorrodible material which will seat
tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushing shall be
of bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for easy,
dependable operation. The closure element, e.g. clapper, shall be internally
weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive
closure in all sizes where this feature is obtainable.
APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of at least
two independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly, and suitable leak detector
drains plus connections available for testing the watertightness of each
check valve. This device must be approved as a complete assembly.
APPROVED REDUCED-PRESSURE-PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE — A device incorporating two or more check valves and an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two
checks, two shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances
for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone
between the two check valves less than the pressure on the public water
supply side of the device.
A. The purpose of these regulations is to safeguard potable water supplies
by preventing backflow into public water systems.
B. Regulations of the State of New York, Part 5.1-31(a)(2), require that
when a supplier of water instructs the user of a public water supply to
protect his water service connection by the installation of a protective
device, plans for the installation of the protective device must be
submitted to the supplier of water and to the state for approval.
C. The regulations are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent of
these regulations to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard
and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should be
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
§ 297-32 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-33
294:751
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply approved by the New York
State Department of Health.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the approved public water supply.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising approximately 35 feet, at its
topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — A person who
has a certificate issued by the State of New York Department of Health for
a backflow prevention device tester. He or she shall be provided with an
appropriate identification card which must be renewed every three years.
Failure to perform his or her duties competently and conscientiously will
result in prompt withdrawal of his or her authority.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any unprotected connection between any part of
a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and
any source or system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be
approved as equally safe, wholesome, and potable for human consumption.
VACUUM BREAKER, NON-PRESSURE-TYPE — A vacuum breaker which is
designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure.
VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE-TYPE — A vacuum breaker designed to
operate under conditions of static line pressure.
WATER SUPERVISOR — The consumer or a person on the premises charged
with the responsibility of complete knowledge and understanding of the
water supply piping within the premises and for maintaining the consumer's
water system free from cross-connection and other sanitary defects, as
required by regulations and laws.
§ 297-34. Protection of public water system at service connection.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between check valves shall
be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced
pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is
two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the
atmosphere, thereby providing an air gap in the device. To be approved,
these devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing
and installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged.
The enclosure must be self-draining, so that the large amount of water
which the relief valve may vent will be disposed of reliably without
submergence of the relief valve.
A.
B. This device must also be approved as a complete assembly.
A. Where protection is required.
(1) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be
protected against backflow of water from the premises into the
public water system, unless the auxiliary water supply is approved
§ 297-33 AUBURN CODE § 297-34
294:752
as an additional source by the water purveyor and is satisfactory
to the public health agency having jurisdiction with regard to
quality and safety. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is expressly
prohibited and illegal that any well water shall be allowed within
the City of Auburn. [Amended 3-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007]
(2) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises on which any substance is handled under
pressure in such fashion as to permit entry into the water system
shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises
into the public waters and waters originating from the public water
supply system which may have been subject to deterioration in
sanitary or chemical quality.
(3) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises on which a substance of unusually toxic
concentration or danger to health is handled in liquid form, even
though it is not under pressure, shall be protected against backflow
of the water from premises into the public system. Examples are
plating factories using cyanide and hospitals. This is not intended
to apply to normal household installations.
(4) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service
connection to any premises that have internal cross-connections,
unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the
water purveyor. It shall be the responsibility of the water user to
provide and maintain these protective devices, and each one must
be of a type acceptable to the State Health Department.
B. Type of protection. The protective device required shall depend on the
degree of hazard as tabulated below:
(1) At the service connection to any premises where there is an
auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no
known cross-connection, the public water supply shall be protected
by an approved double check valve assembly.
(2) At the service connection on any premises on which there is an
auxiliary water supply where cross-connections are known to exist
which cannot be presently eliminated, the public water supply
system shall be protected by an air gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device.
(3) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance
that would be objectionable but not necessarily hazardous to health
if introduced into the public water supply is handled so as to
constitute a cross-connection, the public water supply shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly.
(4) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance of
unusual toxic concentration or danger to health is or may be
handled, but not under pressure, the public water supply shall be
§ 297-34 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-34
294:753
§ 297-35. Protection of potable water system within premises.
protected by an air gap separation or an approved reducedpressure-
principle backflow prevention device. This device shall be
located as close as practicable to the water meter, and all piping
between the water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely
visible.
(5) At the service connection to any premises on which any material
dangerous to health, or toxic substance in toxic concentration, is or
may be handled under pressure, the public water supply shall be
protected by an air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as
close as practicable to the water meter, and all piping between the
water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply shall
be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow prevention device, providing the alternative is acceptable
to the water purveyor.
(6) At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage
pumping station, the public water supply shall be protected by an
air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as close as
practicable to the water meter, and all piping between the water
meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply shall
be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow prevention device.
C. Frequency of inspection of protective devices.
(1) It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises on account of
which backflow protective devices are installed to have competent
inspections made at least once a year, or more often in those
instances where successive inspections indicate repeated failure.
These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the water user whenever they are found to be defective.
These tests shall be performed by a qualified backflow prevention
tester, and all test results will be provided to the water purveyor
within 72 hours after the test is made.
(2) Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall also be kept and
made available to the water purveyor and the local Health
Department upon request.
A. Separate drinking water systems. Whenever the Supervisor of Water
Distribution or Superintendent of Engineering Services determines that
it is not practical to protect drinking water systems on premises against
entry of water from a source or piping system or equipment that cannot
be approved as safe or potable for human use, an entirely separate
drinking water system shall be installed to supply water at points
convenient for consumers.
§ 297-34 AUBURN CODE § 297-35
294:754
B. Fire systems. Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that
cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, shall, wherever
practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and
equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is used for both
drinking and fire-fighting purposes, approved backflow prevention
devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines
as are not used for fire-fighting purposes. Any auxiliary fire-fighting
water supply which is not approved for potable purposes but which is so
connected that it may be introduced into potable water piping during an
emergency shall be equipped with an approved automatic chlorination
machine. It is hereby declared that it is the responsibility of the person
or persons causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe water
into the pipelines to see that a procedure is developed and carried out
to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency
and that special precautions are taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush
out all pipelines which may become contaminated before they are again
used to furnish drinking water. In the event the means of protection of
water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary fire-fighting supply,
the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. The public
water supply must be protected against backflow from such dual
domestic fire systems, as detailed in § 297-34.
C. Process waters.
(1) Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial
processes or operations shall be protected by a suitable backflow
prevention device located beyond the last point from which
drinking water may be taken, which device shall be provided on the
feed line to process piping or equipment.
(2) In the event the particular process liquid is especially corrosive or
apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow prevention device, air
gap separation shall be provided. These devices shall be tested by
the water user at least once a year or more often in those instances
where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. The devices
shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found
to be defective. These tests must be performed by a qualified
backflow prevention device tester, and records of tests, repairs,
and replacement shall be kept and made available to the water
purveyor and the Health Department upon request.
D. Sewage treatment plants and pumping stations. Sewage pumps shall
not have priming connections directly off any drinking water systems.
No connections shall exist between the drinking water system and any
other piping, equipment, or tank in any sewage treatment plant or
sewage pumping station.
E. Plumbing connections.
(1) Where the circumstances are such that there is special danger to
health by the backflow of sewage, as from sewers, toilets, hospital
§ 297-35 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-35
294:755
bedpans and the like, into a drinking water system, a dependable
device or devices shall be installed to prevent such backflow.
(2) The purpose of these regulations is not to transcend local plumbing
regulations but only to deal with those extraordinary situations
where sewage may be forced or drawn into the drinking water
piping. These regulations do not attempt to eliminate at this time
the hazards of backsiphonage through flushometer valves on all
toilets but deal with those situations where the likelihood of
vacuum conditions in the drinking water system is definite and
there is special danger to health. Devices suited to the purpose of
avoiding backsiphonage from plumbing fixtures are roof tanks,
barometric loops or separate pressure systems separately piped to
supply such fixtures, recognized approved vacuum or siphon
breakers and other backflow protection devices which have been
proved by appropriate tests to be dependable for destroying the
vacuum.
(3) Inasmuch as many serious hazards of this kind are due to water
supply piping which is too small, thereby causing vacuum
conditions when fixtures are flushed or water is drawn from the
system in other ways, it is recommended that water supply piping
that is too small be enlarged whenever possible.
F. Pier and dock hydrants. Backflow protection by a suitable backflow
prevention device shall be provided on each drinking water pierhead
outlet used for supplying vessels at piers or waterfronts. These
assemblies must be located where they will prevent the return of any
water from the vessel into the drinking water pipeline or into another
adjacent vessel. This will prevent such practices as connecting the ship
fire-pumping or sanitary pumping system with a dock hydrant and
thereby pumping contaminated water into the drinking water system
and thence to adjacent vessels or back into the public mains.
G. Marking safe and unsafe waterlines.
(1) Where the premises contains dual or multiple water systems and
piping, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded
or marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water
is safe and which is not safe. All outlets from secondary or other
potentially contaminated systems shall be posted as being
contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets
intended for drinking purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate
that fact.
(2) Water Supervisor. The local Health Department and the water
purveyor shall be kept informed of the identity of the person
responsible for the water piping on all premises concerned with
these regulations. At each premises where it is necessary in the
opinion of the water purveyor, a water supervisor shall be
designated. This water supervisor shall be responsible for the
§ 297-35 AUBURN CODE § 297-35
294:756
§ 297-36. Recourse for noncompliance.
§ 297-37. Contents of application.
All applications must be accompanied by plans, specifications and an
engineer's or architect's report describing the project in detail. The
application must be signed by a New York State registered professional
engineer or architect. The project must first be submitted to the water
supplier, who will forward it to the local public health engineer. This form
must be prepared in quadruplicate with four copies of all plans,
specifications and descriptive literature.
§ 297-38. Examples of cross-connection hazards.
The following is an example list of facilities that are especially likely to have
cross-connection hazards. The list is not intended to be all inclusive.
installation and use of pipelines and equipment and for the
avoidance of cross-connections.
(3) In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water
system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the local health
officer and water purveyor shall be promptly advised by the person
responsible for the water system so that appropriate measures may
be taken to overcome the contamination.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected
as required by state regulations and this article.
B. Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the water
purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this article and
regulations is not installed, tested, and maintained; if any defect is
found in an installed backflow prevention device; if it is found that a
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed; or if
unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, and service will
not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
A. Automotive plants.
B. Auxiliary water systems such as wells.
C. Beverage bottling plants.
D. Breweries.
E. Food processing plants.
F. Chemical plants and plating facilities.
G. Film laboratories.
H. Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues and mortuaries.
§ 297-35 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-38
294:757
I. Irrigation systems.
J. Laundries and dye works.
K. Meat-packing plants.
L. Metal manufacturing, cleaning and fabricating plants.
M. Radioactive materials production or research plants.
N. Restricted, classified or other facilities closed to the public.
O. Sewage.
P. Buildings heated by boilers where treatment chemicals are used.
Q. Building with certain types of air-conditioning systems.
R. Printing operations.
S. Furniture stripping.
T. Lawn care services.
U. Fire hydrants not under the control of the public water supplier.
§ 297-38 AUBURN CODE § 297-38
294:758
ARTICLE V
Penalties and Termination of Service
§ 297-39. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, other than
nonpayment of water bills or charges, shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-18 of this Municipal Code.
§ 297-40. Termination of service for violation or nonpayment.
[Amended 6-7-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007; 8-23-2007 by Ord. No.
18-2007; 5-22-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, except in case of
emergency, temporary interruption necessitated by repairs, extensions or
maintenance operations, shortage of water or similar situations, no service
shall be terminated by the City without complying with the following
procedures:
A. Notice of violation or nonpayment. Upon the determination by the
Water Department that a violation has occurred pursuant to this
chapter or that a bill for services or other changes has become
delinquent for a period of 20 days, the Water Department shall notify in
writing the owner of the affected premises by first-class mail at the last
known address of such person, setting forth specifically that water
service may be terminated if the bill remains unpaid or said violation is
not corrected.
B. In the event that a violation is not corrected or a bill for services
remains delinquent for a period of 40 days, the Water Department shall
notify in writing the owner of the affected premises by first-class mail at
the last known address of such person, setting forth specifically that
water service will be terminated 10 days after said notice is sent. The
occupants of the affected premises shall be notified by the posting of a
written notice at the affected premises. The notice shall also state that
in the event that water services are terminated at the premises, that
said termination will result in an unsanitary condition at the premises,
in violation of Chapter 125 of the Auburn City Code, § 125-47(I),
thereby rendering the premises unfit for habitation.
C. Any violation which remains uncorrected or any bill for services which
remains delinquent for a period of 50 days, pursuant to the notification
set forth in this section, shall result in the termination of water service
by the Water Department.
D. If any water service is terminated for violation of this chapter or for
nonpayment, the owner or occupant causing said termination shall pay
to the City Water Department a termination fee in the amount of $50 to
shut off and $50 to turn on.
§ 297-39 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-40
294:759
§ 297-41. Termination of service for nonpayment by outside users.
E. The notice of termination set forth in this section shall further state that
the owner or occupant of the affected premises shall be entitled to a
due process fair hearing, prior to the termination of service. The owner
or occupant of the premises which will be affected by the termination of
service shall notify the City Manager that they request a fair hearing
prior to the termination of service. Said notification of the City Manager
shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the City Manager within 10
days of the receipt of the notice that the water services will be
terminated. The City Manager shall designate a hearing officer and the
hearing officer's decision shall comply with the provisions of § 32 of the
New York Public Service Law. Said hearing and decision must be
finalized prior to the termination of any water service by the Water
Department. [Added 12-18-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008]
A. Bills delinquent over 30 days. Because the City of Auburn is unable to
collect unpaid water bills for service rendered to users not residents of
the City by adding such unpaid bills to the annual tax bill, the City may
terminate service after a water bill is delinquent for more than 30 days
beyond the final payment date subject to the provisions of § 297-40.
B. Security deposit.
(1) Whenever a water bill for a user outside the City has become
delinquent for more than three months, the City, in addition to any
other remedy, may require a deposit of an amount equal to the
average bills rendered for the entire prior year for two quarters.
(2) Such deposit, without interest, shall be returned to the user upon a
final reading or transfer of title after applying any amount thereof
to any unpaid charges due the City.
(3) Failure to make such deposit within 30 days after notice shall be
grounds for termination of service subject to the provisions of
§ 297-40.
§ 297-40 AUBURN CODE § 297-41
294:760
Chapter 300
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 297-41 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 297-41
294:761

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Wireless Telecommunication Facilities."
§ 300-2. Intent and purpose.
A. The intent of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction and
modification of wireless telecommunication facilities pursuant to the
authority given to the City of Auburn by the Telecommunications Act of
1996. By this chapter, the City of Auburn intends to accommodate the
increasing demand for wireless telecommunication facilities and the
services provided by them, while simultaneously protecting the health,
safety, public welfare, character and environment of the City and its
residents.
B. The City of Auburn hereby adopts a policy with respect to a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express
purpose of achieving the following goals:
(1) Implementing an application process for the person(s) or entities
seeking a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities;
(2) Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is
both fair and consistent;
(3) Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or
co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities among service
providers.
(4) Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement,
height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in
such a manner, including, but not limited to, the use of stealth
technology, to minimize the adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on
the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to,
surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested
location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall
mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is
not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts
and circumstances.
(5) To protect the appearance and property value of residential
neighborhoods, minimize conflict with adjacent uses and the
surrounding areas and to assure the health and safety of the public.
(6) Minimize the total number and height of new towers throughout
the City of Auburn.
§ 300-1 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-2
294:763
§ 300-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to the placement, construction and modification of
existing and new wireless telecommunications facilities and towers within
the City of Auburn.
§ 300-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter requires
otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED — Any facility which has not been operational for six
consecutive months.
ANTENNA — Any device or exterior apparatus mounted on a tower,
building, utility pole, light pole, or other structure designed for telephonic,
radio, data, Internet or television communications to transmit or receive
communications signals or electromagnetic waves for the purpose of
providing cellular services, telecommunications services, personal
communications services, personal wireless services, wireless cable,
commercial paging, data or wireless services and its attendant base station.
APPLICANT — Any individual, corporation, organization, or entity
submitting an application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Auburn.
CITY — The City of Auburn, New York.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a tower or structure to support antennas for
the provision of wireless services without increasing the height of the tower
or structure.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— The inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce,
the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably
anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the
(7) Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement,
design, appearance, construction, monitoring, modification, and
removal of telecommunications facilities and towers.
(8) Locate towers so that they do not have negative impacts, such as,
but not limited to, attractive nuisance, noise, and falling objects.
(9) Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of
time for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate, or
modify telecommunications facilities.
(10) This chapter is not intended to prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall it
be used to unreasonably discriminate among providers of
functionally equivalent services consistent with current federal
regulations.
§ 300-2 AUBURN CODE § 300-4
294:764
project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment
or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be commercially
impracticable and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement
commercially impracticable.
COMMUNICATION TOWER or TOWER — A vertical structure erected to
support antennas, or other transmitting or receiving devices.
Communication towers may include, but not be limited to, monopole, lattice,
and guided towers. Communications towers are generally a component of a
wireless telecommunications facility.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all information
and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made by the
Board with respect to an application.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from
the base of a wireless communication facility. The fall zone is the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured
from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower or
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightning protection
device.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The addition, removal or change or any of
the physically, visually, and auditory discernible components or aspects of
a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling, radios, equipment shelters,
landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any
visually discernible components, vehicular access, parking and/or an
upgrade or change-out of equipment for better or more modern equipment.
Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a communications
tower or telecommunications site is a modification. A modification shall not
include the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the
replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters
that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without
adding, removing or changing anything.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, limited liability company, estate,
trust, partnership, joint-stock company, association of two or more persons
having a joint common interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
§ 300-4 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-4
294:765
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS — Shall have the same meaning
as defined and used in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
RFE — Radio frequency emissions.
SEQRA — The State Environmental Quality Review Act.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT or SUP — The official permit issued by the Board
which allows an applicant to construct and use wireless telecommunications
facilities.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — To minimize the adverse aesthetic
and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities
adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested
location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean
using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not
technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of audio,
video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light and other
electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TEMPORARY — Temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this
chapter, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or WTF or
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE or PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY or
FACILITY — Includes a structure, facility or location designed or intended to
be used as, or used to support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving
devices. This includes, but is not limited to, towers or all types and kinds
and structures that employ camouflage technology, including, but not
limited to, structures such as multistory building, church steeple, silo, water
tower, sign or other structures that can be used to mitigate the visual
impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such, including all
related facilities such as cabling, equipment shelters, and other structures
associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for
transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911,
personal telecommunications services, commercial satellite services,
microwave services, and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly
exempt from the City's siting, building, and permitting authority, excluding
those used exclusively for the City's fire, police or exclusively for private,
noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands,
amateur radio, and other similar noncommercial telecommunications where
the height of the facility is below the height limits set forth in this chapter.
§ 300-5. Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
A. To the extent that the holder of a SUP for a WTF has not received relief
or is otherwise exempt from appropriate state and/or federal agency
§ 300-4 AUBURN CODE § 300-5
294:766
§ 300-6. Conflict of laws.
Where this section differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations,
unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the City, state or
federal government, this chapter shall control.
§ 300-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, sentence, phrase, or portion of this
chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is, for any
reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
§ 300-8. Exclusivity, transfers, and assignments.
Special use permits issued in accordance with this chapter shall not be
exclusive, and shall not be assigned, transferred, or conveyed without the
express written approval from the Board, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
rules or regulations, then the holder of such a SUP shall adhere to, and
comply with all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions
of any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the FAA
and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules,
regulations or standards regarding height, lighting, security, electrical
and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to,
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting and security, are changed and/or
are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunication facilities, then the holder of such a special use
permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective
date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing
entity.
§ 300-5 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-8
294:767

ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 300-9. Special use permit required.
§ 300-10. Application.
A. All newly constructed, relocated, rebuilt, or extended communication
towers and facilities shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. No
person shall site, construct, maintain or use a communication tower,
antenna, or related facilities without complying with the provisions of
this article.
B. The Board is the officially designated agency of the City to whom
applications for a SUP for WTF shall be made and, as such, is
authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect
to the granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying, or
revoking SUP for WTF.
C. In addition to the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter,
the Board shall also review the SUP for WTF in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the review of special permits in § 305-13. The
standards for said review shall be in accordance with this chapter.
A. Parties. An application for a SUP for WTF shall be signed on behalf of
the applicant by the person preparing the same with knowledge of the
contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth
and completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than
the applicant, shall also sign the application and shall agree to remove
any existing violations and make all existing telecommunications
facilities compliant, in terms of safety issues, with all applicable local,
state and federal telecommunications codes prior to issuance of any
SUP for a new facility.
B. Contents. All applications for the construction or installation of new
WTF shall contain and include the following information:
(1) Documentation that demonstrates the need for the WTF to provide
service primarily and essentially within the City, with service to
adjacent municipalities to not exceed 50% of the total area to be
covered by the proposed facility. Such documentation shall include
propagation studies and maps of the proposed site and all other
planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites in the City, and in all
contiguous municipalities. If the applicant is addressing a capacity
issue, documentation must be submitted to include, but not to be
limited to the following: usage and forecasted or present blockage;
call volume, drive-test data and results, including the date of the
test, locations of the tests, and signal strength results; and any
other technical pertinent information;
§ 300-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-10
294:769
(2) The name, address, e-mail, and phone number of the person
preparing the report;
(3) The name, address, e-mail, and phone number of the property
owner, operator, and applicant, and to include the legal form of the
applicant;
(4) The address and tax map parcel number of the proposed site;
(5) The zoning district in which the site is situated;
(6) Size of the property, stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines;
(7) The distance to the nearest residential property;
(8) The location, size, and height of all structures on the proposed site;
(9) The location and design of all site improvements and modifications
including, but not limited to, access road(s), screening and
landscaping, fencing, lighting, and signage;
(10) The location, size, and height of all proposed and existing antennas
and all appurtenant structures;
(11) The type, locations, and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping and fencing for a new tower;
(12) The number, type, and design of the proposed new tower and
antenna and the basis for the calculations of the tower's capacity to
accommodate multiple users;
(13) A description of the tower and antenna(s) and all related
structures, fixtures, appurtenances, and apparatus, including
height above preexisting grade, materials, color, and lighting;
(14) Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are within
the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
(15) Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications facilities;
(16) Copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the WTF;
(17) Certification that the site is adequate to assure the stability of the
tower on the proposed site;
(18) Statement in writing that the applicant's proposed WTF shall be
maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions
of the SUP, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by
the Board in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local
codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable
City, state and federal laws, rules and regulations;
§ 300-10 AUBURN CODE § 300-10
294:770
(19)Written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or
organization, indicating if the WTF requires lighting under the FAA
rules and regulations;
(20) Analysis and certification detailing the fall zone of the proposed
communication tower;
(21) Analysis and certification indicating that the WTF complies with
the noise standard for WTF;
(22)Written report demonstrating the applicant's meaningful efforts to
secure shared use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative
sites, buildings or other structures within the City. Copies of
written requests and responses showing said efforts shall be
provided to the Board in the application, along with any letters of
rejection stating the reason for rejection;
(23) Any other documentation required by the Board and/or its expert
necessary to review the application;
(24) Where a certification is required herein, such certification shall
bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in
the state
(25) As appropriate, the information above shall be shown on a site plan
and drawing prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state.
C. SEQRA. An applicant shall be required to submit, together with its
application, a long-form environmental assessment form in compliance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act.
D. Visual impact. The application shall include a visual impact assessment
setting forth:
(1) A zone of visibility map, which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the tower may be seen;
(2) Balloon study showing pictorial representations of before and after
views from key viewpoints both inside and outside of the City, as
may be appropriate, including, but not limited to state highways
and other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands;
and designated historic sites and districts.
(3) A demonstration that the WTF be sited so as to be the least visually
intrusive as is reasonably possible and thereby have the least
adverse visual effect on the environment and its character.
(4) A showing of the use of materials, colors and textures to be affixed
to the WTF and tower so as to minimize its visual impact, which
shall include utilization of stealth technology as may be required by
the Board.
§ 300-10 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-10
294:771
E. False, misleading or incomplete information. The Board may, at their
discretion, deny any application without further consideration upon a
finding that the information provided in the application is false,
misleading or incomplete.
F. Fees.
(1) Upon an application for a SUP for a new WTF or to increase the
height of a tower or structure, a nonrefundable fee in the amount of
$5,000 shall be paid to the City.
(2) Upon an application for a SUP seeking co-location on an existing
tower or other suitable existing building, where no increase in
height of the tower or structure is required, a nonrefundable fee in
the amount $2,500 shall be paid to the City.
§ 300-10 AUBURN CODE § 300-10
294:772
ARTICLE III
Standard of Review
§ 300-11. Standards.
The following standards of review apply to all WTF regulated by this
chapter:
A. Co-location. Communication towers shall be designed to provide for colocation
by additional providers or designed so that they can be
retrofitted to accommodate additional providers.
B. Height. The maximum height of a new tower shall be the minimum
height necessary to provide service to locations within the City, as
justified by submitted documentation, but in no case shall the height
exceed 150 feet above average grade level.
C. Equipment. All equipment at ground level shall be enclosed within an
appropriate equipment shelter.
D. Equipment shelter. The equipment shelter shall be designed, sited and
screened to minimize its visibility from surrounding public streets or
neighborhoods, using suitable materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping and, to the fullest extent possible, shall be harmonious
with the character of the district in which it is located.
E. Security. All communication towers and guy wires and anchors, if
applicable shall be enclosed by a fence of not less than eight feet in
height or otherwise sufficiently protected from trespassing or
vandalism.
F. Visibility. Communication towers shall be designed and finished to
reduce visual obtrusiveness, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Communication towers shall employ
stealth technology to the full extent possible as may be required by the
Board.
G. Visibility, historic resource. Where communication towers would be
visible from a designated historic site or designated historic district,
stealth technology shall be implemented.
H. Lighting. Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen shall, to the fullest
extent possible, cause the least disturbance to the surrounding areas.
I. Noise. Noise produced from the WTF shall not exceed 60 dB(A) as
measured at the property line.
J. Signage. For each service provider, the WTF shall contain a sign, no
larger than four square feet, notifying persons of the presence of an
antenna that has transmission capabilities and shall contain the
name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as
§ 300-11 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-11
294:773
emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be visible from the access
point of the WTF. No other signage shall be permitted.
K. Setback, communication tower. The minimum setback for
communication towers shall be equal to the fall zone of the tower, but in
no case shall the minimum setback be less than 500 feet from any
property line of any public park, playground, preschool, elementary
school, secondary school, designated historic site, or designated
historic district.
L. Setback, equipment shelter. The minimum setback for equipment
shelters shall comply with all existing setback requirements within any
zoning district.
M. Access road. An access road shall be provided to assure adequate
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether
public or private shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the
cutting of vegetation.
N. Existing towers, buildings or structures. Communication towers and
antennas that are proposed to be mounted or attached on existing
communication towers, buildings or structures shall be designed so as
to make the equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible and, to the
full extent possible, shall be harmonious with the architectural fabric of
the supporting structure and the surrounding area.
O. Building-mounted antennas. Building-mounted antennas should be
located and designed to be an integral part of the building and shall be
secured or camouflaged, as necessary or as required by the Board, to
minimize visual intrusion to surrounding properties.
§ 300-11 AUBURN CODE § 300-11
294:774
ARTICLE IV
Preferred Locations
§ 300-12. Priority.
A. Applicants for WTF shall locate, site, and erect said WTF in accordance
with the following priorities, provided that the setbacks set forth herein
are met, Subsection A(1) being the highest priority, and Subsection A(5)
being the lowest priority.
(1) On existing towers and existing buildings in industrially and
commercially zoned districts without increasing the height of the
tower or building;
(2) On existing towers and existing buildings in mixed-use and
residentially zoned districts in that order of sub-priority, without
increasing the height of the tower or building;
(3) On new towers in industrially and commercially zoned districts
where the new tower can be sited in such a way as to be set back at
least 500 feet from the nearest property line of any public park,
playground, preschool, elementary school, secondary school,
designated historic site, designated historic district, or
residentially zoned lot used for residential purposes where visual
mitigation or stealth will be provided;
(4) On new towers on country clubs, cemeteries, public utility sites,
government-owned properties, or vacant property under single
ownership where such sites are at least four acres in area, where
the new tower can be sited in such a way as to be set back at least
500 feet from the nearest property line of any public park,
playground, preschool, elementary school, secondary school,
designated historic site, designated historic district, or
residentially zoned lot used for residential purposes where visual
mitigation or stealth will be provided;
(5) On new towers in industrially and commercially zoned districts
where the new tower can be sited in such a way as to be set back at
least 250 feet, but less than 500 feet, from the nearest property line
of any public park, playground, preschool, elementary school,
secondary school, designated historic site, designated historic
district, or residentially zoned lot used for residential purposes
where visual mitigation or stealth will be provided.
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed in
Subsection A herein, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to
why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The applicant seeking
such an exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or
reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site and
the hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were
not granted for the proposed site.
§ 300-12 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-12
294:775
§ 300-13. Shared use.
C. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating that the
site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An applicant shall
address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, then
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board why
co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements
between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a
valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship.
D. Notwithstanding the above, the Board may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the Board
finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety,
and welfare of the City and its inhabitants and will not have a
deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and
neighborhood.
E. The applicant, as part of the application, shall submit a written report
demonstrating the applicant's review of the above locations in order of
priority and demonstrating the technological reason for the site
selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a
detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not
selected shall be included.
F. Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the Board may disapprove
an application for any of the following reasons:
(1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
(2) Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or
historical district;
(3) The use or construction of WTF which is contrary to an already
stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation;
(4) The placement and location of WTF which would create an
unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to
residents, the public, employees and agents of the City, or
employees of the service provider or other service providers;
(5) Conflicts with the provisions of this chapter.
G. If a site is proposed for other than one of the locations on the list
provided in Subsection A herein, in their respective order, then the
applicant must demonstrate by competent evidence to the satisfaction
of the Board that the preferred locations on such list within the service
range established by the Board were thoroughly investigated and that
such locations are not feasible and cannot provide the applicant
adequate coverage.
§ 300-12 AUBURN CODE § 300-13
294:776
A. Locating on existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height shall be preferred by the Board, as opposed to the construction
of a new tower. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report
inventorying existing towers and other suitable structures within 1,800
feet of the location of any proposed new tower.
B. An application showing the intent to locate a WTF on an existing tower
or other suitable structure shall document the intent of the existing
owner to permit its use by the applicant.
C. Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially
within the City, to the extent practicable.
§ 300-13 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-13
294:777

ARTICLE V
Consultants
§ 300-14. Expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant.
A. The Board and City may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to
assist the Board and City in reviewing and evaluating the application,
including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted,
and any requests for recertification.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse
the Board and the City for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert
evaluation and consultation to the Board and the City in connection
with the review of any application and recertification, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial
deposit shall be determined by the City, but not to exceed $5,000. If at
any time during the process the balance of funds deposited with the
City is less than $1,000, the applicant shall immediately, upon
notification by the City, replenish the account. Any remaining balance
shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
C. The total deposit needed and required as set forth herein may vary with
the scope and complexity of the proposed project, the completeness of
the application or certification and other information as may be needed
to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any
construction or modification.
§ 300-14 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-14
294:779

ARTICLE VI
Inspections and Certifications
§ 300-15. Inspections.
§ 300-16. Annual certifications.
A. In order to verify that the holder of a SUP for WTF and any and all
lessees, renters, and/or licensees of WTF place and construct such
facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all
applicable, technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws,
ordinances, and regulations, and other applicable requirements, the
City may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's, or
licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of
such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas, and
buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted
site.
B. The City shall give the holder of SUP for WTF and any and all lessees,
renters and/or licensees of WTF, reasonable notice of said inspection.
A. The holder of a SUP under this chapter shall annually submit
certification of a professional engineer certifying to the City with
identified protocol that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold
levels adopted by the FCC.
B. The holder of a SUP shall annually submit certification of a professional
engineer certifying to the City with identified protocol that its WTF
meets City, state, and federal standards, including, but not limited to all
the requirements of this chapter and the SUP.
§ 300-15 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-16
294:781

ARTICLE VII
Insurance and Indemnification
§ 300-17. Liability insurance.
§ 300-18. Defense and indemnification.
Any application for WTF that is proposed for City property, pursuant to
this chapter, shall contain a provision with respect to defense and
indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent
permitted by the law, to at all times, defend, indemnify, protect, save,
hold harmless, and exempt the City, and its officers, boards, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all
penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits,
demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or
punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which
might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, products, performance, use, operation, maintenance,
repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility,
excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of
action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or
intentional acts or omissions of the City, or its servants or agents. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable
attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in
those costs that are recoverable by the City.
A. A holder of a SUP for WTF shall secure and at all times maintain public
liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage,
and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the SUP in the
amounts set forth below.
(1) Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death, and
property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(2) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate; and
(3) Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
B. The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the City and its officers, boards, employees, committee
members, attorneys, agents, and consultants as additional named
insureds.
C. Before construction of a WTF is initiated, the holder of the SUP shall
deliver to the City a copy of each of the policies or certificates
representing the insurance in the required amounts.
§ 300-17 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-18
294:783

ARTICLE VIII
Violations
§ 300-19. Notice of violations.
§ 300-20. Notice of revocation and termination.
In the event that the holder of a SUP fails to comply with this chapter or
correct existing violations within the time periods stated in this chapter,
then the City may revoke, cancel or terminate the SUP and shall notify the
holder of the SUP within 48 hours of such action.
§ 300-21. Fines; penalties for offenses.
In the event of a violation of this chapter or any SUP, the City may impose
and collect, and the holder of the SUP for the WTF shall pay to the City, the
fines or penalties as set forth below:
A. If WTF are constructed, placed, modified, repaired, rebuilt, moved,
relocated, or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the SUP, then the City
shall notify the holder of the SUP in writing of said violation. Such
notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the fines and penalties
associated with the violation, and that the violations must be corrected
within seven days of the postmark of the notice, or the date of personal
service of the notice, whichever is earlier.
B. In the event that a violation of the provisions of this chapter of the SUP
causes, creates, or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health
and safety of lives or property, then the City may, at its sole discretion,
order the violation remedied within 24 hours.
A. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 per day per occurrence. Each day's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The holder of a SUP may not use the payment of fines, liquidated
damages or other penalties as a means of evading or avoiding
compliance with this chapter. In the event that violations are charged
against the holder of the SUP and remain uncorrected, then the City
may terminate and revoke the SUP. The City may further seek injunctive
relief to prevent continued violations, without limiting other remedies
available to it.
§ 300-19 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-21
294:785

ARTICLE IX
Removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
§ 300-22. Removal.
The applicant, holder of SUP, and/or successors and assigns shall agree to
remove the WTF if it becomes technically obsolete, ceases to be used for its
intended purpose for six consecutive months, or the condition of such poses
a safety issue as determined by the City. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall require the applicant to provide a demolition bond, in a form approved
by the Corporation Counsel, in an amount of at least the cost of removing
the tower or antenna. The cost of the removal shall be certified by a New-
York-State-licensed professional engineer. In no event shall the amount of
the bond be less than the cost of removal in the event that the applicant
fails to remove the communications tower or antenna. The sufficiency of the
bond shall be confirmed at least every five years by an analysis conducted
by a New-York-State-licensed professional engineer. If the bond amount in
force is insufficient to cover the cost of demolition and removal, it shall be
immediately increased to cover such amount.
§ 300-22 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-22
294:787

ARTICLE X
Relief
§ 300-23. Relief; waivers; exemptions.
Any applicant desiring relief, waiver, or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of this chapter may request such from the Board, provided
that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application for
either a SUP or in the case of an existing or previously granted permit, a
request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be
temporary or permanent, partial or complete. The burden of proving the
need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant
to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs of the Board and the City in
considering the request and the relief, waiver, or exemption. No such relief
or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear
and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver, or exemption
will have no significant effect on the health, safety, and welfare of the City,
its residents, and other service providers.
§ 300-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-23
294:789

ARTICLE XI
Building Permit
§ 300-24. Building permit required.
A building permit shall be required prior to the construction or modification
of all wireless telecommunications facilities. Fee to be in accordance with
the City fee schedule.74
74.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-24 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-24
294:791

ARTICLE XII
Effective Date
§ 300-25. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately. This chapter shall have no
retroactive effect and no effect on wireless telecommunications facilities
that have received approval from the Board for construction prior to the
effective date.
§ 300-25 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 300-25
294:793
Chapter 305
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 125.
Business improvement districts — See Ch.
129.
Fees — See Ch. 164.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 169.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 178.
Planning and subdivision — See Ch. 225.
§ 300-25 AUBURN CODE § 300-25
294:794
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 305-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Auburn Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 305-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan which is
designed to promote public health, safety and welfare, and to accomplish
such purposes this chapter is enacted to implement:
§ 305-3. Applicability and scope.
A. Building regulations. These regulations limit the height, bulk and
location of buildings hereafter erected, standardize the area of yards,
courts and other open spaces, and determine the density of population
in any given area and for said purposes to divide the City into districts.
Such regulations shall be uniform for each class of buildings throughout
any district, but the regulations in one or more districts may differ from
those in other districts. Such regulations shall be designed to secure
safety from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote the public
health and welfare, including, so far as conditions may permit,
provision for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and the
accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment and access to
sunlight necessary therefor, and shall be made with reasonable regard
to the character of buildings erected in each district, the value of land
and the use to which it may be put, to the end that such regulations may
promote public health, safety and welfare and the most desirable use
for which the land of each district may be adapted and may tend to
conserve the value of buildings and enhance the value of land
throughout the City.
B. Land use regulations. These regulations restrict the location of trades
and industries and the location of buildings designed for specified uses
and for said purposes to divide the City into districts and to prescribe
for each such district the trades and industries that shall be excluded or
subjected to special regulation and the uses for which buildings may
not be erected or altered. Such regulations shall be designed to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and shall be
made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the
character of the district, its suitability for particular uses, the
conservation of property values and the direction of building
development, in accord with a well-considered plan.
A. Territorial applicability. This chapter shall apply to all lands, structures,
and uses within the corporate limits of the City of Auburn.
§ 305-1 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-3
294:795
§ 305-4. Misrepresentations.
Any permit or approval granted under this chapter based upon or granted in
reliance upon any material misrepresentation, or failure to make a material
fact or circumstance known, by or on behalf of an applicant, shall be void.
This section shall not be construed to affect all the other remedies available
to the City under this chapter.
§ 305-5. Complaints of violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints shall
be filed with the Planning Department. The Planning Department shall
investigate such complaints and report the results of the investigation and
any prosecution of violations to the City Council.
B. General applicability. All buildings and structures hereafter erected or
placed, and all uses of land or buildings or structures hereafter
established, all structural alterations or relocations of existing
buildings or structures and all enlargements or relocations of existing
uses shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. Existing
buildings, structures, and uses which do not comply with the
regulations of this chapter shall be allowed to continue subject to the
provisions of this chapter relating to nonconformities.
C. General prohibition. No building or structure, no use of any building,
structure or land, and no lot now or hereafter existing shall hereafter be
established, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner
except as authorized by the provisions of this chapter.
D. Exceptions. Routine maintenance of existing structures and the
following essential utility uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains,
valves or any other similar equipment, but not including substations
located on or above the surface of the ground, for the distribution to
consumers of telephone, cable television or other communications,
electricity, gas or water or for the collection of sewage or surface water.
E. Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul or
otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private
agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the
regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose a higher
standard than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements
or legal relationships, the regulations of this chapter shall govern.
F. Conflict with other standards. Should any standard herein established
conflict with a similar standard herein, or a similar standard established
by another governmental agency, then the more restrictive standard
shall apply.
§ 305-3 AUBURN CODE § 305-6
294:796
§ 305-6. Repealer.
Chapter 305 of the Code of the City of Auburn as adopted on December
30, 1992, and as amended thereafter prior to the adoption of this
comprehensive revision be and it is hereby repealed in its entirety.
§ 305-7. Severability.
The several provisions of this chapter shall be separate, and if any court
of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter.
Furthermore, if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property.
§ 305-6 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-7
294:797

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 305-8. Applicability.
§ 305-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — The lawful use of any structure or land having ceased for a
period of 12 consecutive months or longer shall be termed abandoned.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit that is permitted with
limitations in conjunction with a principal permitted use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal structure on the property and is physically
detached from the principal building, including play structures, garages,
sheds, etc.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use on the property.
ADULT USE BUSINESSES — Any establishment or business involved in the
dissemination of material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to adult bookstores,
adult motion-picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets and adult minimotion-
picture theaters. Furthermore, for purposes of this chapter, an adult
massage parlor, private modeling establishment and steam bath
establishment shall be considered to be an "adult use business" covered by
this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING PLANT — A building, facility, area, open
or enclosed, or any location for the refinement, treatment, or conversion
of agricultural products where physical, chemical, or similar change of an
agricultural product occurs. Examples of agricultural processing include
but are not limited to packing houses, cold storage houses, fruit
dehydrators, hulling operations, and the sorting, cleaning, packing and
A. Interpretation. When interpreting this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply:
(1) Words defined by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as enforced by the City of Auburn by the authority of
Chapter 125 of the Municipal Code, shall have the same meaning
and interpretation when used in this chapter.
(2) Words not defined within the text of this chapter or the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be assumed
to have a meaning of standard usage.
(3) Words defined below.
§ 305-8 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:799
storing of agricultural products preparatory to sale and/or shipment in their
natural form, including all uses customarily incidental thereto. Agricultural
processing shall not include wineries or commercial manufacturing of
secondary products using agricultural products, such as kitchens, bakeries,
breweries, woodworking and wood processing plants, or biofuel processing.
AGRICULTURE — The use of land, buildings, structures, equipment,
manure processing and handling facilities, and farming practices which
contribute to the production, preparation and marketing of crops, livestock
and livestock products as a commercial enterprise or a hobby, and including
commercial horse boarding operations as defined in the Agriculture and
Markets Law (AML) Article 25-AA, § 301. This includes, but is not limited to
the following: orchards and vineyards, vegetable crops, hops, greenhouse/
nursery production of horticultural and floriculture crops, greenhouse
vegetable production, harvested agronomic crops (corn, soybeans, small
grains), hay and pasture, livestock and poultry raised for food and fiber,
and animals raised for recreation or sale (e.g., horses, alpaca/llama),
beekeeping, aquaculture (fish production), silviculture (timber, firewood),
agroforestry (forest farming) including maple, energy production including
energy from manure or biomass crops.
ALLEY — A narrow service street or passage less than 22 feet between
properties or buildings.
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to or any relocation
of a building or structure; any modification in construction or equipment.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility providing animal medical care and
crematorium services, run by a licensed Doctor of Veterinary Medicine
(DVM). Animal hospitals may allow overnight animal patients, but are not
boarding facilities.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency waves. Such waves shall include but not be limited to radio
navigation, radio, television and microwave communication. The frequency
of these waves generally range from 10 hertz to 300,000 megahertz.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A purposefully designed and built structure
containing two or more dwelling units. Such structure may be the result of
adaptive reuse and complete rehabilitation of a nonresidential building.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — More than one apartment building designed
or used solely for residential purposes, detached from one another and
grouped together on a single parcel.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Those ways used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic generally having a right-of-way width of 66 to 120 feet.
ARTIST STUDIO — A place where artists, artisans, craftsmen and skilled
tradespeople produce custom-made art or craft products, where they teach
such skills, and/or where they sell such art or products.
AUTO WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of used motor
vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:800
AUTO WRECKING YARD — A facility including buildings and land area
where auto wrecking occurs.
AWNING — A roof-like protective cover over a door, entrance, window
or sidewalk dining area that projects from the face of a structure and is
constructed of durable materials, including but not limited to fabrics and/or
plastics.
BAKERY, COMMERCIAL/WHOLESALE — An establishment engaged in the
preparation and production of baked goods for transport and sale off site.
The limited retail sale of baked goods may occur as an incidental or
accessory use.
BAKERY, RETAIL — A commercial establishment engaged in the
preparation and production of baked goods for direct sale to the general
public.
BAR — An establishment primarily engaged in the sale and service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption during any period of the
day as permitted by law. Such an establishment is subject to the regulatory
authority of the New York State Liquor Authority. The incidental sale or
provision of food or snacks shall not entitle such as a use to be considered a
restaurant under other provision of this chapter.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An accessory use of an owner-occupied dwelling
used for providing overnight accommodations and a morning meal to not
more than 10 transient lodgers, and containing not more than five bedrooms
for such lodgers.
BERM — An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views and/or decrease noise.
BREW PUB — A brew pub allows for the brewing of beer on-premises,
as well as on-premises sale of liquor, wine, and beer. A brew pub license
holder must have a bonafide restaurant, and may have up to five separate
locations. In accordance with New York State's Alcoholic Beverage Control
(ABC) Law, brew pub license holders may produce up to 5,000 barrels of
beer per location per year, not to exceed an annual total of 20,000 barrels
across all locations. (Barrel: 31 US gallons.)
BREWERY — A commercial establishment for the manufacturing of malt
liquors, such as beer and ale. When located on a single site, this definition
shall include all activities associated with the preparation of raw materials,
the manufacture of product, and its packaging and distribution.
BUFFER — A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such
as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and
screen incompatible land uses from each other and/or to protect wildlife
habitats, wetlands, stream corridors and other significant environmental
features.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The maximum ratio obtained by dividing the
ground floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot by the
total area of the lot upon which the buildings are located (including covered
porches, carports and breezeways but excluding open patios).
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:801
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation
of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the average
height of the highest roof surface.
BUILDING PERMIT — A building permit issued by the City based upon
plans that comply with all applicable codes, statutes, laws, rules,
regulations and necessary approvals.
BUILDING SITE — That portion of the lot or parcel of land upon which
a building and appurtenances are to be placed or are already existing,
including adequate areas for yards, setbacks, sewage disposal, clearances,
proper drainage, appropriate easements, and, if applicable, the
requirements of other chapters of the Code of the City of Auburn.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building, and located on the
same lot as the principal building. Refer to "accessory structure."
BUILDING, MIXED-USE — Refer to "mixed-use building."
BUILDING, OFFICE — Refer to "office."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main use of
the lot on which said building is located.
CANOPY — A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of deceased
human beings and dedicated for such purpose, including crematories,
mausoleums or mortuaries when operated within its boundaries.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — An approval of any plans for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of an historic structure of
site within an historic district.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — Official certification from the Code
Enforcement Officer acknowledging an acceptable use of land or structure
in accordance with this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a premises
conforms to the provision of the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, and
other applicable regulations, and may be used or occupied.
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN — An establishment where space is leased or
otherwise shared by individuals for short periods of time to process,
typically only in small quantities and only periodically, the food that they
grow or produce, primarily for purposes of selling or distributing off-site.
The facility shall satisfy the requirements of the Cayuga County Health
Department for the preparation of food that will be sold or distributed to the
public.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE or COMMERCIAL SPEECH — Any wording, logo
or other visual representation that draws the public's attention to a
particular product to promote the product's advertisement and/or sale. For
the purpose of this chapter, the presence of an economic motivation by the
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:802
speaker shall be nondeterminative evidence that the expression constitutes
commercial speech.
CONFERENCE/CONVENTION CENTER — A large building designed to
accommodate the gathering of individuals and groups to promote and share
a common interest. These uses typically offer sufficient floor area to
accommodate several hundred or thousands of attendees, and may offer
separate spaces such as concert halls, lecture halls, meeting and conference
rooms.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An enclosed parcel of land, structure(s) or a
combination thereof used for the storage of machinery, equipment and
nonhazardous materials required for construction.
CONVERSION — A change in residential occupancy of a residential
building, generally by alteration or by other reorganization as to increase
the number of families or dwelling units in a structure.
CULTURAL USE FACILITY/MUSEUM — Any building, room or area
designed or utilized primarily for the presentation to the general public
of cinema, lectures, exhibits of various art forms or exhibits of cultural,
historic, academic or scientific material.
CURB CUT — A point of ingress or egress that links a parcel of land with a
public way, and is an improved pavement with defined limits pursuant to the
design requirements of the entity claiming jurisdiction of said public way.
DAY-CARE CENTER/DAY-CARE FACILITY — A place other than an occupied
residence providing or designed to provide day care for five or more persons
on a regularly scheduled basis for more than three but less than 24 hours
per day. Also see § 390, 1(c) of the Social Services Law of the State of New
York.
DAY-CARE, FAMILY HOME — An occupied family residence providing day
care for three to six children for more than three hours per day. See § 390
of the Social Services Law of the State of New York.
DEAD-END STREET — A street or portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet.
DECK — A constructed platform other than a patio or terrace that may
be attached to a building and/or ground and is located in the side or rear
yard. A deck does not have a roof and is not enclosed. Decks are considered
a structure and shall conform to required lot setback and coverage
requirements, and conform to the New York State Building Code and the
New York State Residential Code.
DEED OR TRACT RESTRICTIONS — Legal language recorded in an
instrument in the chain of title for a lot, which describes specifically
limitations or restrictions on the use of the property.
DEMOLITION — The act or process of wrecking, completely destroying or
removing an existing structure, or portion thereof, from a site.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:803
DENSITY — The required land area for each dwelling unit (DU) within a
given parcel of land, such as a minimum density of square feet of land area
for each dwelling unit.
DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT — The number of dwelling units per acre.
DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE — The Design Review Committee is
responsible for reviewing site plans for completeness, code compliance,
issues of public health, safety and welfare, and for developing
recommendations regarding the project proposal. The Design Review
Committee shall be comprised of representatives from City departments
including Code Enforcement, Corporation Council, Engineering, Fire,
Planning and Economic Development, Municipal Utilities and Police.
DESIGN STANDARDS — The compulsory standards as prescribed within
this chapter pertaining to the design and implementation of building and
property development within the City of Auburn.
DISTILLERY — A facility for the distillation of grains and fruits into alcohol.
This includes the manufacturing, bottling, and sale to a wholesaler. The onsite
sale of products is permitted.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — A building or structure used primarily for the
storage and sale of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to
retail or other commercial outlets.
DOG KENNEL — Refer to "kennel."
DORMITORY — A building used to provide living quarters to persons for
monetary or other consideration in a manner similar to a hotel, but, unlike
the occupants of a hotel, the majority of persons residing therein are not
transients. A dormitory shall have a resident manager.
DRIVE AISLE — The primary access route connecting access drives and
individual parking spaces. Access lanes are a component of internal site
circulation owned and maintained by private interests and are not a public
right-of-way.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An accessory use, typically associated with a bank
or restaurant, that is designed so that customers can be served while
remaining in their cars.
DRIVEWAY, RESIDENTIAL — A driveway is a private roadway providing
access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
See Article IV, 305-32, Driveway, Residential.
DRIVEWAY, SHARED — An area or areas on one or more private residential
properties providing access from a public or private road where the usage
of said access route is provided to three or fewer lots through an easement
agreement. Shared or common driveway access for greater than three
residential lots is defined as a road.
DRY-CLEANING FACILITY — An establishment used to clean articles or
goods of fabric to be subjected to the process of dry cleaning, dyeing or
stain removal. A dry-cleaning facility includes the cleaning of fabric on site
using the dry-cleaning process.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:804
DRY-CLEANING OUTLET — An establishment used to collect and distribute
articles or goods of fabric to be subjected to the process of dry cleaning,
dyeing or stain removal, at an off-site dry-cleaning facility location.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation, or intended to be so used, and includes any
appurtenances belonging thereto.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation by one family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY, FIVE OR MORE UNITS — A building or
portion thereof containing five dwelling units and designed or used for
occupancy by five families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY, THREE TO FOUR UNITS — A building or
portion thereof containing three to four dwelling units and designed or used
for occupancy by three to four families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling unit designed for or occupied
exclusively by one or more persons living as a single, nonprofit
housekeeping unit. The dwelling can consist of a modular home, or a
lumber-constructed home on a permanent foundation, cellar or basement.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — Two single-family
dwelling units attached side to side, each situated on a separate subdivision
lot, sharing a party wall and capable of individual sale and sharing common
walls with the other.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A structure containing at least three attached
single-family dwellings. Each dwelling shares a common sidewall, and no
dwelling unit is entirely or partially above another. Each unit has its own
external street-facing entrance.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling designed for and occupied by not
more than two families in separate dwelling units, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground
to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to
exterior wall.
EASEMENT — The authorization by property owner for use by another,
for a specified purpose, of any designated part of such property by legally
recorded instrument.
EQUIPMENT SALES, REPAIR OR RENTALS — The sale, repair and rental of
supplies and equipment primarily intended for homeowner use and minor
residential gardening and construction projects (e.g., lawnmowers, snow
blowers, medium-duty construction equipment such as rubber-tired
backhoes, smaller dozers, and aerial lifts), including the sale, installation
and servicing of related equipment and parts. This use classification does
not include the rental, storage or maintenance of large construction
equipment, which is included in the broader use classifications of vehicle
and equipment sales, repair and rentals.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:805
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year
round.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
FARM PRODUCT, VALUE-ADDED — Any product processed by a producer
from a farm product, such as baked goods, jams, and jellies.
FARM PRODUCTS — Products that include fruits, vegetables, mushrooms,
herbs, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products, flowers, nursery
stock, livestock food products (including meat, milk, cheese and other dairy
products), and fish. "Farm product" shall not include live animals.
FARMER'S MARKET, PERMANENT — A market at a fixed location and
structure open to the public at which:
FARMER'S MARKET, TEMPORARY — Primarily outdoors at a temporary
location, a recurring event on designated days and times consisting
primarily of agricultural producers, at which:
FENCE — A structure bounding an area of land designed to either limit
access to the area or to screen such area from view, or both. The term
"fence" shall not include tennis court enclosures, backstops, and similar
structures.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision
or other entity, or for decorative purposes.
FLEA MARKET — A building, portion of a building, or open-air market area
where individual market stalls or spaces are provided (rented or leased) for
persons on a daily or other basis, to display, buy, sell, exchange, or deal in
new or used goods, inside the building or in a designated open-air market
area. A flea market shall not include such activities when conducted by
a church, school or other similar public service organization, nor shall it
include an antique store, junk store, auction house or other similar business
established on a permanent basis, nor shall it include garage sales, yard
sales, rummage sales or occasional craft fairs and benefit sales.
At least 75% of the products sold are farm products, value-added farm
products or hand-made goods and products; and
A.
At least 75% of the vendors regularly participating during the market's
hours of operation are producers, or family members or employees of
producers.
B.
At least 75% of the products sold are farm products, value-added farm
products, or hand-made goods and products; and
A.
At least 75% of the vendors regularly participating during the market's
hours of operation are producers, or family members or employees of
producers.
B.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:806
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, measured from the interior face of exterior walls or interior
face of common walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio between total floor areas permitted in any
district and the total site area. The floor area of the building considered
for the computation of floor area ratio shall be restricted to those levels
above the surface of the ground and shall not include any basement or
garage spaces under the surface. Garage facilities above the surface shall
be included in the computations. Where the ground level changes a full
story height or more along a building facade, the floor area of such story
shall be prorated in proportion to the average story height above grade.
Total site area shall be the entire site within the property lines of any
development.
FOOD CART — An unpowered vehicle which can be pushed or pulled down
a sidewalk, street or highway, on which food is prepared, processed or
converted, or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate
consumer. This definition shall include push carts.
FOOD TRUCK — A motorized vehicle, registered and able to be operated on
the public streets of New York State, in which ready-to-eat food is cooked,
wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for sale or distribution. Food
trucks shall not exceed 28 feet in length. This definition shall not include
vehicles engaged solely in the sale of ice cream and frozen novelties.
FRONTAGE — That side of the lot nearest the street. A corner lot shall be
considered to have two such frontages.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith
before burial or cremation.
GARAGE SALE — The sale of personal property conducted in or near a
residence, under cover or partially under cover or completely outside of any
building, in the open. The term shall include garage sales, lawn sales, porch
sales, patio sales, rummage sales or other similar sales which are advertised
by a sign or other means, for the public to attend.
GARAGE, DETACHED RESIDENTIAL — A building or indoor space in which
to park or keep a motor vehicle which is disconnected from the primary
structure and surrounded completely or partially by open space. Refer to
"accessory structure."
GARDEN CENTER — Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in retail sales from the premises to the general public including
trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, plants and plant materials. Such
establishments typically sell products purchased from others, but may sell
material which they grow themselves.
GLARE — The illumination at all points one foot distant from a uniform point
source of one candle power. (Footcandle: a unit of illumination.)
GRADE, ESTABLISHED STREET — The permanently established elevation
of the center line of a street in front of the midpoint of the lot.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:807
GRADE, FINISHED — The elevation at which the finished surface of the
surrounding lot intersects the walls and supports of a structure.
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — Establishments that raise nursery stock
for sale to garden centers, retail nurseries or other businesses.
GREENHOUSE, PERSONAL — An accessory structure, primarily of glass,
in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or
protection of plants, fruits or vegetables which is accessory to the main use
of the property. Personal greenhouses are considered an accessory use and
not to exceed 100 square feet in area.
GREENSPACE — Any permeable vegetated surface.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The gross size of the total floor area of the
outside dimensions of a building. These dimensions shall include the length,
width and number of stories of the facility.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) — The gross size of the floor area of a
commercial/retail facility which is leased.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — Floor area in a habitable space shall have a
clear floor to ceiling height of not less than 7 1/2 feet over an area having no
horizontal dimension of less than seven feet, except that, in one- and twofamily
dwellings having sloping roofs, the minimum ceiling height shall be
7 1/2 feet for at least 50% of the habitable floor area. Any area where the
height is less than five feet shall not be considered habitable floor area.
HEALTH CLUB — An indoor facility provided for individual or group
exercise and recreational activities including aerobics, workout equipment,
calisthenics, weight training, running, swimming and court games, and
providing shower facilities and changing areas and may include spas,
gymnasiums, and incidental uses such as child-care facilities, food service,
and pro shops oriented to customers during their use of the facility.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY, OUTPATIENT — A facility providing medical care,
treatment and minor surgical procedures for non-life-threatening injuries.
Such facilities typically operate for extended hours throughout the day
and are utilized as an alternative to traditional emergency departments
at hospitals. These facilities are not coincident with primary medical care
providers and are not considered medical offices.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area containing buildings or places in which
notable historic events occurred or having special public value because of
notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic
heritage of the area, of such significance as to warrant conservation and
preservation.
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT AREA, SITE OR
STRUCTURE — An area, site or structure designated as an historic district
or landmark by Chapter 178, Historic Preservation, of the Municipal Code
or an area, site or structure having the characteristics of areas, sites, or
structures so designated that could itself be so designated.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:808
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession, occupation or trade
conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building or a
structure accessory thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use
of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the
essential residential character of such building.
HOMELESS SHELTER — An establishment primarily engaged in providing
temporary or transitional residential care, room, board supervision,
information and/or referrals to homeless persons voluntarily seeking such
service.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services and medical or
surgical care, primarily for temporary inpatients, to persons suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical or mental
condition, and including as an integral part of the institution related
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A commercial establishment providing transient lodging,
meals, and other guest services. A hotel or motel establishment must have a
minimum of 15 individual guest rooms, which must have attached (en suite)
private bathroom facilities. A hotel/motel may or may not provide internal
hallway access to all guestrooms.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any roofed or other solid building structure
or material covering the ground through which water does not readily
penetrate, including but not limited to concrete, oil and stone, tar or asphalt
pavement, or compacted gravel.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — The ratio between impermeable
surface and total land area of a lot expressed as the percentage of land
covered by impermeable surfaces.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or
raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes
using flammable or explosive materials or storage or manufacturing
processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
INN — A commercial facility for the housing of transient occupants,
containing less than 15 rooms. The facility may have an ancillary use such
as a restaurant or bar.
JUNK — Any and all secondhand and used machinery and scrap iron,
including automobiles, tools, implements or parts or portions thereof, and
any and all secondhand and used furniture or other personal property, other
than livestock, or parts or portions thereof.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:809
JUNKYARD — A place where junk, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, sorted, stored, baled, packed, disassembled,
handled, or abandoned; but not including pawnshops or establishments
for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture, household equipment,
clothing, used motor vehicles capable of being registered, or machinery to
be reused for the purpose for which originally manufactured.
KENNEL — An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs,
cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding,
training, or selling animals is conducted as a business.
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area required or permitted to be devoted to
landscaping and environmental improvement, which may include existing
and new vegetation.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVE — A business that cleans clothing or which is
equipped with individual clothes washing and drying and/or cleaning
machines for the principal use of retail customers. Refer to Chapter 195 of
the City of Auburn Municipal Code.
LOGO — Any picture, shape or drawing, with or without letters or words,
used to identify a product, service, business or organization.
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation
thereof, together with such open spaces as are required by this chapter, and
having frontage on a public street.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear
lot lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from a street right-of-way is called a side street lot line.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot with an area, width or other dimension which
is less than prescribed for a lot in the district in which such lot is situated
if such lot is (i) under one ownership of record since the effective date of
the original City of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, or (ii) under one ownership
of record since the time of any amendment to the original City of Auburn
Zoning Ordinance which amendment changed the area, width or other
dimension requirements with respect to lots in such district and which lot,
except for such amendment, would have been in all respects in conformance
with the requirements of such original Zoning Ordinance, or (iii) any lot
shown on an approved subdivision plat filed with the Cayuga County Clerk
and not combined with any other lot or parcel for the purposes of real
property assessment at any time following such filing.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:810
LOT WIDTH — The width of the lot between side lot lines at the front
building line as prescribed by the front yard regulations.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two
streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than 135°.
LOT, FLAG — Lots that the City has approved with less frontage in a public
street than is normal. The panhandle is an access corridor to lots or parcels
located behind lots or parcels with normal street frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, having access on two
streets.
MAKERSPACE — An indoor facility intended to be used by artists as studio
and retail space. Makerspaces often combine production, equipment,
community, and education for the purposes of enabling participating
individuals to design, prototype, and create works that said individuals
would have difficulty producing if working alone due to a lack of resources,
tools, and/or space. Makerspaces may also include common space such
as galleries, meeting rooms, retail space, and open space that encourages
resident engagement and community involvement. Makerspace shall not
include any dwelling.
MASSING — The sense of bulk, size, and shape of a structure, usually
perceived by reference to the surrounding space and nearby structures and
natural features such as trees.
MICROBREWERY/CRAFT BREWERY — An establishment where beer and
malt beverages are made on the premises and then sold or distributed,
either to others with liquor licenses or to the general public, if in possession
of a brewer's retail permit. May have a restaurant or an accessory tasting
room in or adjacent to the brewery, on whose premises sale of beer would
require an on-premises retail license. In accordance with New York State's
Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) Law, microbrewery license holders may
produce or brew up to 75,000 barrels of beer per year. (Barrel: 31 US
gallons.)
MICRODISTILLERY — A facility for the production and packaging of
alcoholic beverages in quantities not to exceed 12,000 gallons per year and
may include an accessory tasting room or other uses such as a restaurant,
bar, or live entertainment only as permitted in the zoning district.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A development or redevelopment that allows for
multiple uses in a single structure or on a lot including, but not limited to,
residential, commercial, and industrial. A typical mixed-use structure would
have retail or offices on the first floor and offices, residences, and/or studios
on the upper floors.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet
or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:811
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical
systems contained herein.
MODULAR HOME — Any home constructed of premade parts and unit
modules that are transported on a flatbed truck from the factory to the
building site where they are permanently anchored onto a foundation.
Modular homes are subject to the local building codes where they are
constructed. Modular homes are subject to the regulations of whichever
style of home they are designed to be, i.e. single-family home, multifamily
home, etc.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR STATION — A lot, including structures thereon
or parts thereof, that is used for engine repair, body work, frame
straightening, painting, upholstering, steam cleaning, electric work, tuneups
and all other vehicle repair services not specifically listed in the
definition of "motor vehicle service station."
MOTOR VEHICLE SALESROOM/RENTALS — Any building, land area or
other premises used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles,
motorcycles, trucks, trailers or boats, but not including any repair work
other than warranty and other repair service conducted as an accessory
use on such premises. Also includes facilities which provide for the storage
and rental of vehicles on a regular basis by the general public, including
automobiles, vans, and motorcycles. Typical uses include automotive
dealership and auto rental agencies. No fuel sales shall be part of such an
establishment.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A lot, including structures thereon
or parts thereof, that is used for the sale of motor fuels dispensed from
pumps and motor vehicle accessories and supplies. Permitted accessory
uses may include facilities for washing vehicles and/or the retail sale of
convenience items, including but not limited to snacks and beverages,
provided such accessory uses are located indoors. Motor vehicle body work,
major structural repair or painting by any means are not to be considered
permitted accessory uses.
MOTOR VEHICLE WASH — Any building or premises, or portion thereof,
the use of which is devoted to the business of washing automobiles for a fee,
whether by automated cleaning devices or otherwise.
MOVIE THEATER — A building containing one or more screens on which
motion pictures are projected for recreation purposes. A "movie theater"
does not include theaters that show pornographic or other adult-oriented
motion pictures.
MURALS — A hand-painted, hand-tiled, or digitally printed image which:
A. Is on the exterior wall of a building located on private property;
B. Is visible from a City park, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way;
C. Does not contain any commercial message; and
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:812
MUSEUM — Refer to "cultural facility/museum."
NIGHTCLUB — Any room, space, or premises operated as a commercial
establishment in which eating and/or drinking takes place, where alcoholic
beverages are served subject to the regulatory authority of the New York
State Liquor Authority, and where the provision of entertainment is the
primary activity. Entertainment includes music by a live musician or
musicians, or any mechanical, electronic, or other means such as records,
laserdiscs, audio, video, or other audio or audio-visual means, including
operation as a motion-picture theater; acting, play performances, theater
performances, dinner theater, revue pantomime, scene, dance, act, or songand-
dance act participated in by one or more employees, guests, customers,
or other person or persons; or dancing by guests, customers, or any other
person or persons. Background music, provided in accord with the City's
noise regulations, shall not be considered as a form of entertainment.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or
structure, other than a sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of
this chapter, or any amendment to it rendering such building or structure
nonconforming, which:
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — A lot of record which does not
comply with the lot requirements for any permitted use in the district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use lawfully being made of any land,
building or structure, other than a sign, on the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment to it rendering such use nonconforming, which does
not comply with all the regulations of this chapter, or any amendment
hereto, governing use for the zoning district in which such land, building or
structure is located.
NOXIOUS USE — Any use which is continuously or regularly offensive or
injurious by reason of the emission of excessive amounts of dust, smoke,
refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes, noise or vibration.
OFFICE — A building that is divided into offices, either single or suites,
for the transaction of business other than for mercantile or manufacturing
Does not fit within the purview of the City's sign regulations as
described in Article V, Sign Regulations.
D.
Does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter, or any
amendment hereto, governing parking or space and bulk requirements
for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located;
A.
Is located on a lot which does not or is so located on a lot as not to
comply with the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such
building or structure is located; or
B.
Both Subsection A and B, except any building containing one or more
dwelling units in addition to the number permitted by the district
regulations in the district where it is located shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use rather than a nonconforming building.
C.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:813
purposes where merchandise is on display and offered for sale. Offices used
for a professional or medical business, in part or in whole, will be classed as
an office.
ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN — A sign commonly associated with, and
limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient for persons
coming on the property, including signs and symbols of handicapped
accessibility, as required by Part 1100, Section 1100.9, of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and signs marking
entrances and exits, parking areas, one-way drives, rest rooms, pickup and
delivery areas and the like.
OPEN SPACE — An area or areas of a lot, including required yards, which
are:
OUTDOOR SEATING — A removable extension of an established retail shop
or small food shop such as bakeries and coffee shops, consisting of movable
tables, chairs and benches that are arranged directly upon the sidewalk
paving. All sales and service shall take place inside the establishment retail
business or restaurant.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — Commercial and industrial storage outside the
confines of an enclosed structure of any equipment or materials in usable
condition which are not being specifically displayed as merchandise or
offered for sale. Outdoor storage shall not be construed as a self-service
storage facility.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A zoning district not independently mapped on the
Zoning Map but that exists in conjunction with and provides alternative or
additional regulations applicable to the primary underlying zoning district
shown on the Zoning Map. An overlay district's boundaries shall be
described within the text of the provisions of the article or any amendment
to the article establishing the same.
PARABOLIC OR DISH-TYPE ANTENNA — Any concave, circular or dishshaped
device designed for receiving communication or television signals.
PARCEL — Refer to "lot."
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any place, lot, parcel, or yard used in whole or
in part of storing or parking four or more motor vehicles under the provision
of this chapter.
PARKING FACILITY — Any use of land as a stand-alone operation or in
conjunction with another permitted use for the commercial parking of
Open and unobstructed from ground to sky, except by facilities
specifically designed, arranged and intended for use in conjunction with
passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation.
A.
Landscaped, maintained or otherwise treated to create a setting
appropriate to recreation or relaxation.
B.
Accessible and usable by the general public, business patrons or
residents of all dwellings or stores it is intended or required to serve.
C.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:814
vehicles. The term "vehicle" includes all passenger vehicles, highway
recreational vehicles and non-highway recreational vehicles. Motor vehicle
parking facilities differ from outdoor storage facility in that the time period
for use is typically 24 hours or less.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for parking one vehicle
and which minimum dimensions are nine feet wide and 18 feet long, not
including maneuvering area and access drives.
PARKING, SHARED — A legally binding agreement between two or more
property owners to provide for the shared utilization of an aggregate
number of parking spaces that collectively meets the parking needs of each
party.
PATIO/TERRACE — An improved or graded area located on the ground with
no structural supports other than subsurface base material and retaining
walls. The concrete or other paved areas around a swimming pool which is
the pool apron is considered a terrace/patio. A patio or terrace shall be flush
to the ground with no air spaces beneath.
PAWN SHOP — A business licensed through Cayuga County and in
conformance with the current version of New York General Business Law
Article 5, §§ 40 and 41 for collateral loan brokers that lends money based
upon the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or is in the business of
purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition
that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within
a fixed period of time.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION OR ACCOMMODATION — An improved
pathway at least five feet in width devoid of obstructions or hazards and
intended for use by pedestrians to commute between destinations, including
but not limited to buildings, structures, parks and open spaces, parking
areas, the sidewalk system or other walkways.
PERMEABLE SURFACE — A surface which prevents sheet flow or ponding
of surface waters and allows for the transmission of surface water flows
through the substance into underlying material.
PERMITTED USE — Any use permitted under the provisions of the district
in which the land, building or structure is located.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building and, where applicable, its accessory
buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship
and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.
PLAT — A map, drawing, or rendering of a subdivision that usually contains
narrative elements.
PLAT OR PLAN, FINAL — A drawing in final form containing all information
or details required by law and by these regulations to be presented to the
Planning Board for approval and which, if approved, may be duly filed or
recorded by the applicant in the office of the County Clerk.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:815
PLAT OR PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A drawing or drawings, clearly marked
"preliminary plat" or "preliminary plan," showing the significant features of
a proposed subdivision, as specified in Article VI, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter, submitted to the Planning Board for the purposes of consideration
prior to submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise
the Planning Board of the layout of the proposed subdivision.
PLAY STRUCTURE — A recreational structure such as a treehouse,
playhouse, or prefabricated play equipment, located at grade or elevated,
not intended for habitation and without amenities such as electricity or
plumbing.
PORCH — A roofed open space open along two or more sides serving to
shelter an entrance and provide a private outdoor space to a residence.
Porches are attached to a building and located in the front, side or rear of
the structure.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR USE — Refer to "building, principal."
PRIVATE CLUB — A nonprofit social organization whose premises are
restricted to its members and their guests.
PROHIBITED USE — Any use which is not listed as a permitted, special,
or accessory use in the Schedule of Use Regulations shall be considered a
"prohibited use."
PUB — Refer to "bar."
PUBLIC REALM — All areas legally open to public use, such as public
streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys and parks, as well
as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings.
PUBLIC REALM AMENITY — Structures or improvements open to the
general public and intended to strengthen the urban fabric and enhance the
pedestrian experience, such as, but not limited to, sidewalks, landscaped
open spaces, public seating, public art, gathering spaces and crossing aids.
PUBLIC SEWER AND/OR WATER FACILITIES — A sewage disposal system
or water supply and distribution system operated by a municipality; a
sewage disposal system or water supply and distribution system authorized
for public use, whether for a residential subdivision, or for commercial,
industrial or manufacturing buildings, and approved by the New York State
and/or the City of Auburn Department of Municipal Utilities, Cayuga County
Departments of Health, the Department of Environmental Conservation,
and any other governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Infrastructure and services that supply an everyday
necessity to the public at large, such as public water and/or public sewer
facilities, electricity, natural gas, and telecommunications. A public utility
may be owned and operated by a municipality or a private entity, or a
combination thereof.
PUBLIC WAY — All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, right-of-way, highways, parkways, alleys, and parks,
as well as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:816
PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC USE — Any one or more of the following uses,
including grounds and accessory buildings necessary for their use:
RECREATION, INDOOR COMMERCIAL — A commercial recreational use
conducted entirely within a building for activities such as an arcade, arena,
bowling alley, gymnasium, skating rink, swimming pool, or raquette ball and
tennis court.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL — A recreational use conducted
outside of a building including athletic fields, miniature golf, skateboard
park, swimming, bathing, wading and other therapeutic facilities, splash
pads and spray parks, tennis, handball, basketball courts, batting cages,
and trampoline facilities.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Refer to "industry, light."
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — A building or portion thereof wherein the
owner and/or proprietor is compensated for furnishing long-term lodging
and varying amounts of custodial care for four or more persons by reason
of them being elderly, handicapped, bedfast, chronically ill, impaired,
convalescing and/or needing such care, but not including hospitals, clinics
or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment
of disease or injury and/or providing surgical and obstetrical services or
asylums for the insane. This term includes boarding and rooming houses
for aged people, nursing homes, homes for adults (rest homes), homes for
the aged and handicapped, convalescent homes for children, homes for the
elderly, homes for prenatal care and the like.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot that currently contains only residential
uses, regardless of zoning district.
RESTAURANT — As defined by the New York State Liquor Authority under
ABCL § 3(27), "restaurant" shall mean a place which is regularly and in a
bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for
compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith,
containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods, which may be
required for ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must, at all times, be in
charge of a chef with the necessary help, and kept in a sanitary condition
with the proper amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on said premises
and must comply with all the regulations of the local department of health.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — Refer to "drive-through."
A. Governmental buildings.
B. Religious institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas when authorized or
operated by a governmental authority.
C.
D. Schools, specifically elementary, secondary or college.
E. Public libraries.
F. Not-for-profit fire, ambulance and public safety buildings.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:817
RESTAURANT, QUICK SERVICE — A specific type of restaurant without a
drive-through, characterized both by its cuisine and minimal table service.
Food is offered from a limited menu; may be cooked in bulk in advance and
kept hot; is finished and packaged to order; and is usually available ready
to take away.
RETAIL, BIG BOX — A single large retail establishment covering over
35,000 square feet that draws customers from a large area and is typically
surrounded by parking lots.
RETAIL, GOODS AND SERVICES — Any building or structure in which
one or more articles of merchandise, commerce or services are provided,
including, but not limited to, department stores, banks, book stores, day
spas, salons, insurance sales, clothing and accessory stores, grocery stores,
pharmacies, and boutique/gift shops.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land, either public or private, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a street, sidewalk, trail, railroad, electrical
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
or other similar use.
ROADSIDE STAND — A temporary or permanent accessory structure,
wagon or trailer up to 100 square feet in size located on private property
which shall be limited to the sale of farm, garden, or other products built or
created on-site.
ROOF — The exterior covering on the uppermost part of a building, with the
primary purpose to protect the building and its contents from the effects of
weather.
SATELLITE DISH — A structure attached to the ground or any other
structure built or intended for the purpose of the reception of any
transmission transmitted or relayed from an earth satellite. The term
"ground dish" as used in this chapter is synonymous with satellite dish.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A school established by a nongovernmental
organization supported by private funds for the purposes of providing
education.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any elementary or secondary school supported by
public funds and providing free education for children of a community or
district.
SCRAP METAL PROCESSING — Refer to "industry, heavy."
SCREEN — A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual
intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants,
berms, fences, walls, or any appropriate combination thereof.
SEATS — For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements,
the seating capacity of a particular room or a hall in a building, as
determined by the specifications and plans, whether fixed or removable
seating; in the event that individual seats are not provided, each 20 inches
of benches, bleachers, pews or similar seating accommodations shall be
considered as one seat for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:818
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings in
a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized, controlled access stalls or lockers for the
storage of customers' goods or wares.
SETBACK, FRONT — The least required horizontal distance between the
front lot line and the principal building measured at the shortest point. On
waterfront lots which border water on one or more lot lines, the lot line on
the road front is considered the principal front lot line.
SETBACK, REAR YARD — The least required horizontal distance between
the rear lot line and the principal building measured at the closest point.
SETBACK, SIDE YARD — The least required horizontal distance between
the side lot line and the principal building measured at the closest point.
SHADE TREE — Usually a deciduous tree, rarely an evergreen, planted
primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy.
SHED — Refer to "accessory structure."
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — An accommodation for transient guests where, in
exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling is rented for lodging for a
period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Such use may or may not
include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential
dwelling shall include all housing types and shall not include hotel/motels,
bed-and-breakfasts, or inns.
SHRUB — A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small
stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. It may be
deciduous or evergreen.
SIDEWALK DINING — An area designated of public sidewalk where patrons
may sit at tables while consuming food and beverages ordered from and
served by wait staff.
SIDEWALK RETAIL — Retail displays located on sidewalks in the public
right-of-way that are clearly accessory to, or a promotion of, the use located
in the abutting building.
SIGN — Any advertisement, announcement, direction or communication
produced in whole or in part by the construction, erection, affixing or
placing of a structure on any land or on any other structure or produced by
painting on or posting or placing any printed, lettered, pictured, figured or
colored material on any structure or surface, but not including signs placed
or erected by the City of Auburn for public purposes.
SIGN AREA or SIGN SURFACE AREA — The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of lettering,
representations, emblems or other figures, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign
from the background against which it is placed.
SIGN PERMIT — No sign shall be hereafter erected, placed or maintained
at any place in the City of Auburn except as provided Article V, Sign
Regulations, and only after a permit therefor has been obtained in
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:819
compliance with the provisions of Article V, Sign Regulations, unless stated
otherwise.
SIGN, A-FRAME — Refer to "sign, sidewalk."
SIGN, AWNING — A sign on which graphics or symbols are painted, sewn,
or otherwise attached to the awning material as an integrated part of the
awning itself.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — Any sign in excess of 100 square feet advertising a
person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote
from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign affixed to the face, on top, or below the surface of
an attached canopy.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Any sign indicating the location of or direction to
a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote
from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE — Any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses
changing lights to form a sign message or messages where the sequence of
messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be
modified by electronic processes.
SIGN, FREESTANDING BRACKET — Freestanding blade sign, not
considered a pole sign, that hangs from a bracket permanently affixed to a
post that is separate from a building.
SIGN, HANGING — Refer to "sign, projecting."
SIGN, HOLIDAY DECORATION — Temporary signs, in the nature of
decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated
with any national, local or religious holiday.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED (DIRECTLY) — A sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the
sign.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED (INDIRECTLY) — A sign illuminated with a light so
shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot
where said illumination occurs.
SIGN, MARQUEE — Any permanent architectural canopy projecting over
the entrance to an establishment, and any signage or message display
thereon.
SIGN, MOBILE — Refer to "sign, portable."
SIGN, MONUMENT — A sign attached to the ground along its entire length
upon a continuous pedestal.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — Any lawfully preexisting sign that does not
meet the requirements of Article V.
SIGN, PLAZA DIRECTORY — A sign listing the tenants or occupants of
a commercial plaza and that may indicate their respective professions or
business activities.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:820
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
supports so that the top edge of the sign face is more than eight feet above
grade.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election
or caucus.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
a structure or the ground, but not including identification lettering on
vehicles and advertising on buses.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign that is attached to the building facade at a
ninety-degree angle, extending more than 12 inches from the wall. It may
hang from a bracket and it may be two- or three-dimensional.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected on or affixed to a building or structure
which extends, in whole or in part, above the roof line.
SIGN, SIDEWALK — A moveable sign not attached to the ground or building
with two or more steeply angled sides.
SIGN, SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION — Any sign erected or displayed
for the purpose of identifying or advertising a residential development or
subdivision.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign erected for a limited time and not permanently
affixed to the ground, a building or other fixed object or surface. Temporary
signs include, but are not limited to, contractor's signs, realty sales or rental
signs, special event signs, banners for charitable events or residential event
signs.
SIGN, TENANT/SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign
which serves as a common or collective identification for two or more
commercial, business or industrial uses sharing an office, plaza, shopping
center, industrial park or the like and which is located on such premises.
SIGN, VEHICLE — Signs displayed on licensed and registered motor
vehicles which are used in conjunction with a business.
SIGN, WALL — A sign placed against a building and attached to the exterior
wall, so that the display surface is parallel with the plane of the wall.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to the inside of a window or door, or a
sign placed inside a building within 12 inches of such window or door and
is visible and legible through a window or door.
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing, or sketch prepared to specifications
and containing necessary elements, as set forth in this chapter, which shows
the arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of a single parcel
of land as shown on said plan.
SPECIAL USE — A use which is deemed desirable for the public welfare
within a given district or districts, which is potentially incompatible with
other uses provided therein. The use shall therefore be subject to approval
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:821
by the City Planning Board and to conditions set forth for such use as well
as the other applicable provisions of this chapter.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A permit provided by the City Planning Board for
a use requiring review, for uses that are not permitted expressly in a district
but are listed as requiring a special use permit.
SPECIMEN TREE — A particularly impressive or unusual example of a
species due to its size, shape, age, or any other trait that epitomizes the
character of the species.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — The State
Environmental Quality Review Act found in Environmental Conservation
Law Article 8 and the implementing regulations found in 6 NYCRR Part 617.
STOOP — An exterior stair or landing area that may be covered or
uncovered and is less than 18 inches in height, four feet in width, and three
feet in depth provided from the street front to an elevated first story. An
area that exceeds any of these dimensions shall be considered a porch or
deck.
STORY — The portion of a building which is between one floor level and the
next higher floor level or the roof.
STORY, HALF — A story with at least two opposite exterior sides meeting a
sloping roof not more than four feet above the floor of such story.
STREET, MAJOR — A street that serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy traffic-generating areas.
STREET, MINOR — A street intended to serve primary access to abutting
properties.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive
of vegetation, boundary walls, fences, mailboxes, lampposts, bird houses,
or similar construction. The term includes but is not limited to structures
temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, satellite dishes,
communications systems, pools, ponds, etc.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any structure above or below ground,
outside of a building with the designed capacity of more than 18 inches
of water depth which is intended for recreational purposes, and including
all appurtenant decks, walks and equipment constructed, installed and
maintained in or above the ground outside of the principal structure to
which the pool is accessory.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Any structure above or below ground
designed for capacity of more than 18 inches of water depth. The structure
may be a publicly or privately owned pool and open to the general public
or on a membership basis and having appropriate dressing room facilities,
recreation facilities and off-street parking area.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:822
TASTING ROOM — A commercial establishment allowing beer/wine tasting
with on-site and off-site retail sales directly to the public (or shipped). The
tasting room facility must be directly affiliated with a minimum of one
brewery/winery and meeting the requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control (ABC) appropriate license type. The tasting room may be operated
within a brewery, brew pub, microbrewery, microdistillery, winery, or
distillery facility or as a stand-alone retail use. A tasting room shall be
subject to the use and parking standards of a bar.
TAVERN — Refer to "bar."
TAXI DISPATCH STAND — An office establishment where taxi cabs are
temporarily in queue during operation and from which they are dispatched.
Taxi cab body work, major structural repair, vehicle painting, and the
overnight storage of any taxi cab vehicle shall be considered outdoor
storage and permitted only in industrial districts.
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS, PRIVATE — Antennas intended for
customer-end applications designed to receive direct broadcast satellite
service, to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals, to receive video
programming services via broadband radio service, to receive local
television or radio broadcast signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — Refer to "wireless telecommunication
facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio, light and other electronic
or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUTE — Performing job-related requirements using
telecommunications to transmit data and textual messages to the central
organizational office without being physically present.
TEMPORARY OUTSIDE SALES — Selling of retail items outdoors for a
limited amount of time for events such as sidewalk sales, open markets, art
displays, and festivals.
TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS — Any container, storage unit,
box-like container or portable structure which resembles and functions in
the same way as a traditional shipping container is a temporary portable
storage unit and not a structure even when affixed to a permanent
foundation.
TEMPORARY USE — One established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses
do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
TENANT — An occupant who temporarily holds or occupies land, a building
or other property owned by another.
TINY HOUSE — A principal residential dwelling that has a square footage
of between 320 square feet and 600 square feet. Each tiny house shall meet
the New York State Building Code and must include basic functional areas
that support normal daily routines (such as cooking, sleeping, and toiletry).
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:823
TINY HOUSE CLUSTERS — An area of land that has four to 12 tiny houses.
Each tiny house cluster must also have a centralized common area no less
than 400 square feet per tiny house.
TOW TRUCK OPERATION — A facility that dispatches tow trucks for hire
with no automotive storage area for impounded vehicles.
TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT YARD — The temporary storage of vehicles
that have been towed, carried, hauled, or pushed from public or private
property for impoundment in a public or private impoundment yard. This
use does not include "motor vehicle repair" or "motor vehicle service
station," "uutdoor storage," or "auto wrecking yard."
TRANSPARENCY — The minimum percent of windows and doors that must
cover a building facade. The ground story is measured between two and 12
feet above the sidewalk. Applies to primary and side streets only. Windows
cannot be opaque.
URBAN AGRICULTURE — The use of a lot for the cultivation of food
and/or horticultural crops, composting, aquaponics, aquaculture, and/or
hydroponics, as well as related agricultural products. Such use may not
include the accessory keeping of farm animals as prohibited by § 104-5 of
the City of Auburn Ordinance.
URBAN FARM — A ground-level area less than one acre that is used as an
accessory to commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
VARIANCE — A modification of the use and/or area and bulk regulations of
this chapter in an individual case where, due to specific facts and conditions
peculiar to a particular property, literal application and strict enforcement
would result in undue and unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty
that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or structures.
Such unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty shall not be construed to
include mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money.
VARIANCE, AREA — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
VARIANCE, USE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited
by the applicable zoning regulations.
VENDOR — Any individual, including an employee or agent of a group
of individuals, partnership or corporation, who sells or offers to sell food,
beverages, goods or merchandise on any public way from a pushcart, stand,
motor vehicle, or from his or her person.
WATERWAY — Any water area providing access from one place to another,
primarily a water area providing a regular route for water traffic.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A business engaged in the sale of
commodities in quantity, usually for resale or business use, chiefly to
retailers, other businesses, industries and institutions.
§ 305-9 AUBURN CODE § 305-9
294:824
WINERY — The commercial processing of grapes or other fruit products
to produce wine or similar spirits or the refermenting of still wine into
sparkling wine. Processing consists of controlled fermentation combined
with any of the following: crushing, blending, barrel aging, and bottling.
Storage of case goods shall only occur in conjunction with processing.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Includes a structure,
facility or location designed or intended to be used as, or used to support,
antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. Refer to Code of the
City of Auburn Chapter 300, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, on the same
lot with a building or a group of buildings, which open space lies between
the principal building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
a building and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SECONDARY FRONT — Any lot having frontage on more than one
street, the orientation of the front or main door of the principal structure,
as determined by the address assigned by the City, shall establish a primary
front yard and all other front yards shall be considered secondary front
yards.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the nearest side lot line.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City
of Auburn as provided for in Article 5-A § 81, of the General City Law. The
Board consists of seven members appointed by the Mayor.
ZONING DISTRICT — The classification of lands as established in this
chapter and by the Zoning Map.
ZONING MAP — The map delineating the boundaries of the zoning districts
which, along with the zoning text, comprises this chapter.
§ 305-9 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-9
294:825

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts Established
§ 305-10. Establishment of districts.
The City of Auburn is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
§ 305-11. Zoning Map.
A. R-1, Single-Family Residential.
B. R-2, Single, Two- and Multifamily Residential.
C. CC, Central Corridor.
D. C, General Commercial.
E. NC, Neighborhood Commercial.
F. HC, Highway Commercial.
G. SC, Specialized Commercial.
H. I, General Industrial.
I. I-1, Industrial Park.
J. I-2, Resource Recovery.
K. DD, Downtown.
A. Description. The aforesaid districts are bounded as shown on a map
entitled "City of Auburn Zoning District Map," which accompanies and,
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this
chapter.75
(1) As evidence of the authenticity of the Zoning District Map, said
map and amendments thereto shall be duly certified by the City
Clerk.
B. Interpretation of district boundaries. District boundary lines are
intended to follow property lines, center lines of streets, highways,
alleys or railroads, extensions of such property lines or center lines or
other lines located on the map by appropriate reference.
75.Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-10 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-12
294:827
§ 305-12. Uses Table.
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Residential
Accessory
dwelling
unit
A A A A A
Apartment
complex
S P S
Bed-andbreakfast
P S P P P P
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
3-4
units
P P P P P P
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
5+
units
S P S P S
Dwelling,
singlefamily
P P P P P
Dwelling,
singlefamily
semidetached
P P P P
Dwelling,
townhouse
P S P P P P P
Dwelling,
two-family
P P P P P
Dormitory P P
Residential
care
facility
S P P P P
Tiny house
clusters
P
Institutional
Cemetery S S S
§ 305-12 AUBURN CODE § 305-12
294:828
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Conference/
convention
center
P P
Cultural
use
facility/
museum
P P
Day-care
center/
day-care
facility
P P P P P
Day-care,
family
home
P P P P P P P
Healthcare
facility,
outpatient
P P P
Hospitals P P
Homeless
shelter
P
Nursery
school
P P P P P
Performing
art venue
P P
Place of
worship
P P P P P P P P
Public/
semipublic
use
P P P P P P P
Commercial
Adult use
business
S S
Animal
grooming
P P P P
Animal
hospital
P P
Artist
studio
P P P P
§ 305-12 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-12
294:829
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Bakery,
commercial/
wholesale
P P P
Bakery,
retail
P P P P
Bar P S P
Brewery P P P
Brew pub P P P
Commercial
kitchen
P P P
Crematorium P
Distillery P P P
Drivethrough
A/S* A A
Drycleaning
facility
P P P
Drycleaning
outlet
P P P P
Equipment
sales,
repair or
rentals
P P P
Farmers
market,
permanent
P P P
Farmers
market,
temporary
P P P P
Flea
market
S P P
Funeral
home
P P P P
Garden
center
P P P
Greenhouse,
commercial
P P P P
§ 305-12 AUBURN CODE § 305-12
294:830
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Health
club
P P P P
Heavy
commercial,
industrial
park
P
Home
occupation
P S S P P P P P
Hotel/
motel
P P P
Inn P P P
Kennel P
Laundry,
self-serve
P P
Makerspace
P P P
Microbrewery
P P P P
Microdistillery
P P P
Mixed-use
building
P P P P P
Motor
vehicle
repair
station
P P P
Motor
vehicle
salesroom/
rentals
P P P
Motor
vehicle
service
station
P S P P
Motor
vehicle
wash
S P P P
Movie
theater
P P P P
§ 305-12 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-12
294:831
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Nightclub P P
Pawn shop P
Office P P S P P
Recreation,
indoor
commercial
P P P P
Recreation,
outdoor
commercial
P P P P
Restaurant P P P P P
Restaurant,
quick
service
P P P
Retail, big
box
P
Retail,
goods and
services
P P P P P
Selfservice
storage
facility
P P
Tasting
room
P P P
Taxi
dispatch
stand
S P P
Tow truck
operation
S P
Urban
agriculture
P
Urban
farm
P
Winery P P
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
S S S S S S S S S S S
§ 305-12 AUBURN CODE § 305-12
294:832
Downtown
(D)
Central
Corridor
(CC)
Single
Family
(R-1)
Multifamily
(R-2)
General
Com.
(C)
Neigh.
Com.
(NC)
Highway
Com.
(HC)
Spec.
Com.
(SC)
General
Industrial
(I)
Industrial
Park
(I-1)
Resource
Recovery
(I-2)
Industrial
Agricultural
processing
plant
P P P
Auto
wrecking
yard
P
Contractor's
yard
P
Distribution
center
P P P
Industry,
heavy
P
Industry,
light
P P
Junkyard P P
Light
industrial,
industrial
Park
P
Outdoor
storage
P P
Scrap
metal
processing
P
Towing
and
impoundment
yard
P
Key:
P - Permitted Use
S - Special Use Permit Required
A - Permitted as an Accessory Use
Blank - Prohibited Use
*Accessory use subject to special use permit
§ 305-13. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
§ 305-12 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-13
294:833
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Single-Family Residential
District (R-1) is to promote owner-occupied residential buildings and to
provide for areas within the City of Auburn that encourage lowerdensity
residential property developments. It is the intent of the R-1
District to encourage development and continuous use of lands for
residential development that maintains the character of the existing
neighborhoods within this district.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the R-1
District:
(1) Day-care, family home.
(2) Dwelling, single-family.
(3) Dwelling, single-family semidetached.
(4) Place of worship.
(5) Public/semipublic use.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the R-1 District:
(1) Accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the R-1 District:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Dwelling, townhouse.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Residential care facility.
(6) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
§ 305-13 AUBURN CODE § 305-13
294:834
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: R-1 Single Family Residential District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Day-care,
family
home
6,000 50 20 7 25 50 35 1 per each 6
children
enrolled
Dwelling,
singlefamily
6,000 50 20 7 25 50 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
semidetached
6,000 50 20 Only 1 side
yard at
least 5 feet
wide
25 50 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Place of
worship
15,000 50 10 10 25 70 35 1 per each 4
seats
Public/
semi-public
use
10,000 50 20 10 25 50 35 1 per 1,0000
square feet
Accessory
Accessory
dwelling
unit
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A + 1
Special Use Permit
Bed-andbreakfast
8,000 50 20 7 25 50 35 1 per guest
room plus 1
for resident
Cemetery N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Dwelling,
townhouse
3,000 30 20 7 25 50 35 1 per
dwelling unit
§ 305-13 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-13
294:835
§ 305-14. R-2 Single, Two- and Multifamily Residential District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
employee
reporting on
a daily basis,
excluding
owner
Residential
care facility
10,000 50 20 15 30 50 35 1 per each 4
residents
plus 1 per
1,000 square
feet of
administrator
space
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 100 40 15 30 35 N/A N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Single, Two- and Multifamily
District (R-2) is to promote owner-occupied residential buildings and to
provide for areas within the City of Auburn that encourage lowerdensity
residential property developments.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the R-2
District:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast.
(2) Day-care, family home.
(3) Dwelling, multiple-family, three to four units.
(4) Dwelling, single-family.
(5) Dwelling, single-family semidetached.
(6) Dwelling, townhouse.
(7) Dwelling, two-family.
(8) Place of worship.
§ 305-13 AUBURN CODE § 305-14
294:836
(9) Public/semipublic use.
(10) Residential care facility.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the R-2 District:
(1) Accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the R-2 District:
(1) Cemetery.
(2) Apartment complex.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: R-2 Single, Two- and Multifamily Residential
District.
§ 305-14 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-14
294:837
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Bed-andbreakfast
5,000 40 15 10 20 65 35 1 per guest
room plus 1
for resident
Day-care,
family
home
6,000 25 15 10 20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
plus 1 per
employee
Dwelling,
multiple
family, 3-4
units
7,500 40 15 10 20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
5,000 40 15 7 20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
semidetached
5,000 40 15 Only 1 side
yard at
least 7 feet
wide
20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
townhouse
1
townhouse
unit per
3,000
square feet
of land
40 15 7 20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
two-family
5,000 40 15 10 20 65 35 2 per
dwelling unit
Place of
worship
15,000 50 10 10 25 70 35 1 per each 4
seats
Public/
semipublic
use
10,000 50 15 10 20 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-14 AUBURN CODE § 305-14
294:838
§ 305-15. CC Central Corridor District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Residential
care facility
10,000 50 20 10 30 50 35 1 per each 4
residents
plus 1 per
1,000 square
feet of
administrator
space
Accessory
Accessory
dwelling
unit
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A + 1
Special Use Permit
Apartment
complex
40,000 80 30 20 30 65 50 1 per
dwelling unit
Cemetery 10,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
employee
reporting on
a daily basis,
excluding
owner
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 100 40 15 30 35 N/A N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Central Corridor District (CC) is
to promote well-designed small-scale commercial development and
accommodate a mixture of uses compatible with surrounding
neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the CC District:
(1) Agricultural processing plant.
(2) Artist studio.
(3) Bakery, commercial/wholesale.
§ 305-14 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-15
294:839
(4) Bakery, retail.
(5) Brewery.
(6) Brew pub.
(7) Commercial kitchen.
(8) Conference/convention center.
(9) Cultural use facility/museum.
(10) Distillery.
(11) Distribution center.
(12) Famers' market, permanent.
(13) Farmers' market, temporary.
(14) Flea market.
(15) Garden center.
(16) Greenhouse, commercial.
(17) Hotel/motel.
(18) Inn.
(19) Makerspace.
(20) Microbrewery.
(21) Microdistillery.
(22) Mixed-use building.
(23) Movie theater.
(24) Performing art venue.
(25) Place of worship.
(26) Public/semipublic use.
(27) Recreation, indoor commercial.
(28) Recreation, outdoor commercial.
(29) Restaurant.
(30) Retail, goods and services.
(31) Tasting room.
(32) Urban agriculture.
§ 305-15 AUBURN CODE § 305-15
294:840
(33) Urban farm.
(34)Winery.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the CC District:
(1) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the CC District:
(1) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: CC Central Corridor District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Agricultural
processing
plant
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
§ 305-15 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-15
294:841
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Artist
studio
6,000 20 10 5 10 80 35 1 per
2,000
square
feet
Bakery,
commercial/
wholesale
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
2,000
square
feet
Bakery,
retail
6,000 20 10 5 10 80 35 1 per
2,000
square
feet
Brew pub* 15,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 8 per
1,000
square
feet
Brewery* 15,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Commercial
kitchen
10,000 50 10 5 10 80 45 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Conference/
convention
center
20,000 75 20 10 10 80 45 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Cultural
use facility/
museum
10,000 75 20 10 10 80 45 2.5 per
1,000
square
feet
Distillery 20,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
§ 305-15 AUBURN CODE § 305-15
294:842
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Distribution
center
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Farmers'
market,
permanent
10,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Farmers'
market
temporary
10,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
vendor
Flea
market
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 2 per
vendor
Garden
center
30,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
2,000
square
feet
Greenhouse,
commercial
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Hotel/
motel
30,000 75 10 10 10 80 50 1 per
room
Inn 15,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
room
Makerspace 10,000 20 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
2,000
square
feet
Microbrewery*
15,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 3 per
1,000
square
feet
Microdistillery*
15,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 3 per
1,000
square
feet
§ 305-15 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-15
294:843
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Mixed-use
building
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 45 1 per
dwelling
unit plus 1
per 2,000
square
feet
Movie
theater
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 75 1 for
every
1,000
square
feet
Performing
art venue
20,000 75 20 15 10 80 45 1 per each
5 seats
Place of
worship
15,000 50 10 10 25 80 35 1 per each
4 seats
Public/
semipublic
use
10,000 50 15 10 20 65 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Recreation,
indoor
commercial
20,000 50 10 10 10 80 50 1 per each
4 persons
of design
capacity
Recreation,
outdoor
commercial
10,000 50 10 5 10 80 50 1 per each
4 persons
of design
capacity
Restaurant 10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 16 per
1,000
square
feet
Retail,
goods and
services
10,000 50 10 5 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Tasting
room
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
1,000
square
feet
§ 305-15 AUBURN CODE § 305-15
294:844
§ 305-16. C General Commercial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Urban
agriculture*
20,000 75 10 10 10 80 N/A 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Urban
farm*
40,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
1,000
square
feet
Winery* 20,000 75 50 10 10 80 45 3 per
1,000
square
feet
Accessory Use
Special Use Permit
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 100 40 15 30 35 N/A N/A
*Brewer and agricultural silos located on the exterior of a building are not to exceed 40 feet in height.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the General Commercial District (C)
is to promote a variety of commercial uses and services which are well
designed and contribute to the character and economic vitality of the
City of Auburn.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the C District:
(1) Agricultural processing plant.
(2) Animal grooming.
(3) Animal hospital.
(4) Apartment complex.
(5) Bakery, commercial/wholesale.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast.
(7) Brewery.
§ 305-15 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-16
294:845
(8) Day-care center/day-care facility.
(9) Distillery.
(10) Distribution center.
(11) Dry-cleaning facility.
(12) Dry-cleaning outlet.
(13) Dwelling, multiple-family, three to four units.
(14) Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units.
(15) Dwelling, townhouse.
(16) Dwelling, two-family.
(17) Equipment sales, repair, or rental.
(18) Farmers' market, permanent.
(19) Farmers' market, temporary.
(20) Funeral home.
(21) Garden center.
(22) Greenhouse, commercial.
(23) Healthcare facility, outpatient.
(24) Home occupation.
(25) Hospital.
(26) Industry, light.
(27) Microbrewery.
(28) Microdistillery.
(29) Mixed-use building.
(30) Motor vehicle repair station.
(31) Motor vehicle salesroom/rentals.
(32) Motor vehicle service station.
(33) Motor vehicle wash.
(34) Movie theater.
(35) Nursery school.
(36) Office.
§ 305-16 AUBURN CODE § 305-16
294:846
(37) Place of worship.
(38) Public/semipublic use.
(39) Recreation, indoor commercial.
(40) Recreation, outdoor commercial.
(41) Residential care facility.
(42) Restaurant.
(43) Retail, goods and services.
(44) Tasting room.
(45) (Reserved)
(46) Tiny house clusters.
(47)Winery.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the C District:
(1) Accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Drive-through.
(3) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the C District:
(1) Cemetery.
(2) Taxi dispatch stand.
(3) Tow truck operation.
(4) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
§ 305-16 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-16
294:847
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: C General Commercial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Agricultural
processing
plant
40,000 75 50 20 20 65 45 1 per 1,000
square feet
Animal
grooming
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Animal
hospital
10,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Apartment
complex
40,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Bakery,
commercial/
wholesale
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 2,000
square feet
Bed-andbreakfast
6,000 20 10 7 10 80 35 1 per guest
room plus 1
for resident
Brewery 20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Day-care
center/ daycare
facility
6,000 20 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
plus 1 per
employee
Distillery 20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Distribution
center
40,000 75 50 20 20 65 45 1 per 1,000
square feet
Drycleaning
facility
20,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-16 AUBURN CODE § 305-16
294:848
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Drycleaning
outlet
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 2,000
square feet
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
3-4
units
10,000 50 20 7 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
5+
units
20,000 50 20 7 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
townhouse
1
townhouse
unit per
3,000
square feet
of land
50 10 7 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
two-family
6,000 20 10 7 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Equipment
sales,
repair, or
rental
10,000 50 20 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Farmers'
market,
permanent
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Farmers'
market,
temporary
6,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 space per
vendor
Funeral
home
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 2 per 1,000
square feet
Garden
center
30,000 75 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 2,000
square feet
Greenhouse,
commercial
20,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Healthcare
facility,
outpatient
20,000 75 20 10 10 80 35 2 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-16 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-16
294:849
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
employee
reporting on
a daily basis,
excluding
owner
Hospital 20,000 100 20 10 20 65 35 3 per 1,000
square feet
Industry,
light
20,000 75 50 20 20 65 45 1 per 1,000
square feet
Microbrewery
20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Microdistillery
20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Mixed-use
building
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
plus 1 per
2,000 square
feet
Motor
vehicle
repair
station
10,000 75 20 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
salesroom/
rentals
20,000 75 20 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
service
station
20,000 100 20 20 20 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
wash
20,000 100 20 20 20 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Movie
theater
20,000 100 10 10 10 65 75 2 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-16 AUBURN CODE § 305-16
294:850
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Nursery
school
10,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 1 for each 6
children
enrolled
Office 10,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 3 per 1,000
square feet
Place of
worship
15,000 50 10 10 25 80 35 1 per each 4
seats
Public/
semipublic
use
10,000 50 20 10 20 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Recreation,
indoor
commercial
20,000 50 10 10 10 80 50 1 per each 4
persons of
design
capacity
Recreation,
outdoor
commercial
10,000 50 10 5 10 80 50 1 per each 4
persons of
design
capacity
Residential
care facility
10,000 50 20 10 20 50 35 1 per each 4
residents
plus 1 per
1,000 square
feet of
administrator
space
Restaurant 10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 16 per 1,000
square feet
Retail,
goods and
services
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Tasting
room
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Tiny house
clusters
3,000 50 15 15 15 30 24 N/A
Winery 20,000 75 20 10 10 80 45 3 per 1,000
square feet
Accessory Use
§ 305-16 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-16
294:851
§ 305-17. NC Neighborhood Commercial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Accessory
dwelling
unit
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A + 1
Drivethrough
30,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Special Use Permit
Cemetery 10,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Taxi
dispatch
stand
30,000 75 20 20 20 65 35 1 per 3,000
square feet
Tow truck
operation
30,000 75 20 20 20 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 75 20 10 20 35 N/A N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Neighborhood Commercial
District (NC) is to promote well-designed medium- and small-scale
commercial development compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the NC
District:
(1) Animal grooming.
(2) Artist studio.
(3) Bakery, retail.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast.
(5) Day-care center/day-care facility.
(6) Day-care, family home.
(7) Dry-cleaning outlet.
(8) Dwelling, multiple-family, three to four units.
§ 305-16 AUBURN CODE § 305-17
294:852
(9) Dwelling, single-family.
(10) Dwelling, single-family semidetached.
(11) Dwelling, townhouse.
(12) Dwelling, two-family.
(13) Healthcare facility, outpatient.
(14) Health club.
(15) Home occupation.
(16) Inn.
(17) Makerspace.
(18) Microbrewery.
(19) Mixed-use building.
(20) Nursery school.
(21) Place of worship.
(22) Public/semipublic use.
(23) Restaurant.
(24) Restaurant, quick service.
(25) Retail, goods and services.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the NC District:
(1) Accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the NC District:
(1) Bar.
(2) Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units.
(3) Motor vehicle service station.
(4) Office.
(5) Wireless telecommunications facility.
§ 305-17 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-17
294:853
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: NC Neighborhood Commercial District.
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet)
Min. Setback
(feet)
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Front Side Rear
Permitted
Animal
grooming
6,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Artist
studio
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 2,000
square feet
Bakery,
retail
6,000 50 20 10 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Bed-andbreakfast
8,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per guest
room plus 1
for resident
Day-care
center/ daycare
facility
10,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 2 per 1,000
square feet
Day-care,
family
home
6,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Drycleaning
outlet
6,000 50 20 10 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-17 AUBURN CODE § 305-17
294:854
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet)
Min. Setback
(feet)
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Front Side Rear
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
3-4
units
10,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
5,000 50 15 7 20 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
semidetached
6,000 50 20 Only 1 side
yard at
least 5 feet
wide
25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
townhouse
3,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
two-family
6,000 50 20 7 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Healthcare
facility,
outpatient
10,000 50 20 7 25 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Health club 20,000 75 20 10 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
employee
reporting on
a daily basis,
excluding
owner
Inn 15,000 75 20 10 10 80 35 1 per room
Makerspace 10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 2,000
square feet
Microbrewery
20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Mixed-use
building
10,000 50 N/A N/A 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
plus 1 per
2,000 square
feet
§ 305-17 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-17
294:855
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet)
Min. Setback
(feet)
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Front Side Rear
Nursery
school
10,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 1 for each 6
children
enrolled
Place of
worship
15,000 50 20 10 25 80 35 1 per each 4
seats
Public/
semipublic
use
10,000 50 20 10 25 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Restaurant 10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 12 per 1,000
square feet
Restaurant,
quick
service
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 7 per 1,000
square feet
Retail,
goods and
services
10,000 50 10 10 10 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Accessory Use
Accessory
dwelling
unit
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A + 1
Special Use Permit
Bar 20,000 75 10 10 10 65 35 12 per 1,000
square feet
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
5+
units
20,000 50 20 7 10 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Motor
vehicle
service
station
30,000 75 20 15 25 80 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Office 10,000 50 10 10 10 65 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-17 AUBURN CODE § 305-17
294:856
§ 305-18. HC Highway Commercial District.
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet)
Min. Setback
(feet)
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Front Side Rear
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 75 20 10 20 35 N/A N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Highway Commercial District
(HC) is to promote well-designed commercial development that is
accessible and compatible with the district as a major vehicular
corridor.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the HC
District:
(1) Animal grooming.
(2) Animal hospital.
(3) Artist studio.
(4) Bakery, retail.
(5) Bar.
(6) Brew pub.
(7) Commercial kitchen.
(8) Day-care center/day-care facility.
(9) Day-care, family home.
(10) Drive-through.
(11) Dry-cleaning facility.
(12) Dry-cleaning outlet.
(13) Dwelling, multiple-family, three to four units.
(14) Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units.
(15) Dwelling, townhouse.
(16) Equipment sales, repair or rentals.
§ 305-17 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-18
294:857
(17) Farmers' market, temporary.
(18) Flea market.
(19) Funeral home.
(20) Garden center.
(21) Greenhouse, commercial.
(22) Health club.
(23) Healthcare facility, outpatient.
(24) Home occupation.
(25) Homeless shelter.
(26) Hospitals.
(27) Hotel/motel.
(28) Laundry, self-serve.
(29) Motor vehicle repair station.
(30) Motor vehicle salesroom/rentals.
(31) Motor vehicle service station.
(32) Motor vehicle wash.
(33) Movie theater.
(34) Nightclub.
(35) Pawn shop.
(36) Place of worship.
(37) Office.
(38) Recreation, indoor commercial.
(39) Recreation, outdoor commercial.
(40) Residential care facility.
(41) Restaurant.
(42) Restaurant, quick service.
(43) Retail, big box.
(44) Retail, goods and services.
(45) Self-service storage facility.
§ 305-18 AUBURN CODE § 305-18
294:858
(46) Taxi dispatch stand.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the HC District:
(1) Drive-through.
(2) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the HC District:
(1) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: HC Highway Commercial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Animal
grooming
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Animal
hospital
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Artist
studio
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 1 per 2,000
square feet
§ 305-18 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-18
294:859
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Bakery,
retail
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 1 per 2,000
square feet
Bar 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 12 per 1,000
square feet
Brew pub 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 8 per 1,000
square feet
Commercial
kitchen
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Day-care
center/ daycare
facility
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per 6
children
enrolled or
persons in
care
Day-care,
family
home
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per 6
children
enrolled
Drycleaning
facility
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Drycleaning
outlet
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 1 per 2,000
square feet
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
3-4
units
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
5+
units
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
townhouse
1
townhouse
unit per
3,000
square feet
of land
100 15 10 30 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
§ 305-18 AUBURN CODE § 305-18
294:860
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Equipment
sales,
repair or
rentals
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Farmers'
market,
temporary
20,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per vender
Flea
market
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 2 per 1,000
square feet
Funeral
home
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 2 per 1,000
square feet
Garden
center
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 2,000
square feet
Greenhouse,
commercial
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Health club 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 3 per 1,000
square feet
Healthcare
facility,
outpatient
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 2 per 1,000
square feet
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per 1,000
square feet
Homeless
shelter
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per
employee
Hospitals 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1.5 per bed
Hotel/motel 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per room
Laundry,
self-serve
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 2 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
repair
station
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 2 per bay
Motor
vehicle
salesroom/
rentals
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-18 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-18
294:861
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Motor
vehicle
service
station
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
wash
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per
employee
plus 1 per
vacuum
Movie
theater
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 for each 6
seats
Nightclub 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 10 per 1,000
square feet
Pawn snop 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 1,000
square feet
Place of
worship
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 for each 4
seats
Office 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 3 per 1,000
square feet
Recreation,
indoor
commercial
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per each 4
persons of
design
capacity
Recreation,
outdoor
commercial
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per each 4
persons of
design
capacity
Residential
care facility
20,000 100 15 10 30 65 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Restaurant 30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 12 per 1,000
square feet
Restaurant,
quick
service
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 7 per 1,000
square feet
Retail, big
box
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 3 per 1,000
square feet
Retail,
goods and
services
20,000 100 15 10 30 80 40 2 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-18 AUBURN CODE § 305-18
294:862
§ 305-19. SC Specialized Commercial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Self-service
storage
facility
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 2,000
square feet
Taxi
dispatch
stand
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 1 per 3,000
square feet
Accessory Uses
Drivethrough
30,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Special Use Permit
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
30,000 120 30 10 30 80 40 N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Specialized Commercial District
(SC) is to insure the availability of sites for specialized uses that require
or benefit from proximity to particular facilities. These areas also need
to be easily accessible to the public, not only by private auto, but by
mass transit and pedestrian ways as well.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the SC District:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast.
(2) Day-care center/day-care facility.
(3) Day-care, family home.
(4) Dormitory.
(5) Dwelling, multiple-family, three to four units.
(6) Dwelling, single-family.
(7) Dwelling, single-family semidetached.
(8) Dwelling, townhouse.
(9) Dwelling, two-family.
(10) Funeral home.
§ 305-18 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-19
294:863
(11) Home occupation.
(12) Mixed-use building.
(13) Nursery school.
(14) Office.
(15) Place of worship.
(16) Public/semipublic use.
(17) Residential care facility.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the SC District:
(1) Accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the SC District:
(1) Apartment complex.
(2) Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units.
(3) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: SC Specialized Commercial District.
§ 305-19 AUBURN CODE § 305-19
294:864
Minimum Setback
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Bed-andbreakfast
6,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per guest
room plus 1
for resident
Day-care
center/ daycare
facility
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 2 per 1,000
square feet
Day-care,
family
home
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 per 1,000
square feet
Dormitory 10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
3-4
units
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
6,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
singlefamily
semidetached
4,000 50 15 Only 1 side
yard at
least 10
feet wide
25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
townhouse
3,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
two-family
8,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Funeral
home
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 2 per 1,000
square feet
Home
occupation
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
employee
reporting on
a daily basis,
excluding
owner
§ 305-19 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-19
294:865
§ 305-20. I General Industrial District.
Minimum Setback
(feet)
Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Mixed-use
building
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 per
dwelling unit
plus 1 per
2,000 square
feet
Nursery
school
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 for each 6
children
enrolled
Office 10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 3 per 1,000
square feet
Place of
worship
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 per each 4
seats
Public/
semipublic
use
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 45 1 per 1,000
square feet
Residential
care facility
10,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Accessory Use
Accessory
dwelling
unit
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A + 1
Special Use Permit
Apartment
complex
30,000 80 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Dwelling,
multiplefamily,
5+
units
15,000 50 15 10 25 80 35 1 per
dwelling unit
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
20,000 75 20 10 20 35 N/A N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The general purpose of the General Industrial
District (I) is to provide for areas in the City to facilitate and encourage
§ 305-19 AUBURN CODE § 305-20
294:866
business growth and job creation where industrial uses have primarily
been concentrated. Industrial uses must respect adjacent transitional
areas through the incorporation of buffers, design guidelines, and
compliance with performance standards as set forth elsewhere in this
chapter.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the I District:
(1) Agricultural processing plant.
(2) Contractor's yard.
(3) Distribution center.
(4) Dry-cleaning facility.
(5) Industry, heavy.
(6) Industry, light.
(7) Junkyard.
(8) Kennel.
(9) Motor vehicle repair station.
(10) Motor vehicle salesroom/rentals.
(11) Motor vehicle service station.
(12) Motor vehicle wash.
(13) Outdoor storage.
(14) Taxi dispatch stand.
(15) Tow truck operation.
(16) Towing and impoundment yard.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the I District:
(1) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the I District:
(1) Adult use business.
(2) Wireless telecommunications facility.
§ 305-20 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-20
294:867
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: I General Industrial District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Agricultural
processing
plant
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each 2
employees
Contractor's
yard
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
Distribution
center
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each 2
employees
Drycleaning
facility
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Industry,
heavy
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each 2
employees
Industry,
light
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each 2
employees
Junkyard 40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each 2
employees
Kennel 30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
§ 305-20 AUBURN CODE § 305-20
294:868
§ 305-21. I-1. Industrial Park District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Motor
vehicle
repair
station
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 2 per bay
Motor
vehicle
salesroom/
rentals
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
service
station
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Motor
vehicle
wash
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per
employee
plus 1 per
vacuum
Outdoor
storage
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
Taxi
dispatch
stand
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 3,000
square feet
Tow truck
operation
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Towing and
impoundment
yard
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
Special Use Permit
Adult use
business
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The I-1 District is intended to provide areas within
the City for the establishment of industrial parks. Industrial parks
§ 305-20 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-21
294:869
permit the City to maximize its investment in infrastructure, protect
adjoining uses from adverse impacts that might be associated with a
particular industrial activity, and offer potential developers state-of-theart
facilities responsive to the needs of modern industry.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the I-1 District:
(1) Light industrial, industrial park. Light industrial uses undertaken
within a fully enclosed building, except for off-street parking and
loading facilities and incidental storage, and not normally
producing impacts beyond the site where located. Such uses
include the manufacture of musical and small precision
instruments, watches and clocks, toys, novelties, and metal and
rubber hand stamps, garments, pottery and ceramic products;
assembly, testing, packing, and storage of products made from
previously prepared materials such as cloth, plastic, food, paper,
glass, leather, metals, stones, electronic components and other
materials; assembly of optical, mechanical and other equipment;
and experimental, photo and testing laboratories.
(2) Heavy commercial, industrial park. Heavy commercial uses
undertaken within a fully enclosed building, except for off-street
parking and loading facilities and incidental storage. Such uses
include wholesale business, storage and warehousing
establishments; truck and freight terminals; delivery and
distribution centers; wholesale produce and meat markets;
mechanical and vehicle equipment repair establishment; drycleaning
and dyeing plants; carpet and rug cleaning
establishments; laundries; sign painting; blueprinting and graphic
reproduction shops; printing and publishing establishments; and
radio and television studios.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the I-1 District:
(1) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the I District:
(1) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
§ 305-21 AUBURN CODE § 305-21
294:870
§ 305-22. I-2 Resource Recovery District.
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: I-1 Industrial Park District.
Min. Setback (feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Light
industrial,
industrial
park
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each
2
employees
Heavy
commercial,
industrial
park
40,000 150 25 25 50 75 85 1 per each
2
employees
Special Use Permit
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The general purpose of the Resource Recovery
District (I-2) is to provide for targeted locations in the City for
businesses that may have more substantive impact on surrounding land
uses. These uses are important to the overall economic health of the
City but due to their impacts should be located in specified locations
where their impacts can be minimized.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the I-2 District:
(1) Auto wrecking yard.
(2) Junkyard.
§ 305-21 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-22
294:871
(3) Outdoor storage.
(4) Scrap metal processing.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses within
the I-2 District:
(1) Uses and structures accessory to a principal use as permitted and
subject to the requirements of Article IV, § 305-25, Accessory uses
and structures.
D. Special use permits. Certain uses require a special use permit from the
Planning Board, subject to the requirements of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits. The following uses are allowed as special permit
uses within the I-2 District:
(1) Adult use business.
(2) Wireless telecommunications facility.
E. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly permitted in this section
are prohibited.
F. Off-street parking requirements. Uses not listed in the Bulk and Use
Table are not subject to off-street parking requirements. In addition, all
uses permitted in this district are subject to the additional parking and
loading requirements set forth in Article IV, § 305-48, Off-street parking
and loading, of this chapter.
G. Signs. All signage is required to conform to regulations set forth in
Article V, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
H. Supplemental regulations. Uses are subject to the requirements
specified elsewhere in these regulations or other chapters of the City's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, supplemental
regulations in accordance with Article IV, Supplemental Regulations.
I. Bulk and Use Table: I-2 Resource Recovery District.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Permitted
Auto
wrecking
yard
40,000 N/A 50 25 50 50 85 1 per each 2
employees
Junkyard 40,000 N/A 50 25 50 50 85 1 per each 2
employees
§ 305-22 AUBURN CODE § 305-22
294:872
§ 305-23. D Downtown.
Min. Setback
(feet)
Uses
Min. Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Min. Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Max.
Allowable
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(%)
Max.
Building
Height
(feet) Parking
Outdoor
storage
30,000 N/A 50 25 50 50 85 N/A
Scrap
metal
processing
40,000 N/A 50 25 50 50 85 1 per each 2
employees
Special Use Permit
Adult use
business
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 1 per 1,000
square feet
Wireless
telecommunications
facility
30,000 100 25 15 25 75 35 N/A
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide regulatory
standards governing building form and related urban design principles
for new development and redevelopment projects in Downtown Auburn.
These standards are intended to ensure that proposed development is
consistent with the vision, goals and objectives of "Building a
Sustainable Future," the City of Auburn Comprehensive Plan and other
City planning and development initiatives. Downtown is the City's
financial, entertainment, governmental and institutional center for
public services, social activity and employment. As such, the intent of
this section is to maintain the distinctive character of Downtown and
enhance relationships between buildings and streets and other public
spaces by considering their visual compatibility with surrounding
areas.
B. Guiding principles. These standards are based upon a number of
guiding principles, including to:
(1) Implement the City of Auburn Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Protect and reinforce the unique and historic character of
Downtown neighborhoods;
(3) Encourage adaptive reuse and desirable forms of development at
infill locations and underutilized properties;
§ 305-22 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:873
(4) Re-establish walkability and strengthen the historic circulation
patterns of walkable areas;
(5) Encourage reinvestment and revitalization by promoting mixed-use
development;
(6) Discourage less compatible suburban styles of development in the
Downtown;
(7) Enhance the visual character and quality of the public realm and
improve pedestrian comfort; and
(8) Promote diversity and compatibility in the design and use of urban
buildings and public spaces.
C. Applicability and use. This section applies to all buildings and the
interface of buildings with the public realm and public realm amenities
within the boundaries of the Downtown district. The provisions of this
chapter are implemented by use of the words "shall" when meeting
such provisions are required; "should" when the actions are
recommended; and "may" when actions are considered optional.
Applicable Subsection
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(1)
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23M
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(9)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(5)
Article V,
§ 305-75
Action Sites Placement Height Facade
Encroachments
Parking
Landscaping
and
Screening Lighting Signs
New
development
X X X X X X X X X
Expansion
of building
up to 25%
of gross
building
square
footage
X X X X
Expansion
of building
over 50%
X X X X X X X X X
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:874
Applicable Subsection
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(1)
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23M
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(9)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(5)
Article V,
§ 305-75
Action Sites Placement Height Facade
Encroachments
Parking
Landscaping
and
Screening Lighting Signs
Exterior
remodel
(change or
addition of
facade
materials)
of existing
nonresidential
or
multifamily
building of
more than
50% of the
facade**
Exterior
remodel
(change or
addition of
facade
materials)
of existing
nonresidential
or
multifamily
building
between
20% and
50% of the
facade**
X X X X
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:875
Applicable Subsection
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(1)
Article
III,
§ 305-23J
Article
III,
§ 305-23M
Article
III,
§ 305-23G(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(6)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(9)
Article
III,
§ 305-23H(5)
Article V,
§ 305-75
Action Sites Placement Height Facade
Encroachments
Parking
Landscaping
and
Screening Lighting Signs
Exterior
remodel
(change or
addition of
facade
materials)
of existing
nonresidential
or
multifamily
building of
more than
50% of the
facade**
X X X X X
Expansion
or
replacement
of existing
surface
parking lot
of more
than 10
new spaces
X X
Installation
of parking
lot lighting
X
Installation
of a new
sign
X
Modifications
to an
existing
sign
X
D. Downtown Boundaries Map. The Downtown district is identified as
comprising all those buildings, structures, parcels, uses, corridors and
natural features within the boundaries as shown on the most recent
version of the City of Auburn Zoning Map, which may be amended from
time to time by the City Council.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:876
E. Downtown Core and Gateway areas.
(1) The Downtown district has a mixed-use core and gateway areas as
discussed in this chapter. Both are evolving over time in terms of
development scale, density, type and intensity of use. The
Downtown Core is the centralized mixed-use business area of the
City with a concentrated mix of land uses at higher densities of
building development and vertical scale than other areas of the
City. The Core is an area of high development interest often focused
at or near the crossroads of major thoroughfares. The Core
contains some of the most important landmarks, civic places and
historic sites in Auburn.
(2) The Downtown Gateway areas are generally those neighboring
peripheral areas that transition from the higher intensities of use
and the more traditional urban forms found in the core to
somewhat lower densities, less variability in land use and
noticeable changes in visual character. The gateways are generally
along thoroughfares leading into Downtown adjacent to
neighboring zoning districts where land use transitions to
residential neighborhoods and nonresidential uses that begin to
exhibit characteristics of urban/suburban areas with obvious
changes in building types, architectural styles, lot sizes and
pedestrian activity along mostly commercial corridors.
F. Organization of building types.
(1) This section is organized by building types found within the
Downtown District. In the Downtown District, eight building types
have been identified (see Table F-1). Building type should not be
confused with building use or architectural style. Each building
type is associated with information specific to that type including
its general size, height and similar form and design characteristics.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:877
(2) This chapter includes dimensional and building form standards.
Dimensional standards include lot size and setback requirements.
Building form standards relate to the overall size and shape of
buildings including massing and scale relative to their
surroundings. This chapter provides standards applicable to all
building types as well as standards that only apply to a specific
building type. Table F-1 identifies where each type is permitted
within the Downtown Core and each of the four Downtown
Gateway areas.
Table F-1 Downtown Building Types
Downtown
Building Types
Downtown
Mixed Use Core
Northern
Gateway
Southern
Gateway
Eastern
Gateway
Western
Gateway
Civic and
institutional
P P S S S
Multistory
commercial/ office
P P S — S
Main street mixeduse
P P S P P
Mid-rise/ high-rise P S — — —
Small shopfront/
storefront
P P P P P
One-story
commercial/
franchise
S P S P P
Attached multiresidence
P P P P P
Detached house S P P P P
P Permitted
S Requires Special Permit
— Not Permitted/Not Applicable
(3) A details list of permitted uses is provided in Article III, § 305-12,
Uses Table. In cases where specific uses and their associated
building types are assigned two different levels of permissibility
(e.g., where a commercial office use may be permitted, and the
multistory commercial/office building type requires a special
permit), the more restrictive review process prevails.
G. Standards applicable to all building types.
(1) Building and architectural standards.
(a) Building placement and orientation: Massing and traditional
proportions of building height, width to height ratios, and
rooflines shall be maintained and be compatible with the
context of surrounding buildings that meet the intent of this
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:878
chapter. With regard to proposed new buildings, additions and/
or alterations of existing buildings, the height and scale of
other buildings on the block shall be maintained so that the
front facade of the new or altered building does not exceed the
average width of principal buildings within approximately 200
feet of the proposed new or altered building by more than 20%.
(b) In the Downtown Core, the height of new buildings shall not
exceed the average height of principal buildings within
approximately 200 feet by more than one story or 12 feet,
whichever is less. In Downtown Gateway areas, the height of
new buildings shall not exceed the average height of principal
buildings within approximately 400 feet by more than one story
or 12 feet, whichever is less.
(c) The building's front facade shall be oriented to the primary
street.
(d) Building height limits shall not apply to structural elements
such as, but not limited to, domes, flag poles, masts, clock
towers, chimneys, belfries, mechanical areas and elevator
enclosures.
(e) The proposed new or altered building shall also maintain the
pattern of building fronts and setbacks from both primary and
secondary streets within approximately 200 feet so that the
building setback is within five feet of the average setback of
buildings on the block, provided those buildings presently
meet the setbacks established by this chapter.
(f) In the case of adjacent buildings that do not conform to the
traditional heights and rooflines of the block, the traditional
height shall take precedent. Some slight variation (up to a
maximum of plus or minus four feet) in the height of a
building's primary facade roofline is allowed to avoid visual
monotony.
(g) The primary facade may step back a maximum of two feet from
the required setback to allow for building articulation for its
total length.
(h) Block corners shall be reserved for buildings oriented to face
both streets. Buildings shall be placed at the corner created by
the intersection of the front and side setback lines. The void
created by the difference between the total lot width and the
minimum permitted width of the building shall not be located
at this corner.
(i) Buildings at corners shall be considered to have two primary
facades facing the adjacent streets. References in this chapter
to primary facade treatment shall apply to both facades.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:879
(2) Building components.
(a) Flat roof forms are most appropriate for medium and largescale
buildings in the Downtown District. This includes most
building types that are two stories or more in height.
(b) Flat roofs and roofs with a pitch less than 4:12 shall include
parapet walls along each side of the building of at least 18
inches in height.
(c) Sloping and pitched roofs (greater than 4:12 pitch) may be
appropriate for small and medium scale buildings for
consistency within the context of their surroundings,
particularly for one-story buildings in gateway areas of
Downtown adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
(d) Decorative cornices are required on flat roofed buildings and
shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height. Cornices may
extend a maximum of 24 inches from the exterior face of the
building into the front or side setback.
(e) Existing original and traditional roofline features and details
such as eaves, cornices, pediments and medallions shall be
maintained and not removed, destroyed or covered. Missing,
damaged or previously removed architectural features, such
as, but not limited to, cornices, special roofline decorative
details, masonry piers, and bulkheads, shall be repaired and/or
replaced with acceptable traditional designs and materials.
Typical Mixed-Use Building Components
(3) Frontage types. Frontage types are components of a building
extending beyond the facade into the transition area on private
property between the building and the public realm, which includes
sidewalks and streets. Frontage types are important structural
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:880
elements within the private realm that contribute to social
interaction and character of a neighborhood. The following
frontage types are appropriate to the Downtown District according
to building types identified in this chapter.
(a) Arcade. An arcade is a passage located along the exterior wall
of a building and structurally covered, typically by the
building's upper stories.
(b) Awning. An awning is a wall-mounted, pitched cover extending
from a building to provide protection from the weather.
(c) Balcony. A balcony is a projecting platform, or recessed within,
the upper floors of a building facade.
(d) Canopy. A canopy is a horizontal roofed cover extending
outward from a building typically with structural supports
attached to the building or ground plane extending to provide
protection from the weather.
(e) Common yard. A relatively large planted lawn, setback from
the frontage line typically associated with detached houses
providing a buffer from local thoroughfares. A common yard
remains unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent
yards forming a common landscape.
(f) Forecourt. A forecourt is a semi-public space, open to the sky
and formed by the recess in the central portion of the building
facade, enclosed by the building facade on three sides. The
space could be used as an entry court, shared garden space for
apartments, restaurant seating area or outdoor retail space.
(g) Plaza. A plaza is an outdoor public space formed by a building
setback from the street that is open above and designed
specifically for public gathering.
(h) Porch. A porch is a raised, roofed platform attached to a
building forming a projected or recessed entryway as a semiprivate
space. A projecting porch is typically open on three
sides behind the setback line. An engaged porch appears
recessed and has one or two adjacent sides attached to the
building and one or two sides open. Minimum width is typically
eight feet across the front facade with a minimum depth of four
feet. Partial walls or railings are not more than four feet high.
(i) Stoop. A stoop is a raised unenclosed platform to a building
entrance that is elevated relative to and adjacent to the
sidewalk. Stairs or ramps lead directly to the sidewalk. A stoop
is most appropriate to residences with small front setbacks, or
to facades that must accommodate a grade change. Typically, a
stoop has a maximum width and depth of six feet.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:881
(j) Storefront/shopfront. The storefront/shopfront is along the
main facade of the building at or near the front setback line
with an at-grade entrance along the public sidewalk. This
frontage type is typically intended for retail use. This may be
used along with other frontage types such as a front awning
over a window.
(4) Facade design, materials, and maintenance.
(a) Original facade materials and design details, including
transparency created by windows and doors, shall be
maintained and/or restored to the greatest extent practicable,
if it is determined in consultation with the City that such
existing facade treatment is feasible and necessary to be
consistent with the intent of this chapter.
(b) Durable and low maintenance traditional building facade
materials, such as brick, stone and concrete, as exists
throughout the Downtown area, shall be used as much as
possible. Metal siding, corrugated metals, wood and vinyl
siding materials shall be avoided unless approved by the City.
Lightweight synthetic wall cladding and mirrored or reflective
surfaces shall be avoided.
(c) Facade materials shall consist of classic colors found
elsewhere within the Downtown District. Accent colors shall
complement and contrast appropriately with primary building
materials. Dramatic contrast in colors should be avoided
unless it is considered important and integral to the
architectural design, historic context and/or style of the
building.
(d) The side facade and entryways of corner buildings along side
streets shall be consistent with the treatment of the primary
front facade in terms of the quality and appearance of building
materials, windows and doors, colors and landscaping
treatment.
(5) Doors, windows, and trim.
(a) Primary entry doors shall face the street and transparency
shall vary with building type. For redevelopment projects,
original building entrances shall be retained and original
entranceway details shall be restored to the greatest extent
practicable or replaced with traditional-looking substitutes.
(b) Angled entranceways are permitted for corner buildings.
(c) Windows and doors shall be regularly spaced on the front
facade and other facades visible from the public realm.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:882
(d) Windows at ground level shall provide clear views from the
building to the street and from the public realm into the
building. Dark, tinted, textured or highly reflective glass is not
permitted along the ground-level facade.
(e) For redevelopment projects, windows shall be maintained to
their original size and overall proportions. Lintels, caps, and
sills shall be retained to the greatest extent practicable or
appropriately replaced with traditional looking substitutes.
(f) On masonry building facades, window elements shall include a
header or hood and sill. On facades other than masonry,
window elements shall include wood or similar looking trim on
all four sides of each window.
(g) Trim shall be compatible in style, materials and colors with the
exterior of the building. Accent colors shall complement and
contrast appropriately with primary building materials.
Dramatic contrast in colors should be avoided unless it is
considered important and integral to the architectural design,
style and/or historic context of the building.
(6) Awnings and canopies.
(a) The use of awnings or canopies above storefront glass
windows, particularly on mixed-use and commercial buildings,
shall be allowed along the full linear extent of the primary
facade to promote pedestrian interest in ground floor areas.
(b) Awnings that are located on a primary facade or visible from
the primary street shall use nonvinyl and nonplastic matte
finish materials, such as commercial grade fabric or canvas
that is durable for local weather conditions.
(c) Asphalt or composition shingle, or other materials with a
synthetic or plastic appearance, are not allowed.
(d) Colors shall complement the exterior design of the building
and be compatible with the context of surrounding areas and
buildings.
(e) Information contained on the awning or canopy shall not be
interpreted as a substitute for allowed signage (see Article V,
Sign Regulations).
(f) Awnings and canopies shall have a minimum clearance of 10
feet above the top of sidewalk and project a minimum of five
feet from the building, subject to any and all other regulations
restricting structural encroachments within the public right-ofway.
(g) Convex, bullnose, quarter round, or waterfall-style curved
awnings are discouraged.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:883
(h) Awnings and canopies should be integrated into the front
facade by being placed within, rather than overlapping, the
vertical elements of a building facade, for example, a facade
that is divided into distinct structural bays.
H. Public realm standards.
(1) Public realm.
(a) Concrete sidewalks and granite curbs shall be provided along
both sides of the public right-of-way of primary municipal
streets upon approval of the City to safely separate areas of
high volumes of vehicular traffic from pedestrian activity.
(b) The ground plane that abuts the inside back of the curb
between the curb and sidewalk shall be paved with concrete,
concrete pavers, brick, stone, or other high quality, durable
and low maintenance hardscape material acceptable to the
City. The use of asphalt and loose gravel or granular materials
is prohibited.
(2) Streetscapes and pedestrian amenities.
(a) Where streetscaping and pedestrian amenities are provided by
the property owner or developer within or immediately
adjacent to the public right-of-way, the materials shall be high
quality, durable elements determined acceptable by the City.
These amenities may include, but not be limited to, pavement
surfaces, seating areas and walls, benches, lighting, street
trees, fences and railings.
(3) Screening walls, fences, and gates.
(a) Screening walls, fences, railings and gates along primary
streets shall be constructed of durable, high quality, low
maintenance materials including, but not limited to, brick,
stone, and metal (steel, aluminum, wrought iron). Plastic, vinyl,
chain link and wooden fences, railings and gates shall be
prohibited in the Downtown District unless approved by the
City.
[1] The appearance of security fencing from the public realm
shall be enhanced by landscaping along the fence line with
appropriately sized evergreen and deciduous plant
materials.
[2] The use of chain link fencing along primary and secondary
streets, with or without vinyl slats, for use as visual buffers
and/or screens is prohibited in the Downtown District
unless approved by the City.
(4) Loading zones, berths, and docks.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:884
(a) Off-street parking and loading shall be per Article IV, § 305-48,
Off-street parking and loading.
(b) Loading zones, berths, docks, and overhead doors shall face
the rear lot line of the primary building or an alley where
practicable. Delivery and service areas shall be visually
screened from the public realm and from primary and
secondary thoroughfares, adjacent residential areas and other
pedestrian activity and public gathering areas.
(5) Lighting, fixtures, and illumination.
(a) Area lighting shall be per Article IV, § 305-43, Lighting.
(b) Pedestrian-scale street lights shall meet City engineering and
placement standards.
(c) Lighting shall not conflict with pedestrian circulation and
street trees.
(d) Exterior building lights, if provided, shall be mounted on the
primary street's front facade, between eight feet and 12 feet
above adjacent sidewalk grade. All buildings with alleyways
shall have sufficient lighting fixtures along the alleyway for
pedestrian safety where it will not conflict with vehicle access
and circulation.
(e) Exterior building lights shall not cause glare onto adjacent lots
or buildings. Floodlights or directional lights may be used to
illuminate alleys, parking areas, garages and maintenance
areas, but shielded in such a way as to not shine into other lots
or the street.
(f) All light fixtures, for general area lighting, shall be full cut-off
type fixtures, which do not produce any light above 90° from
the nadir (nadir being the angle pointing directly downward
from the luminaire or fixture), and equipped with flat lenses;
and with fixed, nonadjustable, mounting arms or brackets.
Light fixtures for landscaping lighting and decorative building
lighting may allow light above 90° from the nadir.
(g) Light poles and light fixtures shall maintain the same style,
height, and color and intensity of illumination throughout the
surrounding area. Poles and fixtures shall be made of durable
and vandal-resistant materials. Variation in styles of light poles
and fixtures are permitted if it is demonstrated that the styles
contribute to an overall design theme for the area.
(h) Illumination shall be consistent with neighborhood ambient
light levels and accepted industry standards, such as those of
the illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA).
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:885
(6) Parking.
(a) Off-street parking and loading shall be per Article IV, § 305-48,
Off-street parking and loading.
(b) For buildings that are located at or near the public sidewalk
edge, for example, with a zero setback line, parking shall be
located to the rear or side of the building and/or with shared
parking at interior parts of the block.
(c) Off-street parking shall not be located in front of the building
along primary streets.
(d) New stand-alone parking structures that front along a primary
thoroughfare shall incorporate mixed-use liner buildings and
decorative exterior facade materials appropriate to the context
of its surroundings to visually screen interior parking levels
from the public realm and minimize the appearance of parked
vehicles.
(7) Site access, driveways, and vehicular circulation.
(a) Vehicular circulation, where provided, shall include shared
narrow drive lanes between parcels and/or buildings as offstreet
connections to interior parts of the block to limit curb
cuts.
(b) Driveways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete per City
engineering standards.
(8) Pedestrian movement.
(a) Buildings shall be connected to the street and to adjacent
public transit stops via concrete sidewalks.
(b) Sidewalks or landscaped walkways shall connect buildings to
off-street parking areas.
(c) Convenient pedestrian access shall be provided to adjacent
development. All sites must provide for safe and direct
pedestrian connections between detached buildings where
practicable.
(d) Paving materials and landscaping shall differentiate and
delineate pedestrian walkways from parking spaces,
automobile travel lanes and driveways.
(e) Outdoor seating areas and cafes on private property shall not
interfere with pedestrian flow and circulation along the public
sidewalk and at building entryways.
(9) Landscaping standards.
(a) Materials and maintenance.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:886
[1] Landscaping shall be per Article IV, § 305-42,
Landscaping.
[2] The design emphasis for landscaping shall focus on
enhancing the visual quality and safe functioning of the
public realm by incorporating pedestrian amenities such
as linear planting beds, seat walls, street furniture, public
art, lighting, and other streetscape materials. These
features shall be architecturally compatible with the
styles, materials and colors of the principal building on the
lot, and the landscaping design and context desired by the
City in the immediate area.
[3] Context-appropriate landscaping shall be provided at the
front facade along the primary street where space allows.
Appropriate landscaping will depend on factors such as
the setbacks, shape, size, frontage elements and
orientation of the building.
[4] The selection of landscaping materials shall consider their
visual quality, seasonal use, durability, and maintainability.
Recycled and sustainable materials shall be acceptable if
they meet these conditions.
[5] The developer, its successor and/or subsequent owners
and their agents shall maintain landscaping on the
property on a continuing basis for the life of the
development. Plant materials which exhibit evidence of
insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately
treated. Dead plants shall be promptly removed and
replaced within the next planting season after removal.
(b) Use of native species. Plant species shall be selected based on
compatibility with conditions in an urban environment. Native,
noninvasive plant materials shall be considered over nonnative
species. Ease of maintenance, plant litter, disease resistance,
irrigation needs and growth habits, including the potential for
tree canopies, branches, and root systems to damage
sidewalks, pavements and utilities, shall also be considered.
(c) Tree placement and protection. Plant species shall be selected
based on compatibility with conditions in an urban
environment. Native, noninvasive plant materials shall be
considered over nonnative species. Ease of maintenance, plant
litter, disease resistance, irrigation needs and growth habits,
including the potential for tree canopies, branches, and root
systems to damage sidewalks, pavements and utilities, shall
also be considered.
(d) Visual screening.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:887
[1] Mechanical equipment for all new installations or
relocation of existing equipment in commercial and mixeduse
building development shall be screened from public
view and from primary thoroughfares to the greatest
extent practicable whether on the roof, ground or along
building walls.
[2] Building roof parapets or other architectural screening
techniques shall be used in screening roof-mounted
equipment. For existing buildings that have no or low
parapets, mechanicals shall be surrounded by an opaque
screening wall at a height as high as the equipment,
provided the operation and functioning of the mechanicals
is not jeopardized. The wall shall be architecturally
consistent and compatible with the building's design,
colors and material finishes.
[3] Ground-mounted or wall-mounted equipment shall not be
located between the building's front facade and the
primary street(s) or other side or rear facades in clear
view by the public. Screening devices shall be at a height
as high as the equipment to the greatest extent
practicable, provided the operation and functioning of the
mechanicals is not jeopardized. Ground-mounted or wallmounted
equipment and screening devices shall meet rear
and side yard setbacks.
[4] Utilities, service areas, and waste disposal areas shall be
located and screened to avoid public view to the greatest
extent practicable using screening walls, decorative
fencing and/or plant materials. Screening materials shall
be durable and of a quality that can easily and routinely be
maintained in proper condition by the property owner.
I. Standards applicable to individual building types.
(1) Civic and institutional buildings.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:888
(a) Description. Civic and institutional buildings are typically
unique in building form and architectural style, often providing
visually distinct public gathering places that are highly visible
from the public realm, particularly primary thoroughfares. In
Auburn, the most prominent civic buildings are government
office buildings and courthouses. Institutional buildings may
be operated by private or public institutions and not-for-profit
organizations. These buildings may be dedicated to a single
purpose such as public safety, social services, cultural
activities and education. In some cases, transit-related
facilities, such as public parking structures, are considered
civic buildings. As prominent features in the urban landscape,
the design of civic and institutional buildings is critical to
enhancing community character in the Downtown District.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for civic and
institutional buildings to be used on a case-by-case basis to
create functional and visually memorable civic and
institutional buildings with design features that help establish
a sense of place in Downtown Auburn. It is important that
these buildings are consistent with the visual characteristics
and the context of surrounding neighborhoods and nearby
buildings without sacrificing the uniqueness of their design.
(c) Additional standards applicable to this building type.
[1] Building alignment and setback shall vary with building
location, lot size, and intended use, but shall not exceed
1.5 times the average of the setbacks of immediately
adjacent buildings.
[2] The placement of the building on the property shall
highlight its visual character and intended use.
[3] Where civic buildings are located that terminate a vista,
such as along the centerline of a thoroughfare, the primary
facade(s) shall be designed to include a significant
architectural building and/or open space feature along the
axis of the vista.
[4] Pedestrian areas and circulation on the grounds shall be
well-landscaped and visually distinct from vehicular areas.
Parking and vehicular circulation shall not dominate views
from the public realm in the front of the building or from
major streets nearby.
(2) Multistory commercial/office buildings.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:889
(a) Description. Within the City of Auburn, multistory commercial/
office buildings are typically large structures generally
consisting of two to six stories, with vertical mixed uses that
may include ground-floor retail, office or commercial services,
and upper-floor office or residential use. These buildings are on
large lots and may visually dominate a downtown block and
one or more corners. They may be owned by one or more
entities and can be divided into separate uses. These buildings
are often an important center of employment and substantially
contribute to the urban streetwall and pedestrian activity.
Parking may be incorporated into the structure.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for multistory
commercial/office buildings that because of their relatively
large size, reuse potential and adaptability to a variety of uses,
this building type exhibits a traditional urban rectangular form
and an almost timeless or classic appearance in architectural
style, colors and materials.
(3) Main Street mixed-use buildings.
(a) Description. "Main street" mixed-use buildings are generally
small- to medium-size in scale, typically two to four stories with
ground-floor retail, services or other commercial uses and
upper-floor residential or office space. In their more traditional
form, these buildings are frequently attached to one another
(or other structures) by a common wall, helping to define a
highly unified streetscape. Detached buildings may be a
remnant of past similar uses on the block and may provide
opportunities for infill development. The ground floor
emphasizes transparency and is comprised of larger,
storefront-type windows and doors, with smaller windows in
upper floors. These buildings may include a corner shopfront.
There is a distinct rhythm to window patterns and these
buildings typically exhibit a compatible variety of building
materials, colors and textures.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards to protect and
preserve Auburn's existing stock of pedestrian-scaled mixeduse
buildings that define most of the rich visual character of
Downtown. These buildings are highly adaptable to a variety of
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:890
uses over time and promote a healthy pedestrian environment
consistent with a walkable city. Emphasis shall be placed on
their adaptive reuse, redevelopment, infill development
opportunities and preservation over new forms of development
on the same site.
(4) Mid-rise/high-rise buildings.
(a) Description. Mid-rise to high-rise buildings are medium- to
large-scale, high-density structures on large lots comprised of
multiple stories generally dedicated to a single purpose (such
as residential use) or mixed-use consisting of ground level
retail, personal services, and office use with upper floor
residential units. Surface and/or structure parking may be
provided. Mid-rise buildings are typically four to eight stories
and high-rise buildings are nine to 12 stories or more in height.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for this building
type to permit their development in suitable locations that are
visually compatible with the surrounding neighborhood,
particularly with regard to their scale, height and massing.
Dwelling units in these structures are intended to provide
residents with opportunities to walk to nearby neighborhood
services to meet daily and personal needs.
(c) Additional standards applicable to this building type.
[1] Roofs on most mid-rise and high-rise buildings are
typically flat due to their overall height and massing. The
top floor at the roofline of the primary and side facades
may include decorative elements such as changes in
materials or color to highlight the structure.
[2] Side and rear facades shall receive the same treatments in
terms of building materials, windows, and colors as the
primary facade. Entries to ground floor uses and dwelling
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:891
units may be accessed from the sides or rear of the
building.
(5) Small shopfront/residence buildings.
(a) Description. Shopfront buildings are generally small attached
or detached buildings having one owner and typically set on
relatively small lots. The ground floor is flexible space able to
adapt to a variety of shopfront uses and may contain retail or
commercial services with a rear or upper floor residence or
office. These buildings may function as "live/work" buildings,
and are typically located in medium- or moderate-density
areas. The building's main entrance typically faces the primary
street and there may be a separate entry for the upper floor.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for the shopfront/
residence building type to protect and preserve their unique
architectural styles and ability to adapt to the space
requirements of small businesses and neighborhood uses.
(c) Additional standards applicable to this building type.
[1] The building shall be aligned with adjacent building fronts
on primary streets, typically with a very narrow (or zero)
setback and build-to lines along side streets.
[2] Buildings shall be brought forward to the property lines of
adjacent streets. Storefronts and primary entryway to the
ground floor is along the primary street. Upper floor
entries may be along the primary and/or side streets.
[3] Rooflines may include trim and color accents.
(6) Commercial franchise and branch office buildings.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:892
(a) Description. Commercial franchise and branch office buildings
are typically small- to medium-size, on correspondingly sized
lots that allow for surface parking. These buildings tend to be
more auto-oriented than others in the Downtown District, and
their placement on a lot typically emphasizes maximum
visibility. Building design and colors may exhibit identifiable
logos and commercial brand characteristics; to the extent that
nontraditional, branded colors are featured in the building
design, these should not be a primary element of the facade.
Buildings are typically one to two stories in height and
principal uses generally confined to the ground floor. Off-street
parking is typically provided on the property. These buildings
may contain office space and are well-suited to daily or
personal care services and may include uses such as banks;
restaurants; specialty retail; and office buildings.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for commercial
franchise and branch office buildings to encourage compatible
development with adjoining buildings and nearby residential
neighborhood uses, particularly in transitional areas beyond
the core of Downtown Auburn.
(c) Additional standards applicable to this building type.
[1] Pedestrian circulation on the grounds shall be welllandscaped
and visually distinct from vehicular areas.
Parking and vehicular circulation shall not dominate views
from the public realm in the front of the building or from
major streets nearby.
[2] Pitched roofs may be most appropriate in transitional edge
areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods with similar
rooflines and features.
[3] Bright, neon and nontraditional colors shall be used
sparingly in identifying franchise logos and/or brand
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:893
names, but not as building elements, facade treatments,
frontage elements, window or door design accents, and/or
trim without City approval.
(7) Attached multiple-residence buildings (duplex, rowhouse,
townhouse).
(a) Description. Attached multiple-residence buildings contain
more than one dwelling unit and may be constructed to house
multiple units in a variety of ways, vertically and/or
horizontally. These buildings are generally dedicated to a
single use as residential buildings.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the design standards for attached
multiple-residence buildings to encourage compatible, welldesigned
and maintained residential development with nearby
residential neighborhood uses, particularly in transitional
areas beyond the core of Downtown Auburn.
(8) Detached house.
(a) Description. Detached houses, particularly large older homes,
come in various shapes and sizes with flexible design
characteristics that often, but not always allow for the
conversion of their interior space to other than residential
uses. Although detached houses may remain as single-family
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:894
residences, conversion to other residential and nonresidential
uses in Downtown Auburn may include apartments, home
occupations, office buildings, and small retail shops. These
buildings typically remain dedicated to a single use even after
conversion occurs. Conversion, if it occurs, typically happens
in areas where development is transitioning from urban singlefamily
residential neighborhoods to other forms of land use.
These buildings typically have setbacks for a front yard, rear
yard and two side yards. Many detached houses have
accessory structures, including garages.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of these design standards for detached
houses to encourage compatible, well-designed and
maintained residential development with nearby residential
neighborhoods and other nonresidential uses, particularly in
transitional areas of downtown.
J. Dimensional standards.
Dimensional Standards
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multi-story
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-
Use
Mid-Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Detached
House
Lot Size
Lot width E N/A N/A 40 feet
minimum
N/A 20 feet
minimum,
40 feet
maximum
25 feet
minimum
N/A 50 feet
minimum
Lot depth F N/A N/A 100 feet
minimum
N/A N/A 100 feet
minimum
N/A 100 feet
minimum
Setback
Primary
street
(front
setback)
A See Section
3.1.3
10 feet
maximum
5 feet
maximum
10 feet
maximum3
5 feet
maximum
5 feet
maximum
10 feet
maximum
10 feet
maximum
Side B See Section
3.1.3
0 feet or 5
feet
0 feet or
5 feet
10 feet
maximum3
0 feet or 5
feet
0 feet or 10
feet
10 feet
maximum
10 feet
maximum
Rear4 D See Section
3.1.3
N/A N/A N/A3 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Building Size and Massing
Main
building
height1
K 2 stories or
25 feet
minimum
2 stories
minimum, 75
feet
maximum
2 stories
minimum,
50 feet
maximum
4 stories
minimum3
1 story
minimum,
25 feet
maximum
2 story
maximum
2 stories
minimum,
3 stories
maximum
2.5 stories
minimum, 3
stories
maximum
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:895
Dimensional Standards
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multi-story
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-
Use
Mid-Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Detached
House
Main
building
width2
G N/A N/A N/A N/A 18 feet
minimum
N/A N/A N/A
Main
building
depth
H N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Ancillary
building
height
2 stories or
25 feet
maximum
2 stories or
25 feet
maximum
2 stories
or 25
feet
maximum
2 stories
or 25 feet
maximum
1 story or
15 feet
maximum
1 story or
15 feet
maximum
1 story or
15 feet
maximum
1 story or
15 feet
maximum
Finish
ground
floor elev.
L 8 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
8 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
18 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
8 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
18 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
8 inches
maximum
above
sidewalk
N/A N/A
First floor
ceiling
height
M 10 feet
minimum to
14 feet
maximum
10 feet
minimum to
14 feet
maximum
10 feet
minimum
to 14 feet
maximum
10 feet
minimum
to 14 feet
maximum
10 feet
minimum to
12 feet
maximum
10 feet
minimum to
14 feet
maximum
N/A N/A
Upper
floor(s)
ceiling
height
N 9 feet
minimum
8 feet
minimum to
10 feet
maximum
8 feet
minimum
to 10 feet
maximum
8 feet
minimum
to 10 feet
maximum
8 feet
minimum to
10 feet
maximum
8 feet
minimum to
10 feet
maximum
N/A N/A
1 Buildings that are more than four stories high shall step back the fifth and upper floors thereafter, a minimum of one
foot for each foot in height above the fourth floor to reduce the scale and massing effect of the structure.
2 Where parcels are wider than 100 feet on the primary street axis, the building width along the primary street shall be
at least 75% of the width of the parcel. In all cases, individual buildings wider than 40 feet shall be designed with bays
or other features to articulate the primary facade.
3 Where building facade is built less than 10 feet from the property line, the maximum building height is six stories.
The building height maximum may be increased by 10 feet or one story for each additional 10 feet provided for front,
rear, and combined side yards, to a maximum height of 150 feet or 12 stories.
4 Where new buildings in the Downtown District abut residential districts, rear setback shall be equal to or greater
than the rear setback of adjacent residential property.
K. Building form.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:896
Building Form
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multistory
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-Use
Mid-
Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Detached
House
Frontage Elements1
Arcade X
Awning X X X X X X
Balcony X X X X
Canopy X X X X X X
Common
yard
X X X X X
Forecourt X X X X
Plaza X X X
Porch X X X
Stoop X X X
Storefront X X X
Roof Type and Features2
Flat X X X X X X X
Pitched3 X X X X X X X
Gabled X X X X X
Hip X X X
Mansard X
Transparency
Primary
facadeground
floor
40%
minimum
60%
minimum
60%
minimum
60%
minimum
40%
minimum
50%
minimum
N/A N/A
Secondary
facadeground
floor
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
N/A N/A
Upper
floor(s)
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
30%
minimum
N/A N/A
x = Permitted element or feature
1 Pitched roof height maximum one story.
2 Roof type and features shall be compatible with adjacent and nearby buildings and emphasize the use of traditional
cornices and facade treatments to the extent practicable.
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:897
Building Form
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multistory
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-Use
Mid-
Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Detached
House
3 Front facade and storefronts shall be oriented parallel to the primary street. Vertical and horizontal articulation shall
be considered as a method of breaking up the scale of the building and differentiate the ground floor from upper floors
by the use of bays, recesses or other structural or decorative elements.
L. Building use guideline.
Building Uses1
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multistory
Commercial/
Office
Main Street
Mixed-Use
Mid-
Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Detached
House
Ground Floor
Education X X
Professional
service
X X X X X X X2 X2
Public
assembly
X X
Commercial/
office
X X
Food
service
X X X X
Recreation X
Residential X X X
Retail X X X X X
Upper Floors
Education
Professional
service
X X X X X X X2 X2
Public
assembly
Commercial/
office
X X X X X X
Food
service
Residential X X X X X
Retail X
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:898
1 See Article III, § 305-12, Uses Table, for specific uses permitted in the Downtown District.
2 Adaptive re-use only.
M. Facade materials.
Facade Materials
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multistory
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-
Use
Mid-
Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Apartment
Building
Detached
House
Brick and
mortar
X X X X X X X X
Brick
panels
X X X X X X
Glazed
brick
X X X X X X X X
Stone,
natural and
cast
X X X X X X X X
Stone
masonry
units
X X X X X
Concrete,
precast and
cast-inplace
X X X X X X
Architectural
concrete
block
X X X X
Metal
composite
panels
X X X X
Exterior
insulation
finishing
systems
(EIFS)1
X
Granite and
marble
X X X X
Steel X X X X
Glass X X X X
Stucco X X X
§ 305-23 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-23
294:899
Facade Materials
Key
Civic and
Institutional
Multistory
Commercial/
Office
Main
Street
Mixed-
Use
Mid-
Rise/
High-
Rise
Small
Shopfront/
Storefront
Commercial
Franchise
and
Branch
Office
Attached
Multi-
Residence
Apartment
Building
Detached
House
Wood
siding
X X X X
Vinyl siding X X X
1 Where permitted, EIFS is to be used on upper floors only. Use of EIFS as a primary facade
material is strongly discouraged.
§ 305-23 AUBURN CODE § 305-23
294:900
ARTICLE IV
Supplemental Regulations
§ 305-24. Accessory dwelling units.
A. Standards.
(1) Principal use. The principal use of the structure must be that of a
single-family dwelling or an accessory structure that primarily
serves the needs of the single-family dwelling.
(2) Required occupancy. The owner of the property upon which the
accessory dwelling unit is located shall occupy the principal or
accessory dwelling unit on the premises as their primary residence.
(3) Maximum occupancy. The accessory dwelling unit shall be limited
in occupancy as a single-family dwelling.
(4) Number of accessory dwelling units. Only one accessory dwelling
unit shall be permitted on any lot.
(a) If the portion of the structure is attached for the use of a
garage or carport, and is more than one story in height, that
portion not used for the shelter or storage of vehicles shall be
designed and used as an integral part of the principal
residence or approved habitable use such as guest living
quarters.
(b) If an accessory dwelling unit is attached, the entire structure
must comply with all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for
the primary structure.
(5) Minimum lot dimensions. The lot on which the accessory dwelling
unit is to be located shall contain at least the minimum lot area and
lot width required by the Bulk and Use Table for the primary onefamily
dwelling unit plus a minimum of an additional 2,000 square
feet of lot area and an additional 10 feet of lot width for the
accessory dwelling unit.
(a) Maximum size. An accessory dwelling unit shall be subordinate
in area to the single-family dwelling not to exceed 800 square
feet.
(b) Setbacks. If the accessory dwelling unit is within a detached
accessory structure, said structure must meet the required
yard setbacks.
(c) Access. An external located entrance, separate from that of the
single-family dwelling, shall be located on the side or rear of
the single-family dwelling, or in the front only if the entrance is
on a separate, perpendicular plane from that of the front
entrance of the single-family dwelling.
§ 305-24 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-24
294:901
§ 305-25. Accessory uses and structures.
(d) Outside stairways. Any outside stairways and/or fire escapes
shall be at the rear or side of the structure.
(e) Exterior appearance. If an accessory dwelling unit is located in
a detached single-family dwelling, to the degree reasonably
feasible, the exterior appearance of the structure shall remain
that of a single-family dwelling.
(f) Maintenance and continued compliance. An accessory dwelling
unit shall be permitted and continued only when all structures
on the lot are in compliance with applicable codes, rules,
regulations, statutes and local laws and ordinances.
(g) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with § 305-48, Off-street parking and loading, of this chapter.
(6) Application. An application for an accessory dwelling unit must
contain sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with each
of the standards set forth in this section, including but not limited
to the following information:
(a) A floor plan of each habitable floor of the structure, with all
interior dimensions, including windows and doors, including
types of rooms.
(b) Plans shall be prepared in sufficient size and detail to enable
the Planning Department to determine compliance with the
requirements for an accessory dwelling unit.
A. Authorization.
(1) Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, accessory uses are
permitted in all zoning districts in connection with any principal
use lawfully established within such district.
B. Permit required.
(1) An accessory use or structure shall only be established or
constructed following issuance of a permit unless otherwise noted
in this chapter.
(2) Particular permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Accessory structures and uses include, but are not limited to,
the following list of examples; provided, however, that each
structure or use shall comply with the standards and
requirements of Subsection B(1) above.
[1] Private residential garages, portable garages, pole barns
and carports. Attached or unattached private residential
garages and carports shall not exceed 784 square feet.
§ 305-24 AUBURN CODE § 305-25
294:902
[2] Private customer and employee garages and parking lots
and parking areas, together with related circulation
elements.
[3] Storage shed. A structure used for storage incidental to a
permitted use, including garden and storage sheds,
personal greenhouses, and nurseries shall not exceed 144
square feet.
[4] Play structure. Play structures are allowed in the rear
yard, or in the side yard behind the midpoint of the lot
depth, and shall maintain a minimum side and rear yard of
setback of three feet, inclusive of any roof overhang, and
shall not exceed 100 square feet.
[5] Recreation facilities. Tennis courts or other recreational
facility accessory to a residential building and limited to
use by the occupants thereof and their guests.
[6] Portable garages, pole barns and carports. No more than
one portable garage, pole barn or carport will be allowed
on a lot regardless of zone or size unless a special use
permit that will comply with Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits, is obtained. The side yard
requirements for a portable garage, pole barn or carport
will be a minimum of five feet and shall always be located
in the area defined as the rear yard with a three-foot
minimum rear setback.
[7] Trash area, nonresidential. An outdoor trash collection
and storage areas shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall
or fence with a minimum height of five feet. The trash area
shall be located on the site so that adequate vehicular
access is provided.
[8] The removal of soil, sand, gravel, sod, stone or other
natural material from a site in connection with
construction of a building or structure shall be deemed to
be part of the construction process and permitted only
upon issuance of a building permit in conjunction
therewith. Such removal shall otherwise be prohibited,
except when undertaken as a permitted principal use
under the terms of this chapter.
[9] The disposal of refuse, garbage, or other types of solid
waste is permitted only in accordance with applicable
regulations of the City of Auburn and shall not require a
permit under the provisions of this chapter except when
undertaken as a principal use under the chapter.
C. General regulations.
§ 305-25 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-25
294:903
§ 305-26. Adult use businesses.
(1) No accessory structure shall be erected or established within a
front yard.
(2) Accessory structures ancillary to a residential use.
(a) Setback. No accessory structures shall be located closer than
three feet to a side or rear property line.
(b) Height. No accessory structures shall be higher than 20 feet.
(3) Accessory structures ancillary to a nonresidential use.
(a) Setback. Accessory structures shall comply with the setback
requirments of the principal use as required in the Bulk and
Use Tables.
(b) Height. Accessory structures shall comply with the height
requirements of the principal use as required in the Bulk and
Use Tables.
(4) Particular uses prohibited as accessory uses.
(a) Outdoor storage except in accordance with § 305-50, Outdoor
storage of materials and equipment.
(b) Vehicle repair on residential premises except when performed:
[1] By a resident of the premises;
[2] On a vehicle owned, licensed and operated for personal
use by a resident of the premises; and
[3] Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Purpose.
(1) It is recognized that for some uses which, because of their nature,
have serious objectionable operational characteristics when
several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances,
which produce a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, special
regulation is necessary to ensure that adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhoods. The primary reason for regulation is to prevent
concentration of these uses in any one area which could create
adverse neighborhood affects.
(2) It is further declared that the location of these uses in regard to
areas where youth may regularly assemble and the general
atmosphere encompassing their operation is of great concern to
the City of Auburn. In order to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Auburn, County of
Cayuga and State of New York, it is necessary to establish
§ 305-25 AUBURN CODE § 305-26
294:904
reasonable and uniform regulations for adult use businesses within
the City of Auburn. The regulation of adult use businesses is
necessary to prevent deterioration and degradation of the vitality
of the City of Auburn, New York, before a problem develops, rather
than in response to an existing problem.
(3) These special regulations are itemized in this section to accomplish
the primary purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in
any one area and restricting their accessibility to minors. It is not
the intent or purpose of this section to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented adult materials protected by the First
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States or to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to
their intended market, nor is it the intent or effect of this section to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
B. Districts where permitted; restrictions on location.
(1) Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in the General
Industrial District (I) and the Resource Recovery District (1-2),
subject to a special permit in accordance with this chapter and
subject to site plan review in accordance with this chapter.
(2) Adult use businesses shall be further subject to the following
requirements in addition to any other requirements of this chapter.
(a) Adult use businesses shall not be located within:
[1] A radius of 500 feet of any area zoned residential.
[2] A radius of 500 feet of any other adult use business.
[3] A radius of 500 feet of any area where youth may regularly
assemble, including, but not limited to, a school, nursery
school, day-care facility, library, church or other place of
religious worship, community center, park, playground or
recreational area or playing field.
[4] Five hundred feet of any residential dwelling defined as
"bed-and-breakfast," "dwelling," "dwelling,
semidetached," "dwelling, multiple-family," "dwelling,
single-family detached," "dwelling, single-family
semidetached," and "dwelling, two-family" in Article II,
Definitions, of this chapter.
[5] Five hundred feet of any property located in the Historic
Resources Protection District, property listed on the
National Register of Historic Places and property
designated as National Historic Landmarks.
[6] Five hundred feet of an establishment where alcohol is
sold, served or consumed.
§ 305-26 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-26
294:905
§ 305-27. Bed-and-breakfast.
(b) The distance provided hereinabove shall be measured by a
straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the
nearest point of the property parcel upon which the adult use
business is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel of
property or the land use district boundary line from which the
adult use business is to be separated. All separation
requirements shall be maintained from established uses,
whether inside or outside City of Auburn boundaries.
(3) Additional regulations.
(a) The sale, serving or consumption of alcohol shall be prohibited
within or from any adult use business establishment.
(b) No adult use business establishment shall operate after 2:00
a.m.
(c) No more than one adult use business as defined in this section
shall be located on any parcel.
(d) Exterior windows on adult use business establishments may be
opaque but not blackened or boarded.
(e) Any and all booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private
viewing of adult motion pictures and/or live performances or
areas shall be open to public view from the common area of the
adult use establishment. There shall not be any doors, curtains,
blinds or other structures or devices that shall impede
observation of the entire area of such private viewing areas
from the common area of the adult use business establishment.
(f) Private viewing areas must be well lit and readily accessible at
all times and shall continually be open to view.
(g) Lighting throughout an adult use business establishment shall
be sufficient to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access.
(h) The exterior appearance of adult use business establishments
shall be regulated by the Planning Board during the site plan
review process in accordance with Article VI, Site Plan Review,
of this chapter.
A. Requirements.
(1) In addition to parking required for the principal use, one off-street
parking space per bedroom shall be provided for the bed-andbreakfast
home. Further, said parking spaces shall not be
established or permitted in the front yard of the site and shall be
located or screened from view so as to provide no variation from
the residential character of the site.
§ 305-26 AUBURN CODE § 305-27
294:906
§ 305-28. Buffer areas.
(2) Exterior signage shall comply with the requirements for the subject
zoning district as set forth in Article V, Sign Regulations, of this
chapter.
(3) The owner of the bed-and-breakfast home must reside in and
continue to reside in the dwelling as his/her/their principal
residence.
(4) No guest shall stay for a period of time in excess of 30 consecutive
days.
(5) Each bed-and-breakfast home shall be established, maintained, and
operated so as to preserve and compliment the character and
integrity of the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) The bed-and-breakfast home shall be maintained and operated at
all times so as to comply with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, as amended.
(7) Specific exemptions, supersessions, and conditions applicable to
bed-and-breakfast homes established within residential zoning
districts:
(a) The bed-and-breakfast home shall contain no more than three
bedrooms for transient lodgers.
(b) The bed-and-breakfast home may employ no more than one
nonresident employee.
(c) Only a single identification sign, not to exceed four square feet
in area, is permitted.
(d) The Planning Board shall have the right to impose and include
additional conditions as it may deem necessary to effectuate
the purpose of this chapter.
B. Permit required. A bed-and-breakfast shall be permitted in the R-1
Single-Family Residential District only upon issuance of a special use
permit by the Planning Board.
A. Authorization. Buffer areas are permitted in any zoning district. When
site plan review is required for a particular use, said buffer areas shall
be deemed to be a mandatory element of any permit granted for said
use.
B. Purpose.
(1) Provide a visual barrier.
(2) Block the glare of lights.
§ 305-27 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-28
294:907
§ 305-29. Conversions.
(3) Reduce noise produced on the site to a level on higher than that
produced on conforming residential sites in the adjacent residential
neighborhood.
(4) Serve as a protective barrier by blocking physical passage to the
site, unless specific points of passage are desired.
(5) Prevent the passage of air pollution, dust and litter produced on the
site.
(6) Screen the activities on site and block views of the site which are
not in harmony with the character of the adjacent neighborhood.
(7) Be maintained throughout the continuance of the use of the lot.
C. Design.
(1) Buffers shall be composed of fencing, plantings, walls, landscaping,
planters, trellises, etc., or any combination of such.
(2) Buffer design shall include all details required for an appraisal of
the design, including but not limited to location, species, and size of
individual trees and shrubs and detailed design of all structures
and other landscaping treatments.
(3) A screen planting of dense evergreen material not less than five
feet in height shall be required where lights from vehicles or
overhead illumination located within the off-street parking area
may shine directly into windows of adjacent residential buildings. A
solid fencing may be provided not less than four feet nor more than
six feet in height alongside the rear lot lines, and subject to the
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer, may increase the height
requirements of the fence of evergreen screening.
(4) All dumpsters shall be hidden from view from adjacent properties
by closed fencing and vegetation. The screening of materials stored
outdoors may be required by the City Planning Board.
(5) Buffer designs shall be submitted by the applicant and reviewed in
conjunction with the building permit application review procedure.
(6) Construction of required buffers may be delayed for up to 18
months upon approval by the Code Enforcement Officer when the
need for the buffer is unclear.
A. Purpose.
(1) Conversion of existing residential buildings to increase the number
of dwelling units contained therein presents problems not
encountered when new buildings are designed and constructed for
the same number of units. Such conversions can adversely affect
§ 305-28 AUBURN CODE § 305-29
294:908
the safety and comfort of persons who occupy such converted
buildings and can adversely affect a neighborhood originally
designed for low-density development through overcrowding and
its associated problems of inadequate recreational space,
inadequate parking and overtaxed municipal services. These in
turn may contribute to the physical decline and deterioration of
the surrounding area. The intent of this section is to establish
standards to prevent the overcrowding of dwelling units and overly
dense development of neighborhoods and to ensure satisfactory
amenities in neighborhoods as conversions take place.
(2) Dwelling unit conversions which do not meet the standards
established in this section may be permitted only upon the granting
of an area variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to
Article VIII, § 305-95, Zoning Board of Appeals, of this chapter.
B. Required site plan review. No dwelling unit conversion shall be
undertaken unless all requirements for special use permit have been
met in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104, Special use permit.
C. Increase in number of dwelling units.
(1) No dwelling unit conversion to create more dwelling units in any
building than can be accommodated in compliance with all of the
following standards shall be permitted in any district.
(2) Minimum unit size. No dwelling unit conversion shall be permitted
which results in any dwelling unit having less than the minimum
habitable floor area required by the following:
Number of Bedrooms
Required Area of Habitable
Space
(square feet)
Studio 500
1 650
2 800
3 1,000
Each additional bedroom Add 125
(3) Minimum building size. No dwelling unit conversion of any building
having less than 1,500 square feet of habitable floor area shall be
permitted.
(4) Minimum lot size. Lot size shall comply with the requirements for
minimum lot size as defined within the Bulk and Use Tables, but
shall not be less than the following:
§ 305-29 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-29
294:909
§ 305-30. Corner and through lots.
§ 305-31. Drive-through establishments.
Proposed Use
Required Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Dwelling, two-family 7,500
Dwelling, multifamily 11,250
(5) Parking regulations. No dwelling unit conversion shall be permitted
unless the dwelling shall, following such conversion, comply with
the applicable off-street parking and loading regulations provided
in § 305-48, Off-street parking and loading.
A. Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends
from one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street or alley, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall decide which street will be considered
as the front street. No principal structure shall be erected on the rear of
the lot, except as specified in Subsections B and C of this section.
B. Side yard of a corner lot. The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a
street shall be equal to at least one-half the required front yard for that
street.
C. Corner lots; visibility restrictions. No obstruction to vision exceeding 30
inches in height shall be erected, planted or maintained on any lot
within the triangle formed by the street intersection created by the
right-of-way line of each street extended to a point and a line drawn
between two points on the right-of-way line of each street, each located
40 feet from the street intersection, unless a determination is made by
the Code Enforcement Officer that no obstruction to vision exists or will
exist through maintenance or placement of the object.
A. Permit required. A drive-through shall be permitted in the DD
Downtown Zoning District only upon issuance of a special use permit by
the Planning Board in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104, Special
use permits.
B. General regulations. In all districts, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
not issue such a permit unless the drive-through establishment
conforms to the following:
(1) The drive-through shall be an accessory use to a permitted use
within the DD, C, and HC Zoning Districts. Drive-throughs are
prohibited in all other zoning districts.
(2) All vehicle stacking areas shall be clearly identified through the use
of pavement markings, signs and/or curbing and landscaping
features and shall be designed so they do not interfere with safe
§ 305-29 AUBURN CODE § 305-31
294:910
pedestrian and vehicle circulation on the site and along the public
right-of-way.
(a) Each stacking space shall be no less than 10 feet in width and
20 feet in length. Each drive-through facility shall provide a
minimum of six stacking spaces. Each drive-through facility
shall provide a bypass lane of at least 10 feet in width.
(3) Additional stacking or queuing space may be required by the
Article VI, Site Plan Review, to ensure the safety of pedestrians and
motorists.
(a) All drive-through vehicle stacking areas shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential
property.
(b) Any speaker system installed as part of the drive-through shall
be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line
adjoining a residential property, and not exceed 60 dBA.
(c) Drive-throughs shall be sited and designed in such a way to
reinforce the walkable, historic characteristic of the City and
shall pay special attention to the relationship between the
building and the public street.
(d) The capacity of the drive-through stacking lanes should not
interfere with the overall traffic flow within the parking lot.
(e) Each parcel with a drive-through shall be limited to one point
of shared ingress and egress. Where possible, cross access to
the closest shared drive shall be provided.
(f) Menu boards shall be a maximum of 20 square feet with a
maximum height of five feet and shall be shielded from any
public street and residential properties with decorative
treatments and landscaping.
(g) Landscaping along exterior lot lines shall include a five- to tenfoot-
wide vegetative buffer of deciduous trees and shrubs or a
six-foot fence screening, constructed of low maintenance
natural materials, including brick, stone or wood with a
vegetative buffer of two to five feet from the exterior lot lines.
(h) Luminaries or lighting fixtures shall not exceed 16 feet in
height in vehicular areas and 10 feet in height in pedestrian
areas.
(i) Flood lighting shall be prohibited.
(j) No outdoor lighting shall have an intensity greater than 1/2
footcandle at the development property line.
§ 305-31 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-31
294:911
§ 305-32. Driveway, residential.
§ 305-33. Farmers' market.
C. Required findings for approval. The Planning Board shall not grant a
special use permit for a drive-through in the DD Downtown Zoning
District unless it first makes all of the following findings, in addition to
those required in this section and by Article VIII, § 305-104, Special use
permits.
(1) The drive-through is accessory to a bank or similar financial use;
(2) The proposed use will not detract from the walkability of the
district; and
(3) The proposed use will not substantially increase traffic hazards to
pedestrians.
A. Application.
(1) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted nor any driveway or
parking area established in the front yard.
(2) The allowed hardscaping is limited to a driveway leading directly
from a public street or alley to a garage or other required parking
area and pedestrian pathways.
A. Limitations. Temporary and permanent farmers' markets are subject to
the following regulations:
(1) All farmers' markets and their vendors comply with all federal,
state and local laws relating to the operation, use and enjoyment of
the market premises.
(2) All farmers' markets and their vendors receive all required
operating and health permits and these permits (or copies) shall be
in the possession of the farmers' market operator or the vendor, as
applicable, on the site of the farmers' market during all hours of
operation.
(3) All farmers' markets have a representative of the operator
authorized to direct the operations of all vendors participating in
the market on the site of the market during all hours of operation.
(4) There shall be no offensive odors or dust and there shall be no
permanent outdoor storage or equipment.
(5) All farmers' markets shall provide for composting, recycling, and
waste removal in accordance with all applicable City codes. The
farmers' market manager is responsible for ensuring that the site is
in compliance with these regulations.
§ 305-31 AUBURN CODE § 305-33
294:912
§ 305-34. Food carts.
Refer to Chapter 221, Peddling and Soliciting, in the City of Auburn's
Municipal Code.
§ 305-35. Food trucks.
(6) Farmers' markets may not contain market vendors of the following
types:
(a) Market vendors selling any entity's non-food product as an
agent, franchisee, distributor, or licensee; or on consignment;
or by any other third-party arrangement.
(b) Market vendors selling non-food items such as "vintage,"
"found," "reclaimed" or "recycled" objects, or any other objects
not originally manufactured by the market vendor unless those
objects have been substantially transformed by the market
vendor into objects of dissimilar form or function from the
original.
(c) Market vendors selling live animals.
A. General regulations.
(1) Food trucks are permitted to operate in CC, C, NC, HC, SC, I, I-1,
I-2 and DD Districts.
(2) No food truck shall operate within the public rights-of-way within
the City without first having obtained a valid peddling and
soliciting license as prescribed in this section.
(3) Food trucks shall not operate within public rights-of-way in the
Single-Family Residential (R-1) and Multiple-Family Residential
(R-2) Zoning Districts except when permitted by the City to cater a
private event or as part of a City-sponsored event.
(4) All food trucks must abide by all parking and vehicle and traffic
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations at all times, including but
not limited to any durational requirements in force and effect at
that time and location.
(5) No food truck or food trailer shall operate within 100 feet of an
approved vending cart location.
(6) No food truck or food trailer shall operate in a location that has the
effect of obstructing access to or egress from any structure or the
free flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(7) No vendor shall chain or otherwise attach any signs, goods,
merchandise, chairs, stools or food cart or other equipment used in
vending to any tree, parking meter, hydrant, sign or post, light pole,
telephone pole or other street appurtenance or leave any such
§ 305-33 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-35
294:913
§ 305-36. Fences, walls, and other structural screening elements.
items unattended on a public street, sidewalk or place. Items left in
violation of this subsection shall be seized by the police.
B. Permitting.
(1) A private vendor must obtain an annual peddling and soliciting
permit for the vending use of the vehicle on particular properties
from the City. The permit applications must include the property
owners' signatures. Fees for these permits shall be as established
in the City's yearly fee schedule.
(2) A peddling and soliciting permit, operating license, proof of
insurance, and county health permit must be displayed during the
food truck's hours of operation.
(3) Before any license authorized herein shall be issued, the applicant
shall file with the City proof of insurance, issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of New York, which
insurance must be kept continuously in force during the term of the
license. At the time of application, applicants shall provide proof of
insurance that extends for the entire license period. The insurance
shall be not less than $1,000,000 comprehensive/general liability
insurance. Such insurance shall not expire, nor be canceled,
altered or amended except on 10 days' written notice to the City
Treasurer served personally or by certified mail. Municipal
operations, employees and property shall not be excluded from
coverage. The insurance must name the City as an additional
insured party.
(4) The peddling and soliciting permit issued for the food truck
vending (the annual permit held by the vendor) may be revoked if
the City determines that the mobile prepared food vendor's
operations are causing parking, traffic congestion, or litter
problems either on or off the property where the use is located or
that such use is otherwise creating a danger to the public health or
safety.
(5) If the food truck is proposed to operate after dark, the food truck
vendor shall provide a lighting plan which meets the lighting
standards in Article IV, § 305-43, Lighting.
A. Maximum height requirements.
Location
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Front yard 4
§ 305-35 AUBURN CODE § 305-36
294:914
§ 305-37. Garage sales.
Location
Height
(feet)
Side and rear yards adjacent to
residential uses, except that this
limitation shall not apply to living
hedges
6
Side and rear yards adjacent to
nonresidential uses and arterials, except
that this limitation shall not apply to
living hedges
8
On corner lots within the triangle
formed by the street intersection,
created by the right-of-way line of each
street extended to a point and a line
drawn between two points on the rightof-
way line of each street, each located
40 feet from the street intersection
4
Nonresidential uses 8
B. Design elements.
(1) Fences in the front yard and on corner lots within the triangle
formed by the street intersection shall be of a material such as post
or rail or other similar material which does not interfere, impede or
obstruct visually any private driveway or public highway; the
determination as to whether the fence material does not interfere,
obstruct or impede visually any private driveway or public highway
shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) Fence surfaces are regulated as follows:
(a) In residential districts, fences not more than 60% solid may be
located in any front yard.
(b) All solid fences shall be installed so that the finished side shall
face outward; all bracing shall be on the inside of the fence,
and the outward-facing side shall be of similar materials and
colors as the inward-facing side.
(c) No chain-link fencing shall be permitted in the front yard of a
residential structure or a property located in a residential
district.
(d) All required fences and walls shall be maintained and, when
necessary, repaired or replaced.
A. Number of sales; duration; hours.
§ 305-36 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-37
294:915
§ 305-38. Home occupations.
(1) No person or nonprofit corporation shall operate, conduct, manage
or present a garage sale upon his/her/its premises or other
property under its control more often than three times per calendar
year. Said sale shall not be continuous for a period of time of more
than three consecutive days.
(2) No sale shall be conducted before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
B. Persons and sales excepted.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the
following persons or sales:
(a) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(b) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
(c) Any sale that is part of a City-sanctioned event, such as a Citywide
garage sale.
A. Purpose. In order to protect residential areas from adverse impacts
associated with home occupations while allowing residents a choice in
the use of their home as a place of livelihood, the following standards
have been developed to maintain the peace and quiet of residential
neighborhoods and guarantee residents freedom from excessive noise,
traffic or other adverse effects of commercial and business uses
conducted in residential areas.
B. Permit required. A home occupation shall be permitted in residential
zoning district only upon issuance of a special use permit by the
Planning Board in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104, Special use
permits.
C. General requirements.
(1) To be deemed a home occupation, the use must be clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the property.
(2) The occupation or profession shall be carried on within the
principal building, unless the Planning Board grants a special use
permit to allow the home occupation in an accessory structure.
(3) A home occupation shall be conducted by the resident of the
dwelling unit.
(4) A home occupation may employ no more than one nonresident
employee who reports to the dwelling.
(5) There shall be no exterior display, other than a sign, not to exceed
two square feet in area, no exterior storage of materials and no
§ 305-37 AUBURN CODE § 305-38
294:916
§ 305-39. Industrial, heavy.
other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from
the residential character of the principal building.
(6) No offensive odor, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall
be produced, nor will the storage or handling of hazardous material
be allowed.
(7) No more than 25% of the floor area of the residence will be allowed
for the use of the home occupation.
(8) Parking requirements in compliance with § 305-48, Off-street
parking and loading.
D. Approval.
(1) The Planning Board shall not grant a special use permit for a home
occupation in a residential zoning district, unless the Planning
Board determines that the home occupation complies with the
requirements of this section and those of Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits.
(2) The Planning Board may impose additional conditions for home
occupations considered to be exceptional or for home occupations
in unique locations.
(3) If all criteria are not met, the home occupation is subject to a
variance per Article VIII, § 305-105, Use and area variances.
E. Revocation. A special use permit may be revoked by the City of Auburn
Code Enforcement Officer for violating any of the standards set forth in
Subsection C(1) through (8). In the event that a special use permit is
revoked, the aggrieved party may appeal the revocation to the Planning
Board and will be afforded an administrative hearing. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to sustain or overturn the revocation.
A. Performance standards. In addition to the standards and requirements
of this chapter, all heavy industrial industrial uses proposed to be
established shall provide documentation of conformance with the
following standards as a minimum condition of permit issuance.
(1) Vibration.
(a) Vibration shall be measured at or beyond any adjacent lot line
or residential district line as indicated, and such
measurements shall not exceed the particle velocities so
designated. The instrument for these measurements shall be a
three-component measuring system capable of simultaneous
measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular
directions.
§ 305-38 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-39
294:917
(b) The maximum vibration is given as particle velocity, which may
be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or
computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When
computed, the following formula shall be used:
[1] PV=6.28 F X D.
[2] PV=Particle velocity, inches per second.
[3] F=Vibration frequency, cycles per second.
[4] D=Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches
per second.
(c) The maximum particle velocity shall be the vector sum of the
three individual components recorded. Such particle velocity
shall not exceed 0.20 at the adjacent lot line and 0.02 in an
adjacent residential district.
(d) Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses and such
impulses do not exceed a frequency of 100 per minute, then the
maximum particle velocity values may be multiplied by two.
(2) Dust and particulates.
(a) The total emission rate of dust and particulate matter from all
vents, stacks, chimneys, flues or other openings or any
process, operation or activity except solid waste incinerators
within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the levels set
forth below. Emissions of dust and particulates shall be in
accordance with the State of New York rules and regulations
governing air contamination and air pollution, and, in case of
conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.
(b) The emission rate of particulate matter in pounds per hour
from any single stack shall be determined by selecting a
continuous four-hour period which will result in the highest
average emission rate.
(c) Particulate matter emission from materials or products subject
to becoming windborne shall be kept to a minimum by paving,
oiling, wetting, covering or other means such as to render the
surface wind-resistant. Such sources include vacant lots,
unpaved roads, yards and storage piles of bulk material such as
coal, sand, cinders, slag, sulfur, etc.
(d) The maximum emission rate of particulate matter from all
stacks shall be 3.0 pounds per hour per acre of lot area.
(3) Sulfur oxides. The maximum emission rate of sulfur oxides from all
stacks shall be in accordance with the regulations adopted by the
State of New York, Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 305-39 AUBURN CODE § 305-39
294:918
(4) Smoke.
(a) For the purpose of grading the density of equivalent opacity of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines shall be used.
(b) The emission of smoke darker than Ringelmann No. 1 from any
chimney, stack, vent opening, or combustion process is
prohibited; however, smoke of a shade not to exceed
Ringelmann No. 3 is permitted for up to three minutes total in
any one eight-hour period.
(5) Odor.
(a) Odor thresholds shall be measured in accordance with ASTM
D1391-57, "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in
Atmospheres (Dilution Methods)," or its equivalent.
(b) Odorous materials released from any operation or activity shall
not exceed the odor threshold concentration at or beyond the
district boundary line measured either at ground level or
habitable elevation.
(6) Toxic matter.
(a) The ambient air quality standards for the State of New York
Level III shall be the guide to the release of airborne toxic
materials across lot lines. Where toxic materials are not listed
in the ambient air quality standards of the State of New York,
the release of such materials shall be in accordance with the
fractional quantities permitted below of those toxic materials
currently listed in the threshold limit values adopted by the
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
Unless otherwise stated, the measurement of toxic matter shall
be at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the
average of any twenty-four-hour sampling period.
(b) The release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed 1/30 of
the threshold limit value beyond the district boundary line.
(7) Detonable materials.
(a) Such materials shall include but are not limited to all primary
explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN,
and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such as
dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine
and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as
magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate;
blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine;
unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles and
ozonides; unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acids,
§ 305-39 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-39
294:919
perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater
than 35%; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and
products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and
Plutonium 239.
(b) The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation is limited to five
pounds. Quantities in excess of five pounds of such materials
may be stored or utilized, but not manufactured, only when
permitted by the Auburn Fire Department.
(8) Fire hazard solids. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted
within walls having a fire resistance no less than two hours or
protected by an automatic fire extinguishing system. The outdoor
storage of such materials shall be permitted no closer than 40 feet
to all lot lines.
(9) Fire hazard liquids and gases.
(a) The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
gases which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be
permitted only in accordance with this section, exclusive of the
storage of finished products in original sealed containers (60
gallons or less), which shall be unrestricted.
(b) The total storage capacity of flammable liquids and gases shall
not exceed those quantities permitted in the following tables:
Storage Capacity of Flammable Liquids.
Flash Point Above Ground Below Ground
Less than 70° F. 10,000 gallons 20,000 gallons
70° F. to 200° F. 40,000 gallons 80,000 gallons
Storage Capacity of Flammable Gases
Above Ground Below Ground
300,000 standard cubic feet
at 60° F. and 29.92 inches Hg.
600,000 standard cubic feet
at 60° F. and 29.92 inches Hg.
(10) Glare. Any operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted
so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause
illumination in excess of 0.5 footcandle when measured in a
residential district.
(11) Noise.
(a) Noise shall be measured with a sound-level meter having an Aweighted
filter constructed in accordance with specifications
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
§ 305-39 AUBURN CODE § 305-39
294:920
Measurements are to be made at any point as indicated in the
table.
(b) Impact noise shall be assured using the fast response of the
sound-level meter. Impact noises are intermittent sounds such
as from a punch press or drop forge hammer. Measurements
are to be made at any point as indicated in the table.
(c) Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the permissible
sound levels in a residential district shall be reduced by five
decibels for continuous and by 10 decibels for impact noises.
(d) The following sources of noise are exempt:
[1] Transportation vehicles not under the control of the
industrial use.
[2] Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices, and
emergency pressure relief valves.
[3] Temporary construction activity between 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
(e) Maximum permitted sound level from a heavy industrial source
measured in any adjacent nonindustrial district or industrial
district lot adjacent to the site:
Sound measured
in
Continuous Slow
Meter Response
Impact Fast Meter
Response
Residential 50 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
Commercial 60 dB(A) 70 dB(A)
Industrial lot 70 dB(A) 80 dB(A)
(f) Certification of standards. All heavy industrial and light
industrial uses proposed to be established shall include with
the documentation of conformance with the above-enumerated
performance standards a certificate from a registered
professional engineer in the State of New York that the
proposed use can meet the performance standards of the
appropriate district. Furthermore, the Code Enforcement
Officer may employ consultants to evaluate the environmental
effects with respect to performance standards and include the
cost of such consultants as part of the fee for the permit or
certificate of occupancy.
(12) Environmental reviews. The permitting of a new heavy industrial
use is hereby declared to be a Type I action as defined by the rules
and regulations of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation for the implementation of New York
State Environmental Quality Review Act.
§ 305-39 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-39
294:921
§ 305-40. Junkyards and auto wrecking yards.
§ 305-41. Kennels.
§ 305-42. Landscaping.
(13) Existing uses. To the extent that a heavy industrial use has been
established prior to the enactment of this chapter and regardless of
the limitations or permissions granted by any discussion of
preexisting uses elsewhere in this chapter, no such existing use
shall be required to meet the performance standards herein
established. However, no such existing use shall become less
conforming with said performance standards than was the case at
the time of this enactment.
(14) Conflict with other standards. Should any standard herein
established conflict with a similar standard established by another
governmental agency, then the more restrictive standard shall
apply.
A. General requirements. Junkyards and auto wrecking yards are subject
to the performance standards for heavy industrial uses and to the
following regulations:
(1) Junkyards shall be enclosed by a fence or wall having a minimum
height of eight feet which is adequate to discourage entry onto the
premises except through designated gates and entryways.
(2) Such walls and fences shall be not less than 10 feet from all
property lines and shall be not less than 25 feet from any public
street.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any premises in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises by
natural causes or forces.
(4) Junkyards shall be located at least 500 feet from any adjacent
nonindustrial district.
A. Purpose. The purpose of animal boarding regulations is to ensure that
operations are compatible with and do not disrupt the surrounding
neighborhood as well as provide, a safe and adequate property for the
animals being boarded. All kennel establishments are subject to
§ 104-20 in the City of Auburn Municipal Code.
A. Authorization. Landscaping is permitted in any zoning district. When
site plan review is required for a particular use, said landscaping shall
be deemed to be a mandatory element of any permit granted for said
use.
§ 305-39 AUBURN CODE § 305-42
294:922
B. Purpose. This section is intended to establish the minimum standards
for the preservation, installation and maintenance of landscaping
materials in order to:
(1) Protect property values;
(2) Provide privacy from view, light, glare, dirt, and noise;
(3) Buffer incompatible land uses;
(4) Prevent the erosion of soil;
(5) Provide shade;
(6) Improve the environment; and
(7) Enhance the appearance of properties in the City.
C. General requirements. The following shall apply to all landscape plans:
(1) All development subject to the provisions of this section shall
provide for a landscaped or natural area, which is not less than
25% of the property area.
(2) Landscape treatments shall be designed as an integral part of the
entire development and shall be distributed throughout the
development site.
(3) Vegetation shall be compatible with soil conditions on the
development site and with the regional climate. Existing vegetation
may remain on site, provided such species are approved by the
Planning Board when granting approval of the landscape plan.
(4) Each planting area shall be of adequate size for the landscaping
approved. The interior dimensions of any landscaped area or
median shall be a minimum of seven feet wide to ensure proper
growth of vegetation planted therein.
(5) All landscaped areas shall have adequate irrigation and drainage
for that landscaping to ensure proper growth of vegetation.
(6) Landscaped areas in or near parking areas or roadways shall be
bordered with approved concrete curbing or swales.
(7) All landscaped areas shall contain clean, friable, weed-free topsoil
to depths necessary to sustain growth for trees, shrubs and
groundcover. In addition, all landscaped areas shall contain two
inches of wood mulch. Permeable interlocking pavers or
decomposed granite may also be utilized in heavily trafficked areas.
(8) Trees are the preferred form of vegetation and every effort shall be
made to preserve existing site trees, particularly existing trees with
a caliper larger than 10 inches. Each landscape plan must contain
at least one tree per 1,000 square feet of landscaped area.
§ 305-42 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-42
294:923
(9) Trees planted in a tree well or planter strip shall be provided with a
minimum seven-foot-by-seven-foot planting area. Trees planted in
an island planter shall be provided with a minimum four-foot-byeight-
foot planting area. Planter dimensions are measured from the
interior side of the curb. Trees must be planted behind the curb at a
distance no less than 1/2 the minimum planter width.
(10) Each landscape plan shall contain the following varieties of trees:
(a) Forty percent to 60% large deciduous trees.
(b) Twenty percent to 30% evergreen trees.
(c) Twenty percent to 30% small or flowering trees.
(11) A landscaped area at least 10 feet in depth shall be provided along
all exterior lot lines of parking areas unless a greater landscaped
area is required according to the provisions of the given zoning
district.
(12) All nonresidential development located adjacent to residential
districts shall provide screening and/or buffering using
landscaping. Such screening and/or buffering shall be designed so
that a person standing on the adjacent residential parcel on the
minimum setback line, five feet above the finished grade, would not
be able to readily observe uses, activities or automobile lights
originating from said nonresidential development. This standard
may be met by using various techniques such as plant materials,
earthen berms or combinations thereof as approved by the
Planning Board. Vegetation shall be the preferred screening device.
Such techniques can be applied within the required side and rear
yards.
(13) Landscaping shall provide privacy and screening for adjacent land
uses, and shall take into account visual, noise and air quality
factors. More stringent standards may be required by the Planning
Board, particularly for industrial development, to ensure adjacent
properties are provided adequate visual and noise screening.
(14) The location and dimensions of proposed buffers, screening and
fence areas specifying materials and vegetation; including existing
vegetative cover and proposed areas of lawn and groundcover.
(15) A general landscaping plan and planting schedule specifying types
and size of vegetation. The size of vegetation at installation and
upon maturity shall be noted on the plans.
(16) The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions
and distances, and shall clearly delineate existing and proposed
structures, uses, parking areas, access aisles, drainage pattern and
the location, size and description of all landscape materials existing
and proposed, including but not limited to all trees and shrubs, and
§ 305-42 AUBURN CODE § 305-42
294:924
shall include those existing plant materials that are to be removed
and such other information as may be required by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board.
(17) The landscape plan shall clearly show all existing and anticipated
changes to vegetation and natural features, including but not
limited to streams, state wetlands and federal wetlands. Natural
features shall be preserved and incorporated in the landscaped
area wherever possible.
(18) Landscape plans shall be prepared and certified by a New-York-
State-licensed professional.
(19) In the event that designated wetlands exist on site, a copy of the
letter of notification sent to the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and/or the United States Army Corps
of Engineers must accompany the landscape plan.
D. Landscaping specifications.
(1) Tree and shrub size and variety shall be outlined on the landscape
plan, and shall be large enough to establish an aesthetically
pleasing effect.
(2) Specific species of all vegetation shall be outlined on the landscape
plan and approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Native vegetation is preferred and shall be used for plantings
whenever possible.
(4) Nonliving materials shall not be substituted for the required
landscaping.
(5) For tree planting requirements, exclusive of those within rights-ofway,
a minimum of 30% species native to Northeastern United
States shall be required. The Planning Board shall have the
discretion to modify tree shading requirements under power lines
and other obstructions which prohibit strict compliance with
shading requirements.
(6) New development shall be required to have landscaping in place
and completed prior to final certificate of occupancy. In the event
that seasonal conditions prevent completion of the required
landscaping until the following planting season, the Planning Board
shall set a completion date, and the property owner or developer
shall post a certified check in the amount of 50% of the cost of the
landscaping as verified in writing by the landscape architect or by
the licensed professional that sealed the landscape plan. Said
certified check shall be made payable to the City of Auburn and
shall be redeemable after completion and approval of said
landscaping work by the stated completion date. In the event that
the landscaping plan is not completed by the prescribed date, the
§ 305-42 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-42
294:925
§ 305-43. Lighting.
owner or developer shall forfeit the deposited amount, and the City
shall find the site in violation of this chapter until landscaping is
completed as originally approved.
(7) Prior to final approval of the site plan, the property owner or
developer shall enter into an agreement with the City of Auburn to
assure completed plantings. An irrevocable letter of credit, bond,
or other surety shall be required to guarantee maintenance of
approved landscaping for a period of three years from planting. If
the approved landscape plan is not followed during this time, the
surety or bond shall be forfeited and shall be used to complete the
landscape plan as approved. Prior to the release of the bond and
upon notification by the property owner or developer of
completion, the site shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(8) All landscaped areas required and/or permitted by this section shall
be maintained and preserved according to the landscape plan as
originally approved or as amended by the City Planning Board. The
property owner shall be responsible for the continued proper
maintenance of all landscape materials and shall keep them in a
proper neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at
all times. Proper maintenance shall include, at a minimum,
watering, weeding, mowing, mulching, fertilizing and pruning. All
unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within six
months or by the next planting season.
A. Purpose: to minimize light pollution and light trespass for the
enjoyment and use of property and the night environment and to
conserve energy while increasing nighttime visibility, security and
productivity.
B. Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all outdoor
lighting devices used for illumination or advertisement:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all lighting devices or
fixtures shall be shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted
by the device or fixture, whether directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane
running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is
emitted.
(2) Requirements for lighting device or fixture heights, shielding,
placement and aiming to minimize light trespass and direct glare
emitted by a lighting system shall be as follows:
(a) The maximum allowable height of wall-mounted lighting
devices or fixtures shall be equal to the horizontal distance of
§ 305-42 AUBURN CODE § 305-43
294:926
the fixture to the property line with a maximum height of 15
feet.
(b) Direct illumination from lighting devices or fixtures shall not
be visible from six feet above grade at the property line.
(c) No use shall produce glare as to cause illumination beyond the
property on which it is located in excess of 0.5 footcandle.
(d) Light fixtures shall be designed to prevent light pollution by
shielding the light source and directing light downwards, away
from the night sky.
(e) Recessed lighting is encouraged, where appropriate, to
prevent light pollution and shielding neighboring properties
from unnecessary glare.
(3) The use of flashing, rotating or pulsating lights in/on any outdoors
sign or other lighting device is prohibited per Article V, Sign
Regulations. This provision shall not apply to flashing, rotating or
pulsating lights intended to warn of hazards and danger.
(4) The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is
prohibited.
(5) Off-street lighting shall be shielded and/or directed in such manner
that it only illuminates the user's premises and does not spill over
into neighboring areas or interfere with use of residential
properties.
C. Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(1) Incandescent lamps of 150 watts or less; glass tubes filled with
neon, argon or krypton; outdoor advertising signs constructed of
translucent material and wholly illuminated from within and fossil
fuel light sources.
(2) The illumination of outdoor recreational facilities, public or private,
which shall be shielded such that the glare or beam does not emit
beyond property lines, and no such facility shall be illuminated
after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a specific sporting event or any
other activity conducted at a ball park, outdoor amphitheater,
arena or similar facility in progress prior to 11:00 p.m.
(3) Seasonal holiday display lighting.
(4) Lighting that illuminates the American flag.
(5) The Planning Board may grant a special exemption upon a written
finding that there are extreme geographic or geometric conditions
warranting the exemption and that there are no conforming
fixtures that would suffice.
§ 305-43 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-44
294:927
§ 305-44. Microbrewery/craft brewery and brew pubs.
§ 305-45. Motor vehicle repair stations.
A. Microbrewery/craft brewery.
(1) The brewing operation shall not include the production of any other
alcoholic beverage.
(2) The brewery shall not produce more than 75,000 barrels of beer or
ale per year.
(a) No brewing equipment or storage is permitted on the exterior
of the building. This shall not include purpose built exterior
facilities for the storage of raw materials or used for
processing.
B. Brew pubs.
(1) A brew pub license holder must have a bonafide restaurant.
(2) The brew pub license holder may have up to five separate locations,
and may produce 5,000 barrels of beer per location, not to exceed
20,000 barrels per year.
(3) No brewing equipment or storage is permitted on the exterior of
the building.
A. Applicability. This chapter applies to all new motor vehicle repair
station and a new motor vehicle service station that is reconstructed by
more than 50% of its assessed value.
B. Facility requirements.
(1) No part of any building used as a motor vehicle service station shall
be erected within 25 feet of any boundary lines of any residential
district.
(2) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building, and no motor vehicle shall be offered for sale on the site,
except in accordance with an approved site plan.
(3) No motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle shall
be stored outside of an enclosed building.
(4) Up to five unlicensed motor vehicles may be temporarily stored for
a period not to exceed two months at a motor vehicle repair station
if adequate off-street parking spaces are available.
C. Access and circulation.
(1) Ingress and egress points shall be located a minimum of 40 feet
from the intersection of right-of-way lines of any streets.
§ 305-44 AUBURN CODE § 305-45
294:928
§ 305-46. Motor vehicle service stations.
(2) No gasoline or oil pump, no oiling or greasing mechanism and no
other service appliance shall be installed in connection with any
filling station or public garage within 10 feet of any street line.
(3) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicle shall be paved/
hard surfaced.
A. Applicability. The standards outlined in this chapter applies to all new
and any existing motor vehicle service station that is reconstructed by
more than 50% of its assessed value.
B. Permitted activities.
(1) The retail sale of motor fuels and related petroleum products.
(2) Car washing services including hand-washing and drive-thru
stations.
(3) The sale of perishable items and soft drinks associated with a
convenience store.
C. Prohibited activities.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked on the site of a gas station other than
those of customers and employees.
(2) No storage of vehicles shall be permitted.
(3) No vehicle shall be parked at or near a street intersection so as to
obstruct the vision of motorists.
(4) No vehicle may be offered for sale on the premises.
(5) Hydraulic hoists and pits, and the repair of any equipment.
D. Location requirements.
(1) Gasoline stations shall be established no closer than 500 feet from
any other gasoline station in the City. Said distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of the
sites on which each such gasoline station is located.
(2) Notwithstanding the immediately preceding sentence, a gasoline
station proposed to be located on a corner lot adjoining an
intersection may be located within 500 feet of another gasoline
station located on a corner lot adjoining the same intersection;
however, no more than two gasoline stations may be located on
corner lots adjoining any one intersection.
E. Facility requirements.
(1) Products for sale, lease, and/or rental. No display of items for sale,
lease, or rental shall be permitted, except within a building.
§ 305-45 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-46
294:929
(2) Building material. A proposed gas station, and a station that is
reconstructed by more than 50% of its assessed valuation shall use
exterior finish materials that are determined by the Design Review
Committee to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) Restroom entrance screening. Each rest room entrance shall be
from within a building, or screened from the view of adjacent
properties and street rights-of-way by solid decorative screening.
(4) Storm drainage. If drainage is to a street, stormwater shall be
carried under the sidewalk in an approved manner.
F. Access and circulation. These requirements shall apply to all new gas
stations, and a station that is reconstructed by more than 50% of its
replacement cost, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) A gas station site shall not have more than two vehicle access
points (i.e., driveways) on any street.
(2) The Planning Board may prescribe the exact location, dimension
and use of driveways as necessary to reduce potential traffic
hazards.
(3) No portion of a driveway shall be allowed to encroach nearer than
five feet to the beginning of the curve of a street corner, or be
located closer than five feet to a property line abutting a residential
zoning district.
(4) No driveway shall exceed a width of 30 feet.
(5) There shall be a minimum distance of 22 feet of full height curb
between curb cuts along any street.
(6) Ingress and egress points shall be located at a minimum of 40 feet
from the intersection of right-of-way lines of any street.
(7) No part of any building used as a gas station, and no filling pump or
other service appliance shall be erected within 25 feet of any
boundary lines of any residential district.
(8) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be
paved/hard surfaced.
(9) All construction, reconstruction and repairs to the curb, gutter,
sidewalk and approaches and public right-of-way dedications and
curb returns shall be subject to City Engineer approval.
G. Pedestrian access.
(1) A minimum of one continuous four-foot-wide internal pedestrian
walkway shall be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk of
each abutting street to the nearest entrance to the gasoline station
convenience market.
§ 305-46 AUBURN CODE § 305-46
294:930
§ 305-47. Motor vehicle wash.
(2) Internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving
surfaces through the use of raised sidewalks, special pavers,
bricks, or scored/stamped concrete.
H. Landscaping requirements. A new gas station, and a station that is
reconstructed by more than 50% of its assessed valuation, shall comply
with the requirements in Article IV, § 305-42, Landscaping.
I. Application requirements. A special use permit application for a
gasoline station shall include all information and materials normally
required for a special use permit in accordance with Article VIII,
§ 305-104, Special use permits and a photo-simulation showing the gas
station in place on the project site, together with its relationship to
existing surrounding land uses.
J. Required findings for approval. The Planning Board shall not grant a
special use permit for a gasoline station, unless it first makes all of the
following findings, in addition to those required by Article VIII,
§ 305-104, Special use permits.
(1) The proposed use will not substantially increase vehicular traffic on
any street within a residential zoning district;
(2) The proposed use will not, by virtue of curb cuts and vehicular
access, impair the suitability of nearby commercially zoned
property for commercial use; and
(3) The proposed use will not substantially increase traffic hazards to
pedestrians when located near a school, religious facility,
auditorium, theater, or other place of assembly.
A. Permit required. A motor vehicle wash shall be permitted in the DD
Downtown Zoning District only upon issuance of a special use permit by
the Planning Board in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104, Special
use permits.
B. General regulations. In all districts, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
not issue such a permit unless the motor vehicle wash conforms to the
following:
(1) All vehicle stacking areas shall be clearly identified through the use
of pavement markings, signs and/or curbing and landscaping
features and shall be designed so they do not interfere with safe
pedestrian and vehicle circulation on the site and along the public
right-of-way.
(a) Each stacking space shall be no less than 10 feet in width and
20 feet in length. An automatic tunnel wash shall provide a
minimum of 10 stacking spaces. Each automatic wash bay shall
provide a minimum of two stacking spaces.
§ 305-46 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-47
294:931
§ 305-48. Off-street parking and loading.
(2) Additional stacking or queuing space may be required by the
Article VI, Site Plan Review, to ensure the safety of pedestrians and
motorists.
(a) All vehicle stacking areas shall be located a minimum of 30 feet
from any lot line adjoining a residential property.
(b) Motor vehicle washes shall be sited and designed in such a way
to reinforce the walkable, historic characteristic of the City and
shall pay special attention to the relationship between the
building and the public street.
(c) The capacity of the stacking lanes should not interfere with the
overall traffic flow within the parking lot.
(d) Landscaping along side and rear lot lines shall include a five- to
ten-foot-wide vegetative buffer of trees and shrubs or a six-foot
fence screening, constructed of low maintenance natural
materials, including brick, stone or wood with a vegetative
buffer of two to five feet from the lot lines.
(e) Luminaries or lighting fixtures shall not exceed 16 feet in
height in vehicular areas and 10 feet in height in pedestrian
areas.
(f) Flood lighting shall be prohibited.
(g) No outdoor lighting shall have an intensity greater than 1/2
footcandle at the development property line.
C. Required findings for approval. The Planning Board shall not grant a
special use permit for a motor vehicle wash in the DD Downtown
Zoning District, unless it first makes all of the following findings, in
addition to those required in this section and by Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits.
(1) The property is located only in the Northern Gateway section of the
Downtown District;
(2) The motor vehicle wash has frontage along an arterial street;
(3) The motor vehicle wash is a minimum of 30,000 square feet;
(4) The proposed use will not be adjacent to a single-family, two-family
or three- or four-unit multifamily dwelling;
(5) The proposed use will not detract from the walkability of the
district; and
(6) The proposed use will not substantially increase traffic hazards to
pedestrians.
§ 305-47 AUBURN CODE § 305-48
294:932
A. Applicability. Off-street parking and loading requirements pertain to all
parking as required in the district Bulk and Use Tables.
B. Restrictions and other uses. All areas designated as off-street parking
space shall be unobstructed and free of other uses, except off-street
loading.
C. General regulations.
(1) Location.
(a) Except for access to a garage or permitted parking area,
establishment of a parking area in the front yard of the
following residential uses is prohibited:
[1] All residential uses within the R1 Single-Family Zoning
District;
[2] All residential uses within the R2 Multifamily Zoning
District;
[3] Dwelling, multiple-family, three or four units;
[4] Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units, unless
approved during site plan review;
[5] Dwelling, single-family;
[6] Dwelling, single-family semidetached;
[7] Dwelling, townhouse; and
[8] Dwelling, two-family.
(b) Except for parking in an established driveway directly in front
of a garage or side yard, parking in a front yard of the following
residential uses is prohibited:
[1] All residential uses within the R1 Single-Family Zoning
District;
[2] All residential uses within the R2 Multifamily Zoning
District;
[3] Dwelling, multiple-family, three or four units;
[4] Dwelling, multiple-family, five or more units, unless
approved during site plan review;
[5] Dwelling, single-family;
[6] Dwelling, single-family semidetached;
[7] Dwelling, townhouse; and
[8] Dwelling, two-family.
§ 305-48 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-48
294:933
(c) Preferred location of parking areas in the Neighborhood
Commercial Zoning District is within side and rear yards.
(d) Establishment of a parking area shall be prohibited in the
Downtown Core in the DD Downtown Zoning District.
(2) Surfacing. Open off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a
dustless, all-weather material including concrete, asphalt, pervious
asphalt, pervious concrete, modular pavers designed to funnel
water between blocks, lattice or honeycomb shaped concrete grids,
or comparable material, and shall be so graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation, as approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(3) Pervious and porous materials.
(a) Where feasible and appropriate, the use of pervious pavement
or porous materials in the construction of parking facilities is
encouraged, including the use of pervious asphalt, pervious
concrete, modular pavers designed to funnel water between
blocks, lattice or honeycomb shaped concrete grids with turf
grass or gravel filled voids to funnel water, plastic geocells with
turf grass or gravel, reinforced turf grass or gravel with
overlaid or embedded meshes, or comparable structured and
durable systems.
(b) The porous or pervious surfaces can cover the entire lot, or
certain areas, such as parking stalls.
(c) All materials shall be installed per industry standards.
Appropriate soils and site conditions shall exist for the
pervious pavement or pervious pavement system to function.
Documentation that verifies appropriate soils and site
conditions shall be provided by the property owner prior to
installation.
(4) Number of spaces. Minimum number of parking spaces shall be
provided as required by the regulations specified in the Bulk and
Use Table, unless approved by the Planning Board based on a
parking demand analysis.
(5) Drainage. Parking areas 3,000 square feet or larger, including
provisions for vehicular circulation, shall be properly sloped for
drainage as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. On-site
retention and filtration of stormwater shall be provided where
practical. Water from the parking areas shall not drain across a
public walkway.
(6) Lighting. Any illumination of off-street parking areas shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from the street and away from
adjoining premises in such a way to comply with the performance
standards of Article VI, § 305-43, Lighting.
§ 305-48 AUBURN CODE § 305-48
294:934
(7) Marking of parking spaces. All parking areas containing five or
more parking spaces or containing angled parking shall have the
parking spaces and aisles clearly marked on the pavement, using
paint or other marking devices approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Such markings shall conform to the approved parking plan
and shall be maintained in a clearly legible condition.
(8) Curbs. Parking lots 3,000 square feet or larger shall be designed
with discontinuous concrete or granite curbing, or alternative
provision, to provide on-site retention and filtration of stormwater.
Where on-site retention and filtration is not practical, the parking
lot shall be defined by six-inch continuous concrete or granite curb.
(9) Signs. Signs accessory to parking areas shall be regulated by
Article V, Sign Regulations.
(10) Accessible parking. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided as
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(11) Snow storage. All parking garages and parking areas 3,000 square
feet or larger shall provide a storage area for snow which will not
displace any required parking or access thereto or provide
documentation acceptable to the reviewing agency as to an
alternative disposal method.
D. Access to parking and loading. Plans for any use requiring movement of
vehicles across public walks or access through a public alley or street
shall be reviewed through site plan review before any permits are
issued. The following factors will be considered when determining
whether to approve the proposed plan:
(1) The consolidation of curb cuts shall be encouraged, and new curb
cuts shall be discouraged whenever appropriate, considering safe
traffic flow, the objectives of this chapter, and access points needed
for the proper functioning of the use.
(2) Where a residential use is served by an alley, direct access to the
street through a curb cut shall be discouraged, except where such
curb extends into a corner side yard.
(3) The use shall not substantially increase congestion of the public
streets or impede pedestrian traffic.
(4) The space allocated to the use shall be adequate to keep vehicles
clear of sidewalks, alleys and similar areas.
(5) The location of driveways relative to other existing uses is such that
street traffic shall not be seriously disrupted and no unnecessary
hazards shall be established for pedestrians. In no instance shall a
driveway be allowed on a limited access roadway ramp or
combined limited access roadway ramp frontage road.
§ 305-48 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-48
294:935
E. Design standards.
(1) Minimum setbacks.
(a) In all districts, parking garages shall be governed by the
setback requirements applicable in the relevant district to
principal or accessory buildings, whichever is appropriate.
(b) Parking areas set back from lot lines and streets. In all
districts, no part of any parking area, other than driveways for
ingress and egress, shall be located closer to a street or lot line
than the minimum setback required for a one-story principal
building in the relevant district or by the buffer and
landscaping requirements of Article IV, § 305-28, Buffer areas,
and § 305-42, Landscaping, whichever is less.
(2) Parking dimensions.
(a) Each off-street parking space shall have the following
minimum dimensions, in feet:
Parallel Parking Perpendicular Parking
Width Length Width Length
Standard 9 24 9 18
(3) Ingress and egress dimensions.
(a) All parking areas serving nonresidential use shall have clearly
defined driveway(s) not wider than 30 feet. Such driveways
shall be defined with the use of curbing along the street and an
appropriate tree lawn between the sidewalk and street.
(b) All parking areas serving residential uses shall have a clearly
defined driveway not wider than 20 feet for single- and twofamily
residences or clearly defined driveway(s) not wider than
24 feet for other residential uses. Such driveways shall be
defined with the use of curbing along the street and an
appropriate tree lawn between the sidewalk and street, or
other means approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Shared parking. In the case of two or more different uses located on the
same lot, the sum of the space required for all uses individually may be
reduced to an amount no less than 50% of the largest number of spaces
required by any single use, upon a determination by the Planning Board
that such a reduced amount of parking spaces will be adequate to serve
all uses on the lot due to their different character and hours of
operation.
G. Landscape standards.
(1) Not less than 5% of the interior of a parking area designed for 11 to
25 cars shall be devoted to landscaped areas. Not less than 10% of
§ 305-48 AUBURN CODE § 305-48
294:936
§ 305-49. Outdoor seating.
the interior of a parking area designed for 26 cars or more shall
be devoted to landscaped areas. Interior parking lot landscaping
shall be considered as part of the twenty-five-percent-minimum
landscaping requirement.
(2) Landscaped islands shall be located at the ends of each parking bay
which contains 11 or more parking spaces, separating adjacent
rows of parking spaces at least every second parking bay and
elsewhere as determined appropriate by the Planning Board in
order to direct vehicle movement, provide for plant growth and
vehicle overhang, provide for pedestrian circulation and otherwise
help assure proper traffic circulation, pedestrian safety, and
aesthetics.
(3) Unless modified by the Planning Board, the minimum width of
landscaped islands shall be seven feet when located at the ends of
parking bays and 10 feet where separating opposing rows of
parking spaces or adjacent to circulation aisles. All corners shall be
rounded with a curb radius of not less than three feet unless
otherwise required by the Planning Board.
(4) The landscaping of off-street parking areas shall include at least
one shade tree of not less than three inches caliper for each six
parking spaces. Main traffic circulation aisles shall be emphasized
with such shade trees. Other landscaped islands may be planted
with flowering trees and/or other plantings, as appropriate. The
shade trees are in addition to ground cover, shrubs and hedges
which are to be provided where required per § 305-42,
Landscaping, and to serve their intended function while not
interfering with safe sight distance for pedestrians and vehicles.
(5) The Planning Board may also permit nonlandscaped islands, if
appropriate, for purposes such as pedestrian circulation and snow
storage. Such islands shall not be less than seven feet in width.
(6) In addition to the buffer requirements of Article IV, § 305-28, Buffer
Areas, all off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
landscaped along their periphery.
(7) The corners of parking lots where rows of parking spaces leave
areas unavailable for parking or vehicular circulation shall be
landscaped as specified for a required landscaped yard that may
include architectural features such as benches, kiosks or bicycle
parking.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to allow for outdoor seating
including patio tables, chairs, and benches that are incidental in nature
to the primary use of the property.
B. General regulations.
§ 305-48 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-49
294:937
§ 305-50. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment.
(1) No more than 25% of the total on-site seating may be provided
outdoors.
(2) The outdoor eating area must be directly accessible to the interior
eating area. Areas that must be accessed via public sidewalks or
property not controlled by the applicant or property owner are not
considered directly accessible.
(3) No such areas shall be permitted within the public right-of-way,
except as permitted by Chapter 248, Sidewalk Cafes, of the City of
Auburn Municipal Code.
(4) All such areas are subject to minor site plan approval from the
Design Review Committee when added incidental to an approved
primary use. All such plans shall indicate the maximum size of the
area, the maximum number of seats and tables, and the general
layout of seating areas and aisles.
(5) A minimum of one trash receptacle for each four tables or 12 seats
must be provided. At least one is to be located at the exit area into
the public right-of-way or the interior restaurant.
A. Storage of materials and equipment.
(1) No construction or landscaping material of any kind shall be stored
outdoors in any zoning district, except in one- or two-family lots,
unless:
(a) Allowed as part of an approved site plan;
(b) Used in the construction or alteration of a structure on the
same lot or in the same development and stored for not more
than 30 days after completion of construction; or
(c) Such outdoor storage is limited to machinery, equipment or
supplies essential to the operation of storage of any products
grown on the premises of a farm or nursery.
(2) No front yard shall be used for any open storage, living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes, or other storage of vehicles including, but
not limited to, motor homes, camping trailers or vehicles, or boats.
This shall not be construed to prohibit parking of said vehicles
within a duly established driveway. To be considered parked, a
vehicle must be in operable condition with current and valid state
registration.
(3) No heavy equipment storage shall be permitted within the in the
Single-Family Residential (R-1) and Multiple-Family Residential
(R-2) Zoning Districts except when said equipment is intended for
the maintenance of the parcel and is stored within a fully enclosed
structure.
§ 305-49 AUBURN CODE § 305-50
294:938
§ 305-51. Projections into yards.
(4) All enclosed storage shall be within structures which meet the
requirements of the New York State Code, Rules and Regulations.
Storage in mobile homes not connected to public utilities or tractor
trailer bodies are not allowed in any district.
(5) No outdoor storage shall occur within 100 feet of a residential
district. Outdoor storage shall provide a combination of distance
and appropriately dense plantings or setbacks from residential
districts.
(6) Upon written approval by the Code Enforcement Officer, the
temporary outdoor display of plants, trees and landscaping
materials may be permitted for a period not to exceed six months
per year. Such displays shall be maintained to provide a neat,
orderly appearance at all times.
B. Storage of automotive vehicles.
(1) Automotive vehicles of any kind or type without current license
plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned
property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
(2) Automotive vehicles of any kind or type shall not be parked on any
residentially zoned property in a required front yard, exclusive of a
dedicated driveway.
A. General regulations.
(1) Projections permitted in front, rear, and side yards:
(a) The ordinary projection of window sills, belt courses, cornices
and other ornamental features not to exceed four inches.
(b) Balconies, bay windows, chimneys and roof projections not to
exceed two feet.
(c) Retaining wall of any necessary height.
(d) In no case shall a carport project into a required side or front
yard.
(e) Unenclosed steps not extending above the floor level of the
first story, provided that such steps are at least five feet from
any lot line.
(f) Subject to height limitations established in § 305-36, Fences,
walls, and other structural screening elements, fences or walls
along property lines, provided that such fence or wall shall be
at least two feet distant from any existing or future street line.
§ 305-50 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-51
294:939
§ 305-52. Public buildings, public services, and public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to limit or
interfere with the development or use of public buildings used for
governmental purposes or with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance for public utility purposes of water and gas pipes, mains and
conduits, electric light and electric power transmission and distribution
lines, telephone lines, sewers and sewer mains and incidental
appurtenances or with any highway or railroad right-of-way existing or
hereafter authorized by the City of Auburn or the State of New York. The
above provision shall not be construed to permit yards, garages or other
buildings for service or storage by said public utilities, except as otherwise
permitted by this chapter.
§ 305-53. Short-term rentals.
(2) Decks, patios and terraces are allowed provided that they are
located three or more feet from any side or rear lot line. Decks,
patios and terraces are prohibited in the front yard.
(3) Porches may project into any front, rear or side yard provided that
they are located 10 or more feet from the property line.
(4) Stoops are permitted in the front, side or rear yard and may be
covered or uncovered provided they are located 10 or more feet
from the property line.
(a) Stoops shall be less than 36 inches in height, four feet in width,
and three feet in depth and connected to the street front or
driveway by a sidewalk or pathway that leads to an elevated
first story. The sidewalk or pathway shall not exceed six feet in
width. An area that exceeds any of these dimensions shall be
considered a porch or deck.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow the homeowners of the
City of Auburn to provide short-term rental units, simultaneously
protecting the public interest and preserving the residential character
of the community.
B. Permitting.
(1) Short-term rentals are not permitted in any Single-Family
Residential District (R-1).
(2) Applications for a permit to operate a short-term rental unit shall
be available from the Code Enforcement Officer. Applications shall
include the following information:
(a) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate
the occupancy of the structure, one parking space for each
bedroom in the dwelling plus other parking as required by
§ 305-51 AUBURN CODE § 305-53
294:940
§ 305-54. Sidewalk cafes.
§ 305-48, Off-street parking and loading, of this chapter.
Vehicles shall not be parked on front lawns.
(b) Garbage removal. Property owners shall indicate the means by
which garbage is removed from the property. If there is a
dumpster located on the property, the location of the dumpster
shall be depicted on the plat submitted with the application.
(c) Maintenance. The applicant shall indicate the manner in which
lawn maintenance, snow removal, and repairs to the dwelling
unit shall be maintained during the permit period.
(d) House rules. The applicant shall submit a copy of the house
rules.
(e) Insurance and bed tax. Applicant shall provide proof of
insurance coverage and bed tax number.
(3) Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine if the applicant has complied with all of the
requirements of this chapter. If the applicant has fully complied,
then the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the property owner a
short-term transient rental permit.
(4) If an applicant is required to obtain any other permits required by
the City of Auburn, Cayuga County or State of New York in order to
rent or lease their dwelling unit on a short-term basis, then the
Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue the applicant a permit
under this section without sufficient proof that such other
requirements imposed by the City of Auburn, Cayuga County or
State of New York have been satisfied.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer shall have 45 days to determine
whether the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
chapter. Failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to act within 45
days shall constitute an approval unless the applicant and the Code
Enforcement Officer mutually agree to extend this time limit.
A. General regulations. Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted upon application
to the City Manager in compliance with Chapter 248 of the City of
Auburn Municipal Code.
(1) Sidewalk cafes shall operate in connection with the operation of a
restaurant on the first floor of the adjoining premises, which fronts
or empties onto the street at the approximate location where the
sidewalk cafe license is requested.
(2) Adequate pedestrian access must be provided, which is considered
to be eight feet of unobstructed access between chair/table and
curb edge or street furniture. Access may be less under certain
§ 305-53 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-54
294:941
§ 305-55. Swimming pools.
circumstances, but cannot be less than five feet of unobstructed
access. A seating location diagram must be provided to verify
adequate access.
(3) Hours of operation may be required to be limited depending upon
location.
(4) All sidewalk cafes must comply with all New York State Alcohol and
Beverage Control laws and public health regulations.
A. General regulations. A private swimming pool and bathhouse accessory
to a residential building and limited to use by the occupants thereof and
their guests, subject to the following conditions and issuance of a
permit:
(1) Only a single private outdoor swimming pool per dwelling is
permitted as an accessory use to a residential structure.
(2) All outdoor swimming pools shall meet the New York State Building
Code.
(3) All outdoor swimming pools hereafter constructed and all existing
pools which have a minimum depth of 24 inches of water are
subject to the following:
(a) The edge of the pool shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
any property line, nor in the front yard nor occupy more than
10% of the lot area.
(b) Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded
by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height which shall
be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger
than four inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates,
and, if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal
dimension shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling, house or
accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
(c) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when the
pool is not in actual use. Such door must be locked. The door of
any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be
so equipped.
(d) No person in possession of land within the City, either as
owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or a licensee, upon which is
situated a swimming pool having a minimum depth of 24
inches shall fail to provide and maintain such fence as herein
provided.
§ 305-54 AUBURN CODE § 305-56
294:942
§ 305-56. Telecommunication antennas, private.
§ 305-57. Temporary structures/temporary storage units.
§ 305-58. Temporary uses.
A. General regulations. Telecommunication antennas accessory to a
principal use, including dish antennas, are permitted provided:
(1) No part of such accessory shall be located in a front yard;
(2) Antennas shall not be attached to the front of the primary
structure;
(3) Antennas shall not exceed one meter in diameter or diagonal
measurement;
(4) Height of the antenna, including any supporting structure, shall not
exceed the maximum building height for the principal use as
defined in the Bulk and Use Tables.
A. Temporary structures may be permitted in any district for uses
incidental to construction work for a period of time not to exceed six
months, provided that such buildings shall be removed forthwith upon
the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
B. Permits for any other temporary structures or for any extension of the
six-month time limit shall be issued only upon authorization of the
Common Council.
A. Summary of uses addressed. This section addresses the establishment
and operation of activities that are temporary in nature. Such uses are
generally permitted in any zoning district. Where such a use is limited
to a particular district or districts such limitation will be noted herein.
B. Permitted temporary uses. Subject to the specific regulations and time
limits which follow, and to the other applicable regulations of the
district in which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses of
land are permitted as herein specified:
(1) A mobile home in any district as a temporary residence placed by
public or private emergency services in response to the loss of
shelter as a result of natural or man-made disaster. Such use shall
be limited to the period of permanent shelter reconstruction and in
any event no longer than 12 months following loss of shelter. No
such use shall be undertaken unless such mobile home shall have
first been properly connected to City water and sewer lines and to
all required public utilities.
(2) Indoor and outdoor arts and craft shows, exhibits and sales in any
commercial or industrial district and, subject to proper approval of
the City, in any public park in a residential district. Such use shall
be limited to a period not to exceed five days.
§ 305-56 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-58
294:943
(3) Contractors' offices and equipment sheds containing no sleeping or
cooking accommodations in any district when accessory to a
construction project. Such use shall be limited to a period not to
exceed the duration of such project as determined through the site
plan approval process.
(4) Real estate offices containing no sleeping or cooking
accommodations, unless located in a model dwelling unit, in any
district when accessory to a new housing development. Such use
shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of
dwelling units in such development as determined through the site
plan approval process.
(5) A festival on property owned by any not-for-profit group or
organization and when approved by the Code Enforcement Officer
on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions
and traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on
surrounding properties in the residential district. Such use shall be
limited to a period not to exceed 72 hours. Such use need not
comply with the front yard requirements of this chapter, except
that structures or equipment which might block the view of
operators of motor vehicles on the public streets shall not be
located within 30 feet of the intersection of the curblines of any two
streets. Such use need not comply with the maximum height
requirements of this chapter.
(6) Other temporary uses found by the Code Enforcement Officer to
comply with the provisions of this section.
C. Limitations.
(1) Except as expressly provided otherwise in Article IV, § 305-58B,
Permitted temporary uses, above, temporary uses shall comply
with the yard, space, and bulk regulations applicable in the district
in which such temporary use is located.
(2) Before approving any temporary use, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking
spaces which will be reasonably required for the use on the basis of
the particular use, its intensity and the availability of other parking
facilities in the area and shall approve such temporary use only if
such off-street parking is provided.
(3) No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any
days of the week except such as are designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer on the basis of the nature of the temporary use
and the character of the surrounding uses.
(4) Any restrictions deemed appropriate by the Code Enforcement
Officer under the provisions of this chapter shall be noted upon the
permit issued for the temporary use.
§ 305-58 AUBURN CODE § 305-58
294:944
§ 305-59. Tiny houses and tiny house clusters.
D. Conflicts with other laws. Where other laws, ordinances, or regulations
of the City of Auburn require issuance of a license, permit or other
instrumentality for a use regulated by this section, such other laws,
ordinances, or regulations shall supersede this section.
A. General requirements.
(1) Tiny houses are not permitted as individual dwelling units on
parcels within the City of Auburn.
(2) All tiny houses must be part of a tiny house cluster development.
(3) A minimum of four tiny houses and a maximum of 12 tiny houses
are permitted per tiny house cluster.
(4) Architectural details.
(a) All tiny houses must have a minimum of 1 1/2 stories.
(b) All tiny houses must have permanent foundations.
(c) Front facades must have enough window coverage to be at
least 25% transparent.
(5) All tiny houses must have front porches.
(a) Porches shall be oriented towards common open space or
street.
(b) Porches shall be a maximum of 60 square feet and a minimum
of six feet deep on the common open space side of the building.
(c) The square footage of porches may be reduced to 40 square
feet on units less than 350 total gross square feet.
(6) Centralized common area.
(a) All tiny house clusters must meet the minimum requirements
for open space and common areas as set forth.
(b) The common open space area shall include useable public
spaces, such as lawn, gardens, patios, plaza or scenic viewing
areas. Common tables, chairs and benches are encouraged,
with all houses having access to it.
(c) Four hundred square feet of common open space is required
per unit.
(d) Fifty percent of units must have their main entry on the
common open space.
(e) All units must be within five feet of each common open
space(s).
§ 305-58 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-59
294:945
§ 305-60. Wireless telecommunications facility.
In addition to requirements set forth in district Bulk and Use Tables, any
wireless telecommunications facility shall be regulated by the Code of the
City of Auburn Chapter 300, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
§ 305-61. through § 305-69. (Reserved)
(f) Passive trails are allowed and may count towards the common
open space requirement.
(g) Common open space shall be located outside of stormwater/
detention ponds, wetlands, streams, lakes, and critical area
buffers, and cannot be located on slopes greater than 10%.
(7) Tiny house clusters, not owned under single ownership, must be
part of a condominium or homeowners' association to oversee
maintenance of the common areas.
B. Permitting. All tiny house clusters are subject to major site plan review,
as described in Article VI, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
C. Maintenance of common areas. Maintenance of open space and
utilities: before approval is granted, the applicant shall submit
covenants, deeds and homeowner association bylaws and other
documents guaranteeing maintenance and common fee ownership of
public open space, community facilities, private roads, driveways, and
all other commonly owned and operated property. These documents
shall be reviewed and accompanied by a certificate from an attorney
that the site complies with the requirements of this chapter prior to
approval.
§ 305-59 AUBURN CODE § 305-61
294:946
ARTICLE V
Sign Regulations
§ 305-70. Intent.
§ 305-71. General regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare by providing comprehensive time, place, and
manner restrictions on signage which shall include controls on height,
quantity, location, spacing, shape, scale, lighting, motion, design,
maintenance, and appearance. Regulations apply to the physical
aspects of the sign, and not the content or message.
(1) The provisions of this article are intended to ensure that all signs
and advertising features:
(a) Are functional and compatible with the aesthetic appearance of
the property and/or building on which they are located, the
surrounding neighborhoods, and the long-term vision of the
City as outlined in the Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Serve to protect and enhance community appearance;
(c) Protect the safety of motorists, pedestrians, and cyclists by
reducing the frequency and magnitude of hazards caused by
obstructions and distractions;
(d) Preserve and create more attractive business and residential
environments; and
(e) Are harmonious in color, size, and material with the building to
which they relate, thereby preserving the existing character of
the community and providing visual continuity across districts.
A. Purpose. All signs must be constructed in accordance with New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, shall be maintained
in good condition, shall be kept free of defects or hazards and shall not
be allowed to become dilapidated or deteriorated.
(1) When signs are required as part of the site plan review, the
Planning Board and the Design Review Committee shall consider
the compatibility of the sign's general character in context to its
location, color(s), lettering, size and overall design.
(2) Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, substantially
modify, relocate or substantially reconstruct any sign without first
obtaining a sign permit from the Code Enforcement Office.
(3) For the purposes of this article, "substantial modification" shall
mean any change in the configuration, orientation, illumination, or
purpose of the sign. Substantial reconstruction shall mean the
§ 305-70 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-71
294:947
§ 305-72. Design standards for all districts.
removal and replacement of more than 50% of the existing signage
surface area or structural elements.
(4) No sign permit shall be required for the repainting or repair of a
sign in conformance with this chapter.
(5) All signs shall be sited so as not to interfere with a clear view of
intersecting streets and shall be located at least 12.5 feet from any
property line.
(6) No sign shall impair or cause confusion of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic in its design, color or placement.
(7) Every principal building or structure shall have street identification
numbers subject to § 505 of the Fire Code of New York State.
(8) The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the proper
maintenance of all signs, and such signs, together with their
supports, shall be kept in good repair. The display surfaces shall be
kept neatly painted at all times. The Code Enforcement Officer may
order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(9) All signs shall be advertising the business on the property.
(10) No off-premises advertising is permitted.
(11) Any signage not expressly permitted in this section is prohibited in
the City of Auburn.
(12) All applicants proposing signs that encroach into the public rightof-
way must provide an indemnity agreement, in a form acceptable
to the City, holding harmless and indemnifying the City, its officers
and employees from and against any and all claims and liability
resulting from encroachment into the public right of way.
Applicants must also provide proof of insurance acceptable to the
City and naming the City as an additional insured on a primary,
noncontributory basis.
A. Sign area calculations for all districts.
(1) The signable area does not include the sign's supporting frame or
structure, if any, provided that such frame or structure is not
designed to display text or graphics.
(2) Single-faced. For a sign composed of one sign face, the sign area
shall be determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame
surrounding the sign face, but excluding the sign structure
supporting the sign unless it is part of the communication of the
sign or used to differentiate it. In the case of a freestanding sign
that includes blank spaces with the intention of adding wording in
§ 305-71 AUBURN CODE § 305-72
294:948
the future, the blank spaces shall be included in measuring the sign
area.
(3) Individual letters or figures. For a sign composed of individual
letters, logos, or figures, the sign area is measured by that of the
smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all
the letters, logos, or symbols, including any open areas within the
sign face or faces individually.
(4) Double-faced. The area for a sign with more than one face is
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces, except
where the two sign faces are placed back-to-back.
B. Three-dimensional signs. The sign area of a three-dimensional sign is
calculated as total area of the smallest rectangle, circle, or square that
fully encloses the largest profile of the three-dimensional sign.
C. Sign height for all districts. The total height of a ground or bracket sign
is measured from the highest point of the sign or supporting structure
to the top of the adjacent curb, or to the crown of the road where no
curb exists.
D. Signage lighting.
(1) Freestanding or ground signs may be illuminated via groundmounted
fixtures or sign-mounted fixtures.
(2) External illumination fixtures must be shielded and directed such
that a minimum of light pollution is created.
(3) Signage accent lighting shall be of a lesser intensity than the
illumination for the sign panel itself.
(4) Permitted signage lighting fixtures include lanterns, goose-necks,
and shielded, architectural-grade spot lights.
(5) Illumination of directly/internally illuminated signs shall be of the
diffused lighting type.
§ 305-72 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-72
294:949
§ 305-73. Regulated permanent signs.
(6) All additional lighting must be in conformance with Article IV,
§ 305-43, Lighting.
E. Signage materials.
(1) All signage shall be of professional quality and constructed of
robust, durable, and weather-resistant materials.
(2) All wood signage components must be sealed and protected from
the elements. Unpainted or unfinished treated and untreated
lumber shall not be permitted.
(3) Signage materials shall be like or complementary color, character,
type, and quality to those found on the related principal structure.
(4) Segmental block and/or nonmortared stone is permitted for
signage base materials only if like materials are in use throughout
the principal structure.
(5) All sign posts and brackets shall be constructed of robust, durable,
and weather-resistant materials.
A. Purpose. The following regulated permanent signage types are
considered permitted signs in the City of Auburn which contribute to
the total maximum permitted square footage of sign area, unless
otherwise noted in this article.
B. Wall sign.
(1) No portion of a wall sign may project above the roof line or above
the parapet wall of a building with a flat roof.
(2) A wall sign may not cover windows or architectural details.
(3) Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
(4) Signage area calculation:
§ 305-72 AUBURN CODE § 305-73
294:950
C. Awning sign.
(1) Awning signs may not extend outside the awning.
(2) Signs are allowed on ground-floor awnings only.
(3) Awning signs may be externally illuminated only.
(4) Signage area calculation:
D. Canopy sign.
(1) Canopy signs may not extend outside the canopy.
(2) Signs are allowed on ground-floor canopies only.
(3) Canopy signs may be externally illuminated only.
(4) Canopy signs shall not exceed 1.5 feet in height or the height of
vertical thickness of the canopy, whichever is greater.
§ 305-73 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-73
294:951
(5) Canopy signs attached below the canopy must have a minimum
clearance of 10 feet.
(6) The sign area of a canopy sign shall be counted toward the total
allowable wall sign area of the parallel face to which the marquee is
attached.
(7) Signage area calculation:
E. Window sign.
(1) Window signs shall not be considered temporary signage if they are
not intended to be changed or replaced within a calendar year from
date of installation, or text exceeds six inches in height.
(2) Signs hanging from a ceiling or post that are not affixed to the glass
of the window but within 12 inches of the window shall be
considered as a window sign.
(3) Signage area calculation:
F. Projecting/perpendicular sign.
(1) No portion of a projecting sign may be higher than the top of the
building.
(2) No portion of a projecting sign may be located higher than the
second floor of the building.
§ 305-73 AUBURN CODE § 305-73
294:952
(3) Any part of a sign extending over pedestrian areas must have a
minimum height clearance of 10 feet.
(4) The projecting sign may not project more than three feet from the
building line and shall not be nearer than four feet to the curb line
of the street.
(5) The sign post or bracket is not included in the signage calculation.
(6) Signage area calculation:
G. Freestanding bracket sign.
(1) A freestanding bracket sign may be located only on a site frontage
adjoining a public street.
(2) The sign post shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(3) The sign shall be mounted on one or more posts not to exceed a
diameter greater than eight inches.
(4) The sign post or bracket is not included in the signage calculation.
(5) Signage area calculation:
H. Monument sign (single and multitenant).
(1) One monument sign allowed for each frontage along a primary or
secondary street.
(2) Must be set back at least 12.5 feet from the front property line and
in no case may interfere with safe vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
§ 305-73 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-73
294:953
(3) May not be closer than 80 feet from any other monument sign
located on the neighboring lots on the same frontage.
(4) A monument sign may be used as a multitenant directory sign
indicating the name of the occupants of a building or multiple
buildings. Each business may have no more than one sign within
the multitenant monument sign.
(5) Signage area calculation:
I. Sidewalk/a-frame sign.
(1) A sidewalk sign must be located at least 10 feet from any other
sidewalk sign.
(2) Sidewalk signs must be placed indoors at the close of each business
day.
(3) Sidewalks cannot obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and must
comply with ADA clearance and accessibility requirements.
(4) Sidewalk signs may not be illuminated.
(5) Signage area calculation:
J. Subdivision entry or other identification sign.
(1) One sign identifying the name of a project located at the entrance
to a development that has:
(a) Greater than 10 single-family detached or single-family
attached, 20 townhouses, or 20 multifamily housing units.
§ 305-73 AUBURN CODE § 305-73
294:954
§ 305-74. District regulations.
(b) One such sign shall be permitted for each entrance on a
different street or highway.
K. Signs in shopping centers, malls, and plazas.
(1) Each shopping center or mall may have one double-faced
monument sign no more than the maximum area prescribed by this
article on each side, except that if the sign is single-faced, the area
of the sign shall not exceed than the maximum sign area prescribed
by this article.
(2) Tenants.
(a) Each tenant of a shopping center or mall shall be allowed a
sign; however, such sign shall not exceed 5% of the portion of
the shopping center leased by the tenant and shall not exceed
the maximum sign area prescribed by this article.
(b) Tenant signs shall be more than three feet off the ground and
shall not exceed the height of the facade.
(c) All facade signs shall be of a uniform, harmonious design as
prescribed by this article and shall be affixed to the facade of
the building.
A. Maximum sign area by district.
(1) Each property shall be permitted a maximum square footage of
sign area based on the zoning district in which it is located.
(2) Regulations per district are subject to the maximum square footage
as defined below. In no instance, exclusive of a variance granted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals per Article VIII, Administration and
Enforcement, may a business or organization exceed the maximum
square footage as follows:
(a) R-1 District: six square feet.
(b) R-2 District: 12 square feet.
(c) CC District: 100 square feet.
(d) C District: 60 square feet.
(e) NC District: 40 square feet.
(f) HC District: 200 square feet.
(g) SC District: 40 square feet.
(h) I District: 200 square feet.
(i) I-1 District: 200 square feet.
§ 305-73 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-74
294:955
(j) I-2 District: 200 square feet.
(k) D District: 100 square feet.
B. Permitted signage by district. The following signs are permitted in each
district as defined below.
R-1 R-2 CC C NC HC SC I I-1 I-2 D
Wall sign P* P* P P P P P P P P
Awning
sign
P P P P P
Canopy
sign
P P P P P P P P
Window
sign
P* P* P P P P P P P P
Projecting
sign
P P P P P
Freestanding
bracket
sign
P P P P P
Monument
sign
P P P P P P P
Sidewalk
sign
P P
Subdivision
sign
P P P P P P
Signs in
shopping
center/
mall sign
P
* Window signs are permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts for commercial businesses only including a
home occupation, residential care facility, and family home daycare.
C. Maximum number of signs based on the zoning district in which it is
located. Each district is permitted a maximum number of sign type per
the following regulations. The maximum sign area may be split among
permitted sign types, with a maximum of three signs regardless of the
district.
R-1 R-2 CC C NC HC SC I I-1 I-2 D
Wall sign 1 1 1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
Awning
sign
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
Canopy
sign
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
1 per
facade
§ 305-74 AUBURN CODE § 305-74
294:956
R-1 R-2 CC C NC HC SC I I-1 I-2 D
Window
sign
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Projecting
sign
1 per
building
1 per
building
1 per
building
1 per
building
1 per
building
Freestanding
bracket
sign
1 per lot 1 per
lot
1 per
lot
1 per lot 1 per lot
Monument
sign
1 per lot 1 per
lot
1 per
lot
1 per lot 1 per
lot
1 per
lot
1 per
lot
Sidewalk
sign
1 per
building
1 per
building
Subdivision
sign
1 per
subdivision
1 per
subdivision
1 per
subdivision
1 per
subdivision
1 per
subdivision
1 per
subdivision
Signs in
shopping
center/
mall sign
1 per
shopping
center
or mall
D. Maximum square footage. Each property shall be permitted a maximum
square footage of total sign area based on the zoning district in which it
is located. The maximum sign area may be split among permitted sign
types, not to exceed the allowed maximum of three signs.
R-1
(square
feet)
R-2
(square
feet) CC C NC HC
SC
(square
feet) I I-1 I-2 D
Wall sign 2 2 1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
1.5
square
feet per
1 foot of
building
length
Awning
sign
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
30% of
awning
area
Canopy
sign
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
30% of
canopy
area
Window
sign
2 2 30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
30% of
window
area
25% of
window
area
§ 305-74 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-74
294:957
§ 305-75. Supplemental sign standards for Downtown.
In addition to other standards as set forth in the preceding sections of
this article, permitted signs in the Downtown District are subject to the
following design standards.
Permitted
Subareas Width Height
Depth/
Projection
Letter
Height
Awning
sign
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
75% of
awning
width
maximum
18 inches
maximum
n/a 5 inches
minimum;
10 inches
maximum
Wall sign Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
50% of
facade
width
maximum
2 feet
maximum
6 inches
maximum
18 inches
maximum
Projecting
sign
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
4 feet
maximum
4 feet
maximum
4 feet
maximum
8 inches
maximum
R-1
(square
feet)
R-2
(square
feet) CC C NC HC
SC
(square
feet) I I-1 I-2 D
Projecting
sign
16
square
feet
16
square
feet
16
square
feet
16
square
feet
6 square
feet
Freestanding
bracket
sign
6
square
feet
8 square
feet
8
square
feet
20 4 square
feet
Monument
sign
50
square
feet
50
square
feet
80
square
feet
30 100
square
feet
100
square
feet
100
square
feet
Sidewalk
sign
9 square
feet
9 square
feet
Subdivision
sign
10 15 15
square
feet
15
square
feet
15
square
feet
15
square
feet
Signs in
shopping
center/
mall sign
80
square
feet
§ 305-74 AUBURN CODE § 305-75
294:958
Permitted
Subareas Width Height
Depth/
Projection
Letter
Height
Window
sign
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
50% of
window
width
maximum
Varies n/a 8 inches
maximum
Freestanding
bracket
sign
Gateways 3 feet
maximum
(exc. post)
2 feet
maximum
(exc. post);
post 6 feet
maximum
n/a 8 inches
maximum
Monument
sign
Gateways 5 feet
maximum
18 inches
maximum
18 inches
maximum
Sidewalk
sign
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
24 inches
maximum
42 inches
maximum
n/a n/a
Marquee
sign
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core
Entrance
width plus 2
feet each
side
Maximum
50% story
height
4 feet
minimum;
10 feet
maximum
n/a
Outdoor
display
case
Downtown
Mixed-Use
Core;
Gateways
3.5 feet
maximum
3.5 feet
maximum
5 inches
maximum
n/a
§ 305-76. Permitted signs not requiring a permit.
A. Signs permitted in any approved district without a permit. All other
signs require a permit, subject to the requirements of Article V,
§ 305-79, Permitting:
(1) Flags of any nation, state, municipality, or political subdivision,
flags officially designated as a national, state, or local symbol, or
flags of fraternal, religious, and civic organizations. Flags may be
freestanding or wall-mounted.
(a) Poles for freestanding flags are limited to the maximum height
of the district or 35 feet, whichever is less.
(b) Poles for freestanding flags must be setback a minimum of 10
feet from any lot line.
(c) Wall-mounted flags may not extend over the public right-ofway.
(d) There is no limit on the number of such flags per lot.
§ 305-75 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-76
294:959
(e) External illumination of flags is permitted but must be focused
on the flagpole and flag.
(2) Historical markers, tablets and statues, memorial signs and
plaques; names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into any
masonry surface or when constructed of bronze, stainless steel or
similar material; and emblems installed by governmental agencies,
religious or nonprofit organizations.
(3) Nonilluminated warning, private drive, posted or no trespassing
signs, not exceeding two square feet per face.
(4) Number and name plates identifying residences, mounted on
house, apartment or mailbox, not exceeding one square foot in
area.
(5) Lawn signs identifying residences, not exceeding one square foot
per face. Such signs are to be nonilluminated except by a light
which is an integral part of a lamppost if used as a support, with no
advertising message thereon.
(6) Integral graphics or attached price signs on gasoline pumps at
automotive service stations.
(7) Seasonal and holiday decorations, including lighting, are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter and may be displayed in any
district without a permit.
(8) Decals, logos, emblems, or price signs that identify the name of a
business, under 64 square inches.
(9) Signs incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, schools,
private clubs or societies, and other public or semipublic uses
which shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall be located
on the premises of such institution provided that signs are located
not closer than 10 feet to any property line. One sign permitted per
lot.
(10) One home occupation sign shall be permitted for an approved
home occupation, wherever such uses are permitted. Such sign
shall be no larger than two square feet and shall not be closer than
10 feet from any property line, and, if a freestanding bracket sign,
shall not exceed six feet in height above the natural grade which
the sign is located. Home occupation signs in the R-1 and R-2
District are only permitted one wall sign or one window sign not to
exceed 20% of the window area.
(11) Murals or similar designs, images, or expressions on the exterior of
a building, generally for the purpose of decoration or artistic
expression, including, but not limited to, paintings, markings, and
etchings, and does not include any on or off-site advertisement for a
§ 305-76 AUBURN CODE § 305-76
294:960
commercial, industrial, or other nonmunicipal entity, person, or
corporation.
(12) Light pole banners on private property are allowed as follows:
(a) Light pole banners are permitted for light poles in private
parking lots and must be mounted so that they are held taut
between support posts.
(b) Light pole banners are limited to a maximum area of six square
feet per banner.
(c) Light pole banners must be mounted to project perpendicular
from light poles.
(d) Light pole banners must not be used as a temporary offpremises
sign.
(13) Directional signs.
(a) Directional signs used to identify circulation paths and provide
operational information are permitted for any parking lot,
whether a principal or ancillary use.
(b) Directional signs are permitted for each entrance/exit,
driveway intersection, drive-through lane, and other
circulation points.
(c) Directional signs are limited to eight square feet in area.
(d) Directional signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
(e) Directional signs that provide information on the operation of a
parking lot, such as "Unauthorized Users May Be Towed," are
permitted as needed for any parking lot, whether a principal or
accessory use.
(f) Directional freestanding signs are limited to four square feet in
area and must be five feet from any lot line that abuts a street.
B. Temporary signs. Temporary signs, which shall not exceed six square
feet in area unless otherwise stated in this section, provided that such
sign is erected or displayed not less than five feet from the property
line.
(1) One sign is permitted per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs,
one facing each street, shall be permitted. Such signs shall not be
posted more than two weeks prior to the event and no longer than
three days after the event.
(2) In addition to temporary signs, signs authorized below are
permitted within the City of Auburn, and are authorized only under
the circumstances and limitations described.
§ 305-76 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-76
294:961
(a) Special events.
[1] A temporary banner or portable sign promoting a special
event at a commercial establishment may be erected for a
period not to exceed 14 days.
[2] The size of the banner shall not exceed six square feet.
[3] Temporary sidewalk signs are allowed in accordance with
§ 305-73I, Sidewalk/a-frame sign.
[4] Such signs must be located on or adjacent to the
commercial establishment's property, must not interfere
with normal pedestrian traffic and must be kept in an
attractive and safe condition.
[5] Directional signs are not permitted.
(b) Residential events.
[1] For residences, signs announcing special events, garage or
rummage sales, auctions or birthdays may be displayed on
the premises not more than two times a year for each of
the types of events described above.
[2] For each particular event, one sign not to exceed six
square feet on either side may be displayed on the
premises for a period not to exceed seven days.
[3] In addition, up to a maximum of two directional signs may
be displayed during the hours of the event.
[4] All such signs must be kept in an attractive and safe
condition.
[5] No sign is authorized on City property or in the public
right-of-way.
(c) Banners for charitable events.
[1] A charitable, service, educational, religious or not-forprofit
organization may erect a street banner announcing a
coming event.
[2] The banner may be placed for a period not to exceed 14
days.
[3] The banner must be made of canvas or other material of
equal or better durability and must be kept in an attractive
and safe condition.
[4] The banner may not exceed 15 square feet, and may not
include advertisements for commercial products or
services.
§ 305-76 AUBURN CODE § 305-76
294:962
§ 305-77. Murals on private property.
The City of Auburn finds that noncommercial murals that are located on
private nonresidential property and are visible to the public directly affect
the public health, safety, and welfare of the City.
[5] The banner must be removed no later than three business
days after the event terminates.
(d) Realty sales or rental property.
[1] When a property is for sale or rent, one sign per realtor
announcing the sale or rental is permitted at that
residence, except in the case of corner lots where one sign
per street frontage will be allowed.
[2] The sign may not exceed nine square feet on either side.
[3] In the case of all realty sales or rental signs, signs must be
kept in an attractive and safe condition and must be
removed within three days of completion of transaction.
[4] No sign is authorized on City property or in the public
right-of-way, and no directional signs are authorized.
(e) Contractors' signs.
[1] One temporary sign per contractor performing services
may be displayed on the premises where such services are
being performed and only during the performance of such
services.
[2] The sign shall not exceed nine square feet on either side
and shall be removed within two days of completion or
cessation of the work.
[3] The sign must be kept in an attractive and safe condition
and may not be placed on City property or on the public
right-of-way.
(f) Political posters.
[1] There shall be no limit on the number of political signs per
lot.
[2] Political signs may be placed up to the right-of-way line,
but shall not be placed in public rights-of-way or on public
land for any reason.
[3] Political signs may not be placed more than 30 days before
the election and must be taken down 24 hours after the
election has been completed.
A. Purpose and intent.
§ 305-76 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-77
294:963
(1) To encourage the installation of murals on private property as a
vital part of Auburn's urban landscape.
(2) To ascertain that private property murals do not create unsafe
distractions to drivers and jeopardize public safety.
(3) To ascertain that murals on private property are not commercial.
(4) To maintain for the City's residents, workers and visitors an
aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic
and cultural interests of the City.
(5) To preserve the value of property located adjacent to the property
where a private property mural is erected.
(6) To effectively balance legitimate efforts of property owners to
display murals with the public safety needs and aesthetic interests
of the City.
(7) To protect free speech rights provided by the Constitution of the
State of New York and the United States Constitution.
(8) To inform and answer questions of the residents and business
located in the neighborhood where a private property mural may be
installed with the goal of developing neighborhood pride regarding
the mural.
(9) To encourage artistic expression.
B. Applicability. A mural that has been approved as set forth in this article
shall not be considered a sign that is subject to the limitations set forth
in Article V, Sign Regulations.
C. Guidelines for murals.
(1) A mural may be installed on private, nonresidential property only
after the issuance of a permit in accord with this article. The
requirements of this article shall not apply to residential property
as defined in Article II, Definitions.
(2) All commercial messages shall be regulated by Article V, Sign
Regulations. In addition, Article V, Sign Regulations, shall regulate
all displays of noncommercial messages which qualify under Article
V, Sign Regulations, as a substitute for a commercial message
display.
(3) Where a proposed mural has mixed commercial and
noncommercial messages, the mural shall be deemed commercial,
the application (as defined in § 305-77D, Permit application, below)
shall be denied, and the limitations of Article V, Sign Regulations,
shall apply to the entire display and not just to the portion that
contains a commercial message.
§ 305-77 AUBURN CODE § 305-77
294:964
(4) The name of the artist creating the permitted mural and the name
of a sponsor may be displayed on an adjacent plaque or similar
display that is no more than eight inches in height and eight (18)
inches in length provided that such plaque or adjacent display is
made a part of the mural application.
(5) Refer to Article V, § 305-79, Permitting, for permit procedures.
D. Permit application.
(1) Before a mural may be installed, an application for mural
installation (the "application") shall be submitted to the City of
Auburn's Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) The application form shall require that the following information:
(a) The property address and parcel identification number where
the proposed mural will be located;
(b) A site plan setting forth in detail where the mural is to be
located on the property, its overall dimensions, the materials to
be used and the location of any plaque identifying the artist
and/or the sponsor;
(c) The artist's statement describing the proposed mural;
(d) A photograph or detailed reasonably accurate graphic of the
proposed mural;
(e) A notarized statement signed by all property owners of record
that they:
[1] Have reviewed the application including the photograph
or detailed reasonably accurate graphic of the proposed
mural;
[2] Agree to the installation of the proposed mural on their
property pursuant to the details set forth on the
application; and
[3] Approve the submission of the application;
(f) The resume of the proposed mural's artist and, if attribution is
to be made on the permitted plaque, the text of such
attribution; and
(g) The name of any sponsor of the mural if the sponsor is to be
identified on the permitted plaque.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall forward a copy of a completed
application to the Design Review Committee for consideration of
two certifications.
§ 305-77 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-77
294:965
(a) Noncommercial message verification. The Design Review
Committee shall determine whether the proposed mural is
commercial speech or contains a commercial message as
defined in this article.
[1] A finding that the proposed mural is not commercial
speech and does not contain a commercial message shall
be certified by the Design Review Committee.
[2] The display of the name of the artist or the sponsor on the
plaque permitted by this article shall not cause the mural
to be deemed commercial speech.
[3] The determination that a display contains commercial
speech shall result in denial of the application.
[4] A final decision by the Design Review Committee that the
proposed mural is commercial speech or contains a
commercial message shall be transmitted to the applicant
within 14 days of the Design Review Committee's decision.
[5] Where an applicant disagrees with the final decision of the
Design Review Committee that the proposed mural is
commercial speech or contains a commercial message,
and does not wish to amend the application or obtain a
sign permit, the applicant may appeal the determination
within 30 days of the date that the final decision is
transmitted to the applicant in writing.
(b) Traffic hazard determination. The Design Review Committee
shall determine whether the proposed mural may result in a
distraction or hazard to drivers.
[1] Within 30 days of the receipt of an application, the Design
Review Committee shall make a determination of whether
the proposed mural is a traffic hazard or will create an
undue and dangerous distraction to motorists.
[2] The Design Review Committee shall provide written
comments and a recommendation for approval or denial to
the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days of review of
their review meeting.
[3] Where an applicant disagrees with the final decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer that the proposed mural creates
a traffic hazard or an undue and dangerous distraction to
motorists and does not wish to amend the application, the
applicant may appeal the administrative determination by
filing an appeal of the administrative decision within 30
days of the date that the final decision is transmitted to the
applicant in writing, or by invoking another appropriate
remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 305-77 AUBURN CODE § 305-77
294:966
§ 305-78. Maintenance and enforcement.
(4) The Design Review Committee shall provide written comments and
a recommendation for approval or denial of the mural installation
permit to the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days of the
meeting in which the review of the complete mural installation
application occurs.
(5) If recommended for approval by the Design Review Committee, the
Code Enforcement Officer may issue the permit for mural
installation.
(6) If not recommended by the Design Review Committee, no permit
shall be issued until requested modifications are made to the
application and resubmitted or the applicant moves forward with a
sign permit application.
A. Maintenance.
(1) The painted parts of signs and any supports of the sign, unless such
parts are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust, must be
painted at least once every three years.
(2) Any sign found to be broken, damaged, or unsafe upon inspection
by the Code Enforcement Officer must be repaired or made secure
by the applicant, sign owner, or property owner. The Code
Enforcement Officer will give notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to any of the above-named persons to
repair or remove the unsafe sign within five days of receipt of said
notice. If the sign is not repaired, made secure, or removed within
30 days, or within any additional time specified, the Code
Enforcement Officer will revoke the sign permit and remove the
sign.
(3) If a sign is found to be a source of imminent peril to persons or
property, the Code Enforcement Officer will remove the sign or
otherwise secure the sign without notice to the applicant, sign
owner, or property owner.
B. Enforcement.
(1) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there has
been a violation of this article, written notice will be served upon
the applicant, sign owner, or property owner by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, at the person's last known
address. The notice will specify the alleged violation, provide a
reasonable time frame within which the violation is to be corrected,
state what legal remedies will be imposed upon failure to correct
the violation, and inform the individuals of their right to appeal to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The notice of violation will
automatically become a final order if the violation is not corrected
within the time allowed or if an application for appeal is not
§ 305-77 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-78
294:967
§ 305-79. Permitting.
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer within seven days from
receipt of the notice.
(2) If at any time the Code Enforcement Officer determines a sign is in
disrepair, the owner/tenant of the property shall repair or remove
said sign within 15 days of notice to the owner/tenant by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Failure to do so shall result in removal by the
Code Enforcement Office. The cost of this removal shall be charged
to the owner of the property.
A. General procedures. In cases where a single sign permit is required for
any given property or structure, the following procedure shall be
adhered to:
(1) No sign shall be erected, enlarged, expended, altered, or relocated
unless a sign permit evidencing the compliance of such work with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of
this chapter shall have first been issued.
(2) Routine maintenance, changing of parts designed to be changed or
changing the content of a sign in any manner which does not
change the functional classification of the sign shall not, standing
alone, be considered an alteration of the sign requiring the
issuance of a sign permit.
(3) Sign permit application. An application for a sign permit shall be
made in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer upon forms
prescribed by and provided by the Code Enforcement Office, and
shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Location of buildings, structures or land to which, or upon
which, the sign is to be attached or associated.
(c) A detailed drawing or blueprint showing a description of the
construction details of the sign and showing the colors,
lettering and/or pictorial matter composing the sign; position
of lighting and other extraneous devices, and a location plan
showing the position of the sign on any building or land and its
positioning in relation to nearby buildings, structures or
existing signs and to any private or public streets or highway.
(d) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land
to which or upon which the sign is to be erected in the event
that the applicant is not the owner thereof.
(e) A copy of any required or necessary electrical permit issued for
said sign or a copy of the application thereof.
§ 305-78 AUBURN CODE § 305-79
294:968
(4) Review of permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall carefully
consider the application for compliance with this article and either
issue or deny a sign permit. The Code Enforcement Officer may
defer the authority to approve or deny a sign permit to the Planning
Board at his/her discretion.
(5) Appeals. Should an applicant choose to appeal a decision by the
Code Enforcement Officer to deny issuance of a sign permit, an
application for an appeal shall be filled out and submitted along
with supporting documents to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
action.
(6) Whenever an activity requires site plan review pursuant to Article
VI, Site Plan Review, prior to approval and that activity will include
signage as part of its operation, the review of such signage shall be
a part of the site plan review process.
B. Sign site plan approval. In cases where a single property or structure
requires more than one sign permit, a sign site plan will be required. All
applications for sign site plan approval are to be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer on forms provided. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall process all complete applications in accordance with the following
procedures:
(1) All sign site plan approval applications to be heard by the Code
Enforcement Officer are hereby classified as "unlisted actions,"
under Part 617 of the State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR)
regulations. All applications for sign site plan approval must be
accompanied by a completed short form environmental assessment
form for unlisted actions.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Code Enforcement
Officer, within 60 days, must approve, modify or deny any
application for a sign site plan. Any modification or denial of a sign
site plan shall be accompanied by a brief statement of the reason
for such modification or denial.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer may modify a sign site plan
application, provided that such modification does not result in the
need for any variances from these regulations. All sign site plan
modifications must directly relate to the statements of purpose and
intent set forth in this chapter.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may defer the authority to approve
or deny a sign site plan to the Planning Board at its discretion.
(5) Once an application has been approved, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a sign permit. Said permit shall be valid for a
period of 120 days from the date of issuance. The permit may be
extended one time, for a period of 60 days, upon approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer and upon payment of an additional fee,
prior to the expiration of the initial one-hundred-twenty-day period.
§ 305-79 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-79
294:969
§ 305-80. Removal of signs.
Any sign existing on or after the effective date of this chapter which no
longer advertises an existing business conducted or product sold on the
premises upon which the sign is located shall be removed within 30 days of
the discontinuance of the business.
§ 305-81. Prohibited signs.
If a certificate of compliance is not issued within the one-hundredtwenty-
day period, or if applicable, the renewal period for the sign
permit, said sign permit shall expire.
(6) Within seven business days after the placement of the approved
sign, the Code Enforcement Officer shall verify the sign is installed
correctly and to the specifications approved. Upon presentation of
the evidence of erection of the sign in compliance with this chapter
and a sign permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of compliance.
(7) Should the Code Enforcement Officer, upon inspection, find the
sign not in compliance with the sign permit, the applicant shall be
so notified by certified mail within 10 business days of the
inspection. The applicant shall have up to 30 business days from
the date of the receipt of the certified mail notification letter to
correct the cited deficiencies and to notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of said change(s). In no event shall said additional thirty-day
period extend the validation period for the sign permit.
(8) The Code Enforcement Officer or other designated local official
shall issue a permit number for each sign, which shall be kept on
file in the Code Enforcement Office.
C. Fees. The fees to be paid to the City of Auburn for the erection of each
sign and for each of the conforming signs erected shall be consistent
with the City of Auburn Consolidated Fee Schedule.
A. Any signage not expressly permitted in this chapter is prohibited in the
City of Auburn.
B. Prohibited signs are as follows:
(1) Banners, ribbons, streamers, spinners, balloons, or other similar
moving, fluttering, revolving, flashing, smoke-generating or visual
signal generating or animated devices that contain a message or
content used for the purpose of advertising.
(2) Any sign that advertises an activity, business, product, or service no
longer conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is
located.
§ 305-79 AUBURN CODE § 305-81
294:970
(3) Digital or electronic signs which display constantly moving or
flashing content.
(4) Roof signs which are designed and erected on and supported by the
roof of the building or structure.
(5) Portable signs on wheels, except pursuant to Article V, § 305-76B,
Temporary signs.
(6) Signs that constitute a traffic hazard including those that:
(a) Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because of its
position, shape, or color, including signs illuminated in red,
green, or amber color to resemble a traffic signal.
(b) Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER,
CAUTION, WARNING, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or
character in a manner that misleads, interferes with, or
confuses traffic.
C. Billboards, except as expressly permitted as follows:
(1) Cap and replace. No new billboards shall be established within the
City except through the cap and replace regulations. One new
digital billboard face can be placed in the HC Highway Commercial
Zoning District if the advertising company removes four existing
billboard faces from any other zoning District.
(2) Permit required. A new billboard, in accordance with the cap and
replace regulations, shall be permitted in the HC Highway
Commercial Zoning District only upon issuance of a special use
permit by the Planning Board in accordance with Article VIII,
§ 305-104, Special use permits.
(3) General regulations. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue
such a permit unless the billboard conforms to the following:
(a) Maximum size shall be 25 feet by 12 feet and 300 square feet.
(b) Maximum height shall be 25 feet.
(c) Minimum setback shall be equal to the height of the billboard,
but no less than 12.5 feet, from all property lines.
(d) A billboard may not be established within 300 feet of another
billboard.
(e) Minimum duration of message shall be no less than eight
seconds.
(f) Transition time of the message shall be instantaneous.
§ 305-81 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-81
294:971
§ 305-82. Nonconforming sign.
(g) Maximum brightness shall be 5,000 cd/m2 (daytime), and 280
cd/m2 (nighttime)
(4) Approval.
(a) The Planning Board shall not grant a special use permit for a
billboard unless the Planning Board determines that the
billboard complies with the requirements of this section and
those of Article VIII, § 305-104, Special use permits.
(b) The Planning Board may impose additional conditions intended
to protect health, safety and welfare of the general public.
D. Notices, placards, bills, posters, cards, stickers, banners, signs,
advertisings, or other devices designed to attract the attention of the
public that are posted or otherwise affixed upon any street, street
furniture, right-of-way, public sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, lamppost,
hydrant, tree, alley, telephone pole, public telephone, or lighting
system, or other public alarm or communication system.
A. Upon the adoption of this chapter, any legally existing sign or
advertising device which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter in terms of location, area, illumination, type, or height shall be
considered a nonconforming sign. In addition, no nonconforming sign
may be relocated, enlarged, replaced, redesigned, or altered in any way
that increases its nonconformity.
B. Upon the adoption of this chapter, all nonconforming signs, except
those granted a variance, shall cease and desist at the time when there
is any one or more of the following:
(1) A change in ownership of the home or business to which the sign
applies; such change must involve a change in the actual persons
owning the home or business, rather than a mere change in their
corporate status.
(2) A change in use.
(3) Destruction, damage, or disrepair of said sign to the extent that
51% of its replacement cost must be expended in its repair.
(4) Creation of a hazard or disturbance to the health, safety and
welfare of the general public as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(5) Nonconforming signs must be properly maintained, but may not be
changed to another nonconforming sign, either due to a change in
text, cosmetically, or structurally. Any change in the advertising
copy to legal, nonconforming billboard signs would not be subject
to this subsection.
§ 305-81 AUBURN CODE § 305-82
294:972
§ 305-83. Amortization of nonconforming signs.
§ 305-84. Abandoned signs.
(6) Nonconforming signs may not be structurally or electrically
expanded or altered unless such alteration brings the sign into
conformance with the provisions of this section.
(7) Nonconforming signs may not be relocated to another site on the
same property.
(8) Nonconforming signs may not be reestablished after
discontinuance for 30 consecutive days.
A. Nonconforming signs shall be removed or converted to a permitted sign
within three years of official notification of a nonconforming status by
the Code Enforcement Officer. Any legally existing billboard sign in
existence as of the effective date of this chapter will be deemed a legal,
nonconforming sign not subject to amortization.
B. Such notice must be recorded with the City Clerk and mailed to the
property owner. If the property owner fails to alter or remove the
structure to comply with the regulations set forth in this section within
10 days following the final date of the amortization period, such sign
may be removed or altered by the City at the expense of the owner or
sign applicant.
A. Any sign located on property unoccupied for a period of 60 days or more
shall be deemed abandoned.
B. Failure to remove an abandoned sign shall result in removal by the
Code Enforcement Office. The cost of this removal, plus the cost for
inspection of the premises, shall be charged to the owner of the
property. The City Assessor shall assess this amount upon the real
property. Said total amount shall constitute a lien and charge on the
real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged. The amount shall be collected by the City Treasurer in the
manner provided by law for the collection of taxes or delinquent taxes.
§ 305-82 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-84
294:973

ARTICLE VI
Site Plan Review
§ 305-85. General guidelines.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide the specifications and
necessary elements to be included in a minor and major site plan for
those uses which are subject to site plan review including, but not
limited to, proposed parking, access, screening, signs, landscaping,
architectural features, location and dimensions of buildings, adjacent
land uses and physical features meant to protect adjacent land uses.
B. Applicability. This article applies to all land use activities requiring
minor and major site plan approval.
(1) Minor site plans include the following types of development:
(a) Multifamily residential uses.
[1] New multifamily units or conversions up to four units.
[2] Expansion of existing structures by more than 10% but
less than 25% or more of current square footage.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Nonresidential or mixed-use development of less than
4,000 square feet and more than 250 feet from a
residential use or district boundary.
[2] Expansion of less than 25% of the current gross square
footage.
(c) Parking lots, parking structures, loading and stacking area.
[1] Any new parking lot or parking structure with 3,000
square feet or less.
[2] Expansion of a parking lot, parking structure, loading or
stacking area by less than 25% of total area. Changes to
parking lots, parking structures, loading or stacking areas
may require a major site plan review at the discretion of
the Design Review Committee.
(2) Major site plans include the following types of development:
(a) Multifamily residential uses.
[1] New multifamily units or conversions for five or more
units.
[2] Expansion of existing structures by 25% or more of
current square footage.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:975
[1] Nonresidential or mixed-use development located within
250 feet of residential uses or zoning district boundary.
[2] Nonresidential or mixed-use development greater than
4,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[3] Proposed addition of 25% or more of the current gross
square footage.
(c) Parking lots, parking structures, loading and stacking area.
[1] Any new parking lot or parking structure for more than
3,000 square feet.
[2] Expansion of existing parking lots, parking structures,
loading or stacking areas by more than 25% of current
square footage.
(3) Exclusions. The following activities are excluded from the
requirement for site plan review:
(a) Construction of one- or two-family dwellings and ordinary
related accessory structures and related land use activities;
(b) Expansion of existing single- and two-family residential
structures and related land use activities;
(c) Landscaping and grading which is not intended to be used in
connection with a land use reviewable under the provisions of
the definition above;
(d) Ordinary repair or maintenance or interior alterations of
existing structures or uses;
(e) Nonstructural agricultural or gardening uses.
(4) A major site plan may be required if the Design Review Committee
determines that:
(a) A proposed adjustment to a previously approved minor site
plan is not consistent with the intent and objectives of the
original site plan approval.
(b) If the Design Review Committee determines the impacts of an
application for minor site plan review have the potential to
create significant detrimental impacts to character, safety, etc.
C. Jurisdiction.
(1) The Design Review Committee and Planning Board are hereby
authorized to review and act on site plans submitted in accordance
with this chapter, special use permit applications submitted in
accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104, Special use permits, and
amendments proposed to this chapter and to act as lead agency for
§ 305-85 AUBURN CODE § 305-85
294:976
all matters requiring review under the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) that may arise as a
result of the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall also conduct an annual review of this
chapter and issue a report in April of each year advising the City
Council of any sections or provisions, if any, of this chapter which
should be amended.
D. Minor site plan filing approval and procedures.
(1) A minor site plan requires Design Review Committee approval. The
Design Review Committee shall have authority in determining the
compliance of a minor site plan with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application. The following application requirements must be met
and information provided before an application for minor site plan
approval will be approved.
(a) A presubmittal meeting with the Planning Department is
required prior to filing an application for minor site plan
approval. This may be waived by the Planning Department.
(b) Application fee paid in full in compliance with the City of
Auburn Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(c) Minor site plan containing the following items:
[1] A statement and scaled drawing showing the locations and
dimensions of principal and accessory structures, parking
areas, access signs (with descriptions); existing and
proposed vegetation, and other planned features;
[2] Anticipated changes in the existing topography and
natural features; and, where applicable, measures and
features to comply with flood hazard and flood insurance
regulations;
[3] Map of the area which clearly shows the location of the
site with respect to nearby streets, rights-of-way,
properties, easements and other pertinent features;
[4] A topographic or contour map of adequate scale and detail
to show site topography;
[5] Compliance with the City's Design Standards (as
applicable).
(d) If not the owner of the land under consideration, provide
written approval from the owner to submit the sketch plan.
(e) Application form as provided by the Planning Department with
all required supporting documents outlined on the site plan
review application.
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:977
(3) Approval procedures.
(a) Upon submission, Planning Department staff will notify the
applicant within 10 business days of receipt if an application is
complete.
(b) In the event the Planning Department deems an application
incomplete or otherwise not properly filed, the applicant will
be notified in writing and given the opportunity within a
specified period of time (not less than seven days after the date
of the notice) to bring the application into compliance. An
application which is the subject of such notice but is not
brought into compliance within the period specified in such
notice shall be denied for failure to comply with these rules.
(c) Within 10 business days of a notification of a completed
application, the Planning Department will forward the
application to the Design Review Committee.
(d) The Design Review Committee's review of the site plan shall
include, but is not limited to, the following considerations:
[1] Location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs;
[2] Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement
surfaces, dividers and traffic controls;
[3] Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading;
[4] Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access
and circulation, walkway structures, control of
intersections with vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian
convenience;
[5] Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities;
[6] Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities;
[7] Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and
other landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer
between the applicant's land and adjoining lands,
including the maximum retention of existing vegetation;
[8] Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants;
[9] Special attention to the adequacy of and impact on
structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
susceptibility to ponding, flooding, or erosion;
§ 305-85 AUBURN CODE § 305-85
294:978
[10] Conformance with the City's Design Standards to the
maximum extent possible.
(e) Within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, the
Design Review Committee shall approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the minor site plan. Where a site plan
does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the Design
Review Committee may refer said site plan to the Planning
Board for their review.
(f) The Design Review Committee may grant minor site plan
approval with conditions only to the extent that such
conditions specify the actions necessary to bring the
application into complete compliance with applicable
regulations or where additional conditions have been agreed to
by the petitioner. If the proposed minor site plan is determined
to be consistent with all applicable regulations, the Design
Review Committee shall approve the minor site plan.
(g) The date the Design Review Committee, Planning Director or
designee signs the approved minor site plan shall establish the
date of approval for a minor site plan.
E. Major site plan filing approval and procedures.
(1) A major site plan requires Planning Board approval. The Planning
Board shall have authority in determining the compliance of a
major site plan with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application. The following application requirements must be met
and information provided before an application for major site plan
will be approved.
(a) A presubmittal meeting with the Planning Department is
required prior to filing an application for major site plan
approval. This may be waived by the Planning Department.
(b) Application fee paid in full in compliance with the City of
Auburn Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(c) Major site plan containing the following items:
[1] Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant
and person responsible for preparation of such drawing;
[2] North arrow, scale and date;
[3] Boundaries of the property plotted to scale;
[4] Existing watercourses and wetlands;
[5] Grading and drainage plan showing existing and proposed
contours;
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:979
[6] Location, design, type of construction, proposed use and
exterior dimensions of all buildings;
[7] Location, design and type of construction of all parking
and truck loading areas showing access and egress;
[8] Provisions for pedestrian access including sidewalks along
public highways. Pedestrian facilities shall be ADA
(Americans with Disabilities Act) compliant. Sidewalks
must be constructed continuously across all driveways;
[9] Provisions for bicycle parking, such as bicycle racks or
bicycle lockers, as appropriate.
[10] Location of outdoor storage, if any, and location, design
and specific arrangements for storage and access to refuse
collection containers;
[11] Location, design and construction materials of all existing
and proposed site improvements, including drains,
culverts, retaining walls and fences;
[12] Description of the method of sewage disposal and location,
design and construction materials of such facilities;
[13] Description of the method of securing public water and
location, design and construction materials of such
facilities;
[14] Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants, access routes for emergency
vehicles, location of fire hydrants, location of wires, cable
and conduits for electric, telephone, cable television and
similar services, and location of any easements;
[15] Location, design and construction of materials of all
energy distribution facilities, including electrical, gas and
solar energy;
[16] Location, height, size, materials and design and type of
construction of all proposed signage;
[17] Location and proposed design of all buffer areas, including
existing vegetative cover;
[18] Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities;
[19] Identification of the location and amount of building area
proposed for retail sales or similar commercial activity;
[20] Landscaping plan and planting schedule;
[21] Estimated project construction schedule;
§ 305-85 AUBURN CODE § 305-85
294:980
[22] Record of application for and approval status of all
necessary permits from state and county officials;
[23] Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Planning Board.
[24] Short environmental assessment form (EAF), full
environmental assessment form or draft environmental
impact statement as determined by the Design Review
Committee or Planning Board. The EAF should be
completed to the extent possible using the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation
Environmental Resource Mapper.
(3) Completed application. Upon submission, Planning Department
staff will notify the applicant within five business days of receipt if
an application is complete.
(a) In the event the Planning Department deems an application
incomplete or otherwise not properly filed, the applicant will
be notified in writing and given the opportunity within a
specified period of time (not less than seven days after the date
of the notice) to bring the application into compliance. An
application which is the subject of such notice but is not
brought into compliance within the period specified in such
notice shall be denied for failure to comply with these rules.
(b) Within three business days of a completed application, the
Planning Department will forward the application to the
Design Review Committee.
(c) Within 15 business days of receipt of a completed application,
the Design Review Committee shall forward recommendations
to the Planning Board for the first Planning Board meeting that
project is scheduled to be reviewed. The Design Review
Committee may request additional time to review the
application and supporting materials upon consent of the
applicant.
(4) Notice. The Planning Department will mail one notice to all owners
of record of properties within 400 feet of the subject property. The
notice will include the date and time of the first Planning Board
meeting which the project is on the agenda, and address and
description of the proposed project. Notice shall be mailed no
fewer than five days prior to the meeting.
(5) Site inspections. The Board, and any such persons as they may
designate, may conduct such examinations, tests and other
inspections of the site deemed necessary and appropriate.
(6) Review. The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include,
as appropriate, but not be limited to, the following considerations:
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:981
(a) Location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs;
(b) Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement
surfaces, dividers and traffic controls;
(c) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading;
(d) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, walkway structures, control of intersections with
vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian convenience;
(e) Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities;
(f) Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities;
(g) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer between
the applicant's land and adjoining lands, including the
maximum retention of existing vegetation;
(h) Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants;
(i) Special attention to the adequacy of and impact on structures,
roadways and landscaping in areas with susceptibility to
ponding, flooding, or erosion;
(j) Conformance with the City's Design Standards to the
maximum extent possible.
[1] No approval or approval with conditions shall be granted
until the Planning Board determines that the applicant is
in compliance with all other provisions of this and other
ordinances.
[2] Within 60 days of the receipt of a completed application for
site plan approval, the Planning Board shall render a
decision of approve, approve with modifications, or deny
the site plan. The time within which a decision must be
rendered may be extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and Planning Board.
[a] Site plans requiring modifications shall be submitted
to the Planning Department for final approval within a
time period determined by the Planning Board. The
Planning Department may forward the modified site
plan to the Planning Board at their discretion.
[b] If a Site Plan is denied, an applicant may submit an
appeal within 30 days from the date of the decision to
§ 305-85 AUBURN CODE § 305-85
294:982
the Zoning Board of Appeals requesting relief from the
Planning Board action.
(k) Upon approval of the site plan, the date the Planning Board
Chair signs the approved major site plan shall establish the
date of approval for a major site plan. A final copy of the
approved major site plan will be filed by the Planning
Department with the City Clerk.
(l) Costs incurred by the Planning Board for consultation fees or
other extraordinary expenses in connection with the review of
a proposed site plan shall be charged to the applicant.
F. Public hearing.
(1) The Planning Board may hold a public hearing.
(2) In determining whether a public hearing is necessary, the Planning
Board shall be guided by the expected level of public interest in the
project.
(3) Applicants may request a public hearing. When an applicant
requests a public hearing, no site plan may be disapproved without
such a hearing.
(4) When the Planning Board requires a public hearing, a notice shall
be published at least once, not less than 10 days in advance of such
meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation of the City.
(a) A notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
(b) A notice shall be delivered to the Mayor, members of the City
Council, Zoning Board of Appeals, and to the City Manager.
(c) A notice shall be mailed to every association of residents of the
City and any other interested party who or which shall have
registered their names and addresses for this purpose with the
Planning Board.
(d) A notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of properties
within 400 feet of the subject property.
(e) The notice required shall be posted upon instructions from the
Planning Board and shall state the location of the building or
lot in question and the general nature of the question involved.
G. Changes in site plan.
(1) At any time within 30 days following the initial site plan submission
to the Planning Department, the applicant may submit to the
Planning Department site plan modifications which do not
materially affect the fundamental character of a proposed site plan,
and the time periods state in this section shall continue to apply.
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:983
(2) If, subsequent to the approval of a site plan by the Planning Board,
the applicant proposes any modification (other than to correct
minor or technical omissions or inaccuracies) of the site plan, the
procedures set forth in Article VI, § 305-85E(2), Application, above
shall be applicable to such modification, except that the materials
submitted to the Planning Department shall relate only to such
modification.
(3) Minor modifications to the site plan may be approved by the
Planning Department. Minor modifications include:
(a) Error correction that does not alter the site plan;
(b) Modifications that are not in violation of this chapter;
(c) Changes that do not affect overall site layout or properties
outside of the site; and
(d) Location of dumpster containers and other refuse containers,
including enclosures.
H. Subdivision review. Site plan review under the provisions of this
chapter may occur simultaneously with subdivision plat review, where
required. A single public hearing for approval of the site plan and its
associated plat shall be permitted, as determined by the Planning
Department.
I. Compliance.
(1) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all improvements
shown on the approved minor or major site plan are installed or a
sufficient performance guarantee has been posted for
improvements not yet completed. The sufficiency of such
performance guarantee shall be determined by the Planning Board,
after consultation with other appropriate agencies.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the overall
inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the
Planning Board and other officials and agencies, as appropriate.
(3) Whenever the particular circumstances of proposed development
require compliance with other requirements of the City of Auburn,
the Planning Board shall attempt to integrate, as appropriate, site
plan review as required by this section with the procedural and
submission requirements for such other compliance.
J. Period of validity.
(1) If construction of the approved development has not commenced
within two years from the time of minor or major site plan approval,
that approval shall be deemed revoked.
§ 305-85 AUBURN CODE § 305-85
294:984
(2) Extensions not to exceed two years may be granted by the Planning
Department or Design Review Committee.
(3) Multiple extensions may be granted at the discretion of the Design
Review Committee.
§ 305-85 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-85
294:985

ARTICLE VII
Nonconformities
§ 305-86. General guidelines.
§ 305-87. Nonconforming use.
A. Purpose. This article regulates and limits the continued existence of
uses, structures, and lots established prior to the effective date of this
chapter which do not conform to the regulations of this chapter
applicable in the zoning districts in which such nonconformities are
located.
A. Continuance. Except as provided in this article, any lawfully existing
nonconforming use located in a structure designed for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, or not involving the use of a
structure, or involving only a structure which is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained herein.
B. Extension or enlargement.
(1) A nonconforming use existing at the date of adoption of this
chapter may not be extended or enlarged except by special use
permit.
(2) A nonconforming structure or use may not be extended or enlarged
to other structures or land acquired subsequent to the date of
adoption of this chapter.
(3) No special use permit allowing the extension or enlargement of a
nonconforming use shall be granted by the Planning Board unless
the regulations of this chapter, other than allowed uses for the
district in which said nonconforming use is located, can be
complied with. The Planning Board may impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental
to the proposed use of the property. Such proposed conditions shall
be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be
imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such
approval may have on the neighborhood of the property.
C. Changes.
(1) No structure designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or
in part to a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered unless
the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located. No such alteration shall
create any new parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity nor
increase the degree of any existing parking, yard or space and bulk
nonconformity of such structure.
§ 305-86 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-87
294:987
(2) A nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving
only a structure which is accessory to the nonconforming use of
land, or a nonconforming use in a structure designed for a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be changed
to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which
the structure is located.
(a) When such a nonconforming use has been changed to a
permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonpermitted use. For purposes of this subsection, a use shall
be deemed to have been so changed when an existing
nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a
permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a
period of seven days. Any change of use in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
lawfully existing nonconforming use.
D. Discontinuance.
(1) When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of
six consecutive months (from a date determined by the Planning
Department or Code Enforcement Officer), such a nonconforming
use shall not be reestablished and any subsequent use of such
structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the district in which such structure or land is located.
(2) Any period of such discontinuance caused by government action,
strikes, material shortages or acts of God, and without any
contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be
considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes
of this section.
E. Repair and restoration.
(1) Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and
installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing
partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any
structure that is designed for a permitted use but devoted in whole
or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this
subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of this
section.
(2) In the event that any structure designed for a permitted use and
devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or
destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50% of the cost
of replacement of the structure new, such structure shall not be
restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform
to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located
and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating any
new parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity or increasing
the degree of any parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity
existing prior to such damage or destruction.
§ 305-87 AUBURN CODE § 305-87
294:988
§ 305-88. Nonconforming structures.
(3) Where any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means
not within the control of the owner thereof to the extent of 50% or
less of the cost of replacement of the structure new, repair or
restoration of such structure may be made; provided, however, that
no repairs or restorations shall be made which would create any
new parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity or increase the
degree of any parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity
existing prior to such damage or destruction, nor shall any repairs
or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning
district regulations be made unless a building permit is obtained
and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of
such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to
completion.
(a) Exception for a single-family dwelling. Where a single-family
dwelling is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the
control of the owner thereof to the extent of 100% of the cost of
replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of such
structure may be made; provided, however, that no repairs or
restorations shall be made which would create any new
parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity or increase the
degree of any parking, yard or space and bulk nonconformity
existing prior to such damage or destruction, nor shall any
repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable
zoning district regulations be made unless a building permit is
obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year
after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is
diligently pursued to completion.
(4) In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by
means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored
except in accordance with Article VII, § 305-87E, Repair and
restoration.
A. Continuance. Any nonconforming structure which is devoted to a use
which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
restrictions in Subsections B through D of this section and Article VII,
§ 305-91, Certificate of nonconformity.
B. Expansion. Any nonconforming structure may be enlarged, maintained,
repaired or altered; provided, however, that no such enlargement,
maintenance, repair or alteration shall either create any additional
nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of
all or any part of such structure.
C. Additions, alterations, maintenance, and repairs.
§ 305-87 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-88
294:989
§ 305-89. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) A nonconforming structure shall not be extended or enlarged by
special use permit in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-104,
Special use permits.
(2) Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason, its
placement or use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district into which it is relocated.
(3) A nonconforming structure is required to be maintained in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
D. Damage or destruction.
(1) In the event that any part of a nonconforming structure which
contributed to its nonconformity is damaged or destroyed, by any
means, to the extent of more than 75% of the cost of replacement of
said part new, such part shall not be restored unless it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which
it is located.
(2) When such a part of a nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed, by any means, to the extent of 75% or less of the cost of
replacement of such part new, no repairs or restoration except in
conformity with the applicable zoning district regulations shall be
made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is
actually begun within one year after the date of such partial
destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
E. Moving.
(1) No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part, for
any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any
other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being
moved.
F. Discontinuance.
(1) A nonconforming structure, or portion thereof, shall be deemed
discontinued if the structure is vacant for six consecutive months or
sooner if there is a clear manifestation of the intent on the part of
the owner to abandon the nonconforming structure.
(2) If deemed discontinued, such nonconforming structure shall not be
reestablished, and any subsequent use shall conform with the
provisions of the district in which such structure is located.
A. General regulations. A lot of record may be considered as complying
with the minimum requirements of this chapter provided that such lot
does not adjoin other land held by the same owner, part of which such
§ 305-88 AUBURN CODE § 305-89
294:990
§ 305-90. Exception for repairs pursuant to public order.
§ 305-91. Certificate of nonconformity.
§ 305-92. General nuisances.
other land could be combined with the nonconforming lot of record to
create a conforming lot without thereby creating a new nonconforming
lot.
A. Purpose. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a structure in
accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with
protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be
unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided that such
restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this
article prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or
destroyed structures or signs.
A. Burden of owner to establish legality of nonconformity.
(1) The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is lawfully
existing under the provisions of this article shall, in all cases, be
upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the City.
(2) The owner of any nonconformity may at any time apply to the Code
Enforcement Officer for a certificate of nonconformity to establish
the legality of nonconformity as of a specified date. Such
application shall contain such information as may be required by
the Code Enforcement Officer as necessary to establish the legality
of a particular nonconformity.
(3) If, upon reviewing an application for a certificate of nonconformity,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that the use,
structure or sign in question was lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of the provision creating the nonconformity in question
and remains lawfully existing subject only to such nonconformity at
the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in
order, he/she shall issue a certificate evidencing such facts and
setting forth the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the
date, if any, upon which such nonconformity is required to be
terminated; otherwise he/she shall decline to issue such certificate
and shall declare such building, structure or sign to be in violation
of this chapter.
A. General regulations. Upon a complaint registered with the Code
Enforcement Officer by 50% of the property owners within 200 feet of a
nonconforming use and which is considered to be a general nuisance or
a hazard to the health, safety, welfare and morals or to the uses or
structures adjoining such nonconforming use or uses, the Board of
Appeals shall hold a public hearing and make a finding with respect to
§ 305-89 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-92
294:991
the nuisance or hazardous condition which exists and shall determine
the necessity of terminating such nonconforming use. Such uses shall
be terminated within such reasonable time as shall be determined by
the Board of Appeals as related to the reasonable amortization of the
capital investment in such uses.
§ 305-92 AUBURN CODE § 305-92
294:992
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 305-93. Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 305-94. Planning Board.
A. Operational considerations. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
designated as the enforcement officer and is given the duty, power and
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Jurisdiction and authority.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive and examine all
applications for all permits and certificates of occupancy under this
chapter and Chapter 125, Building Construction and Fire
Prevention, of this Municipal Code.
(2) If the application conforms to all applicable codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and ordinances, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a building permit as provided in Chapter 125, unless approval
must be obtained from any other official, board, agency or the City
Council; then the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer such
application to the appropriate review authority or authorities and
shall issue a building permit only upon direction of the review
authority or authorities.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice of
violation to any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions
of this chapter in the manner provided in Chapter 125 of this
Municipal Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, to the extent
possible, integrate the procedures and duties established by this
chapter with those established by Chapter 125 of this Municipal
Code, and the jurisdiction and authority herein granted shall be in
addition to such granted by said Chapter 125.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-A of the General
Municipal Law, a Planning Board is hereby established in and for the
City of Auburn.
B. Appointment. The Planning Board shall consist of minimum of five
members serving for a minimum of three years. The members of the
Planning Board shall be appointed by the Mayor. The terms of the initial
appointees shall be for one, two and three years and thereafter for
three years each. Appointments upon the retirement of the initial terms
shall be for three years each.
C. Minimum meeting and hearing attendance requirements. Members of
the Planning Board are expected to attend all regularly scheduled and
specially scheduled meetings of the Board. In the event that a member
of the Board is absent from three consecutive meetings, or in the event
a member of the Board is absent from three meetings within any one
§ 305-93 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-94
294:993
calendar year, then such member may be removed from the Board as
provided in Subsection E(1) below.
D. Training and attendance requirements.
(1) Each member of the Planning Board shall complete, at a minimum,
four hours of training each year designed to enable such members
to effectively carry out their duties.
(2) Training may include, but not be limited to, training provided by a
municipality, regional or county planning office or commission,
county planning federation, state agency, statewide municipal
association, college or other similar entity.
(3) Training may be provided in a variety of formats, including, but not
limited to, electronic media, video, distance learning and
traditional classroom training.
(4) To be eligible for reappointment to the Planning Board, such
member shall have completed required training pursuant to this
section.
(5) The training required by this subsection may be waived or modified
by the City Council when, in the judgment of the City Council, it is
in the best interest of the City to do so.
(6) No decision of the Planning Board shall be voided or declared
invalid because of a failure to comply with this section.
E. Removal procedure.
(1) Failure to meet attendance requirements.
(a) In the event a member of the Planning Board has failed to meet
the minimum attendance requirements set forth in this
chapter, then the Planning Board Chair may remove such
member from the Planning Board as herein provided:
[1] Such member shall be mailed a written notice specifying
the nature of the failure of such member to meet the
minimum attendance and training requirements of
Subsections C and D above. A copy of such decision shall
be filed with the City.
[2] If the Planning Board Chair finds that the reasons for
failing to meet the minimum attendance requirements are
excusable because of illness, injury, or other sufficient
cause, the Planning Board Chair may elect to take no
action.
(2) Removal for cause.
(a) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict
the City Council's authority to remove a member from the
§ 305-94 AUBURN CODE § 305-94
294:994
Planning Board for cause including conflict of interest or
failure to abide by the rules and procedures outlined in this
chapter.
(b) Action by the City Council.
[1] Upon a finding that such member is in conflict with the
provisions established in this chapter, the City Council may
remove such member from the Planning Board as herein
provided:
[a] Such member shall be mailed a written notice
specifying the nature of the removal. A copy of such
decision shall be filed with the City.
F. Powers and duties.
(1) In addition to those other powers and duties assigned to the Board
by law, the City Planning Board is hereby empowered to perform
the following functions:
(a) Approval or disapproval of site plans, special use permits, and
subdivisions.
(b) Attach conditions and restrictions to an approved site plan that
are reasonable, directly related and incidental to the site plan.
(c) Submittal of an advisory opinion to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for use and area variances.
(d) Submittal of an advisory opinion to the City Council for
proposed amendments to this chapter.
(e) Review and submit advisory opinions to the City Council on
land use plans, design standards, Municipal Code changes and
any other decisions by the City Council that are referred to the
Planning Board. Advisory opinions shall be transmitted within
30 days of the option to the City Council for consideration.
(2) Votes necessary for decision. The concurring vote of a majority of
the members of the Planning Board shall be required to act on a
matter before the planning board.
(3) SEQRA compliance. The Planning Board shall comply with the
provisions of the state Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA)
under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and
regulation promulgated thereunder, codified in Title 6, Part 617, of
the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
(4) Filing of decisions and notice. The decision of the Planning Board
on an application shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within
five business days after the date such decision is rendered and a
copy thereof sent to the applicant.
§ 305-94 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-94
294:995
§ 305-95. Zoning Board of Appeals.
G. General procedures.
(1) The Planning Board shall act in strict accordance with the
procedures specified in this chapter.
(2) Every decision of the Planning Board shall contain a full record of
findings in the case. The Planning Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its proceedings and other official actions.
(3) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Planning
Board shall be necessary to approve site plans, special use permits
and subdivisions.
(4) The Planning Board may provide advisory opinions in the form of a
positive recommendation or a negative recommendation, and shall
provide to the Zoning Board of Appeals or City Council a
reasonable explanation contained within the resolution in support
of the Planning Board's opinion.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5-A, § 81 of the
General City Law, a Board of Appeals is hereby established in and for
the City of Auburn.
B. Appointment. The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members of
which no more than four shall be of the same political party. The
members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
terms of the initial appointees shall be for one, two and three years and
thereafter for three years each. Appointments upon the retirement of
the initial terms shall be for three years each.
C. Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired
term of the member or members whose term or terms become vacant.
Such appointments to fill such vacancies shall be made in the same
manner as the original appointment.
D. General grant of power. The Board of Appeals shall perform all the
duties and have all the powers prescribed by the laws of the State of
New York and as herein provided.
E. Rules of procedure. The Board of Appeals shall perform and adopt rules
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any others not
inconsistent herewith or with the laws of the State of New York.
F. Votes necessary for a decision. The concurring votes of four members of
the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer or to decide in favor of the appellant any matter upon which the
Board of Appeals is required to pass under the terms of this chapter or
§ 305-94 AUBURN CODE § 305-95
294:996
to effect variation in this chapter. If four members of the Board of
Appeals are present, this shall constitute a legal quorum.
G. Minimum meeting and hearing attendance requirements. Members of
the Board of Appeals are expected to attend all regularly scheduled and
specially scheduled meetings of the Board. In the event that a member
of the Board is absent from three consecutive meetings, or in the event
a member of the Board is absent from three meetings within any one
calendar year, then such member may be removed from the Board as
provided in Subsection I below.
H. Training and attendance requirements.
(1) Each member of the Board of Appeals shall complete, at a
minimum, four hours of training each year designed to enable such
members to more effectively carry out their duties.
(2) Training may include, but not be limited to, training provided by a
municipality, regional or county planning office or commission,
county planning federation, state agency, statewide municipal
association, college or other similar entity.
(3) Training may be provided in a variety of formats, including, but not
limited to, electronic media, video, distance learning and
traditional classroom training.
(4) To be eligible for reappointment to the Board of Appeals, such
member shall have completed the training promoted by the City
pursuant to this section.
(5) The training required by this subsection may be waived or modified
by the City Council when, in the judgment of the City Council, it is
in the best interest of the City to do so.
(6) No decision of the Board of Appeals shall be voided or declared
invalid because of a failure to comply with this section.
I. Removal procedure.
(1) Failure to meet attendance requirements.
(a) In the event a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals has
failed to meet the minimum attendance requirements set forth
in this chapter, then the Zoning Board of Appeals Chair may
remove such member from the Zoning Board of Appeals as
herein provided:
[1] Such member shall be mailed a written notice specifying
the nature of the failure of such member to meet the
minimum attendance and training requirements of
Subsections G and H above. A copy of such decision shall
be filed with the City.
§ 305-95 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-95
294:997
[2] If the Zoning Board of Appeals Chair finds that the reasons
for failing to meet the minimum attendance requirements
are excusable because of illness, injury, or other sufficient
cause, the Zoning Board of Appeals Chair may elect to take
no action.
(2) Removal for cause.
(a) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict
the City Council's authority to remove a member from the
Zoning Board of Appeals for cause including conflict of interest
or failure to abide by the rules and procedures outlined in this
chapter.
(b) Action by the City Council.
[1] Upon a finding that such member is in conflict with the
provisions established in this chapter, the City Council may
remove such member from the Zoning Board of Appeals as
herein provided:
[a] Such member shall be mailed a written notice
specifying the nature of the removal. A copy of such
decision shall be filed with the City.
J. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have all the power and
duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, which are more
particularly specified as follows:
(1) Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including determination of the exact
location of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect
thereto.
(2) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination
of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, shall have the power to grant use and area variances, as
defined herein.
K. Hearing appeals. The jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals shall be
appellate only and shall be limited to hearing and deciding appeals from
and reviewing any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or
determination made by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. Such appeal may be taken by any
person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
City.
(1) Procedure.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who or which deems himself or
itself aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision shall have
the right to file a written appeal to the Board of Appeals within
§ 305-95 AUBURN CODE § 305-95
294:998
§ 305-96. Historic Resources Review Board.
§ 305-97. Design Review Committee.
20 days of the issuance of such order, requirement, decision or
determination.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall decide each appeal within 60 days
after the final hearing and shall give notice to all parties in
interest.
(c) The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be immediately filed
in its office and be a public record.
(2) Public hearings.
(a) Upon filing with the Board of Appeals of an appeal as required
by the terms of this chapter, the Board of Appeals shall fix a
time and place for a public hearing in accordance with Article
VIII, § 305-105D, Public hearings.
(3) Fees for appeals. Upon filing an appeal a fee as established by the
City Manager in the fee schedule shall be paid.
A. Jurisdiction and appointment.
(1) The membership, means of appointment, means of removal, terms,
vacancies, and similar considerations shall be in accordance with
Chapter 178, Historic Preservation, of the Municipal Code of the
City of Auburn.
(2) Any activity proposed under this chapter which would take place
within an historic district or at an historic landmark as defined in
Chapter 178 of the Municipal Code or within the Historic
Resources Protection District established by this chapter shall be
reviewed by the Historic Resources Review Board prior to action by
any other agency.
(3) The Historic Resources Review Board shall forward a
recommendation to such other agency regarding the proposal
within 30 days of the receipt of a request for the same. This
recommendation shall be in accordance with the intent and
regulations set forth in Chapter 178, Historic Preservation.
A. Jurisdiction and authority. The Design Review Committee is hereby
assigned the responsibility of reviewing all proposed projects subject to
minor and major site plan review.
B. Membership. The Design Review Committee shall be comprised of
representatives from the following City departments:
(1) Code Enforcement.
§ 305-95 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-97
294:999
§ 305-98. Planning Department.
§ 305-99. Engineering Services Division.
(2) Planning and Economic Development.
(3) Corporation Counsel.
(4) Engineering Services.
(5) Police.
(6) Fire.
(7) Municipal utilities.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Design Review Committee will review
and approve minor site plan applications, and review and provide
recommendations to the Planning Board on applications for major site
plan, special use permit, and subdivision. All minor and major site plan
applications and special use permit applications will be reviewed for
the completeness, code compliance, and issues of public health, safety
and welfare.
A. Jurisdiction and authority.
(1) The Planning Department (Office of Planning and Economic
Development) is hereby assigned the responsibility of coordinating
the actions of the Design Review Committee and advising other
agencies administering aspects of this chapter regarding matters
which are within the technical and professional competence of the
Office.
(2) The Planning Department (Office of Planning and Economic
Development) shall review and advise the Planning Board prior to
its consideration of a site plan, special permit, planned
development district, or zoning amendment as to the conformance
of said proposal with sound planning and design principles and the
laws and regulations of the City of Auburn regarding public works
and the siting thereof.
(3) The Planning Department (Office of Planning and Economic
Development) shall review and advise the Zoning Board of Appeals
prior to its consideration of a use or area variance as to the
conformance of said proposal with sound planning and design
principles and the laws and regulations of the City of Auburn
regarding public works and the siting thereof.
A. Jurisdiction and authority.
(1) The Engineering Services Division shall review and approve the
issuance of all permits for construction of and siting of public works
to insure that such activity is being undertaken in conformance
§ 305-97 AUBURN CODE § 305-99
294:1000
§ 305-100. Corporation Counsel.
with sound engineering principles and the laws and regulations of
the City of Auburn.
(2) The Engineering Services Division shall review and advise the
Planning Board prior to its consideration of a site plan, special
permit, planned development district, or zoning amendment as to
the conformance of said proposal with sound engineering
principles and the laws and regulations of the City of Auburn
regarding public works and the siting thereof.
(3) The Engineering Services Division shall review and advise the
Zoning Board of Appeals prior to its consideration of a use or area
variance as to the conformance of said proposal with sound
engineering principles and the laws and regulations of the City of
Auburn regarding public works and the siting thereof.
(4) In advising the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals or in
reviewing a permit application, the Engineering Services Division
shall at least address the adequacy of proposed utility design and
location and highway access, after a consultation with the Director
of Municipal Utilities and the Superintendent of Public Works,
respectively.
A. Jurisdiction and authority.
(1) The Corporation Counsel is hereby assigned the responsibility of
providing legal advice and representation to other agencies
administering aspects of this chapter.
(2) Attend all hearings of the Board of Appeals and the Planning Board
and shall normally attend any meeting of any such body and act as
the legal advisor to the body holding such hearing or meeting.
(3) Provide all appropriate advice and aid to the Code Enforcement
Officer in the enforcement of this chapter and shall, where
appropriate, initiate such legal actions as may be necessary to the
proper enforcement of this chapter.
(4) Review and give his or her opinion concerning the legal sufficiency
of any Charter provision, code, ordinance, rule or regulation, or
amendments thereto, relating to land use development and
regulation presently in force or proposed for adoption by any
official, department, bureau, board, commission or agency of the
City.
(5) Be available, on reasonable request, for consultation with the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Director of Planning, the Board of
Appeals, and the Planning Board concerning matters properly
subject to their jurisdiction and authority.
§ 305-99 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-101
294:1001
§ 305-101. New building permits.
A. Procedures and requirements for permits. All persons desiring to
undertake any new construction, structural alteration or changes in the
use of a building or lot shall apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a
building permit which shall be issued only in accordance with all
applicable requirements and procedures specified in all applicable
laws, codes, rules or regulations, ordinances and this chapter and this
Municipal Code.
(1) No application for a permit, special permit, site plan, variance,
zoning change, or other procedure required under this chapter
shall be processed which is incomplete.
(a) Permitted uses. A building permit for a permitted use may be
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer on his or her own
authority, subject to Article VIII, § 305-93, Code Enforcement
Officer.
(b) Uses permitted by special permit or requiring minor or major
site plan approval.
(c) Uses permitted after an appeal or request for variance. A
building permit may be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer upon order of the Board of Appeals and after a public
hearing held by the Board of Appeals for the purpose of
deciding upon the appeal or a request for a variance.
(2) After the building permit and any other applicable permit(s) have
been issued to the applicant, he or she may proceed to perform the
work permitted by the permit(s) and, upon the completion of the
work, shall apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a certificate
of occupancy to be issued in accordance with Chapter 125 of this
Municipal Code.
(3) If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the work has been
performed in accordance with the building permit and any other
applicable permit(s), he or she shall issue a certificate of occupancy
allowing the premises to be occupied in accordance with Chapter
125 of this Municipal Code.
(4) Revocation of building permit.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer or the Board of Appeals may
revoke a building permit at any time if it appears that the
application is in any material respect false or misleading or
that work being performed upon the premises differs
materially from that specified in the application or that a
permit has been issued in error and conditions are such that a
permit should not have been issued. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 125 of
this Municipal Code.
§ 305-101 AUBURN CODE § 305-102
294:1002
§ 305-102. Existing building permits.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any structure or prevent issuance of a
certificate of occupancy in the event that:
§ 305-103. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 305-104. Special use permits.
A. A building permit for the same was lawfully issued prior to the effective
date of this chapter or any amendment thereof;
B. Such permit had not by its own terms expired prior to such effective
date;
C. The holder of such permit has taken substantial action, made
substantial expenditures or incurred substantial obligations in reliance
on such permit; and
D. Construction pursuant to such permit is commenced prior to the
expiration of such permit and within 90 days of such effective date and
is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
A. Procedures and requirements for certificate of occupancy.
(1) The purpose of a certificate of occupancy is to certify that the
premises comply with the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable laws, rules and regulations, ordinances and this
Municipal Code and that the premises may be used for the
purposes set forth in the certificate of occupancy.
(2) Prior to the use or occupancy of any building for which a building
permit or other permit (s) is required, or for any change of use of
any existing building or for any change of use of land, a certificate
of occupancy shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer
in accordance with the procedure provided in Chapter 125 of this
Municipal Code.
B. Procedures and requirements for certificate of nonconforming use. The
owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or
building may secure a certificate of nonconforming use from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Such certificate shall be authorized by the Board
of Appeals and shall be for the purpose of insuring to the owner the
right to continue such nonconforming use.
A. Procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for a special permit shall be made in writing upon
forms supplied by the Code Enforcement Officer and such forms
shall be deemed to be complete prior to action by the Planning
Board.
§ 305-102 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-104
294:1003
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application for a special permit from
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Planning Board shall schedule a
public hearing to consider the same.
(3) Public hearings regarding special permits.
(a) Upon filing with the Planning Board of a special permit request
as required by the terms of this chapter, the Planning Board
shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereof as
follows:
[1] Public notice. By publishing a notice at least once, not less
than 10 days in advance of such hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation of the City.
[2] Notice to applicant. By sending a notice thereof to the
applicant.
[3] Notice to local officials. By delivering a notice to the
Mayor, to the members of the City Council, to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, and to the City Manager.
[4] Notice to interested parties. The City shall mail one notice
to all owners of record of properties within 400 feet of the
subject property. Notice shall be mailed no fewer than five
days prior to a hearing.
[5] Nature of notice and posting. The notice required shall be
posted upon instructions from the Planning Board and
shall state the location of the building or lot in question
and the general nature of the question involved.
(b) At said public hearing, the Planning Board will receive
testimony and technical reports regarding the compatibility of
the proposed activity with the neighborhood where it will be
established. Compatibility will be determined based upon the
following standards:
[1] The proposed use will not generate traffic beyond the
capacity of the road serving the site or contribute to traffic
congestion or pose a hazard to pedestrians.
[2] Noise, smoke, dust, noxious matter, heat, glare, or
vibration emanating from the proposed use will not exceed
that customarily associated with the neighborhood.
[3] Storage and waste material will be screened from general
public view.
[4] The general appearance of the use will be compatible with
the predominant scale and physical character of the
neighborhood.
§ 305-104 AUBURN CODE § 305-104
294:1004
§ 305-105. Use and area variances.
[5] All requirements of this chapter applicable to the proposal
are being met.
(4) Only upon determination of neighborhood compatibility and
compliance with the terms of this chapter, may the Board grant a
special permit.
(5) Fees for special permits shall be set by the City Council.
A. Jurisdiction and authority. Use and area variances require Zoning Board
of Appeals approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority
in determining whether an application for a use or area variance is
complete or incomplete, and unnecessary hardship in context of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Application.
(1) All variance applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in
writing on forms prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Every
appeal shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the district lot to be
affected by such proposed variance.
(c) A brief description and location of the district lot to be affected
by such proposed variance.
(d) A statement of the present zoning classification of the district
lot in question, the improvements thereon and the present use
thereof.
(e) A statement of this section or part of this chapter under which
the variance is made and the reasons why it should be granted.
(f) A reasonably accurate description of the present
improvements and the additions or changes intended to be
made under this application, indicating the size of such
proposed improvements, material, and general construction
thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot plan of the
real property to be affected indicating the location and size of
the lot and size of improvements thereon.
(2) Upon filing a variance application a fee as established by the City
Council in the fee schedule shall be paid.
(3) Complete application.
(a) Upon filing a variance application a fee as established by the
City Council in the fee schedule shall be paid. The City shall
mail one notice to all owners of record of properties within 400
§ 305-104 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-105
294:1005
feet of the subject property when application is for a use
variance and within 100 feet of the subject property when
application is for an area variance. The notice will include the
date and time of the first Zoning Board of Appeals meeting
which the project is on the agenda, and address and
description of the proposed project. Notice shall be mailed no
fewer than five days prior to a hearing.
C. Approval procedures.
(1) Upon receiving an application, the Zoning Board of Appeals will
determine if the application is complete.
(2) In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals deems an application
incomplete or otherwise not properly filed, the applicant will be
notified in writing and given the opportunity within a specified
period of time (not less than seven days after the date of the notice)
to bring the application into compliance. An application which is
the subject of such notice but is not brought into compliance within
the period specified in such notice shall be denied for failure to
comply with these rules.
D. Public hearings.
(1) Once the Zoning Board of Appeals deems an application complete
for a variance request, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a time
and place for a public hearing thereof as follows:
(a) Public notice. By publishing a notice at least once, of not less
than 10 days in advance of such hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation of the City.
(b) Notice to applicant. By mailing a notice thereof by registered
or certified mail to the applicant.
(c) Notice to local officials. By delivering a notice to the Mayor, to
members of the City Council, to the Planning Board, and to the
City Manager.
(d) Notice to interested parties.
[1] By mailing a notice thereof to every association of
residents of the City and any other interested party who or
which shall have registered their names and addresses for
this purpose with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[2] Notice shall also be mailed to the owners of record of
properties within 400 feet of the subject property when
the application is for a use variance and within 100 feet of
the subject property when the application is for an area
variance in a residential zone.
§ 305-105 AUBURN CODE § 305-105
294:1006
(e) Nature of notice and posting. The notice required shall be
posted upon instructions from the Zoning Board of Appeals and
shall state the location of the building or lot in question and the
general nature of the question involved.
E. Use variances.
(1) No such use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial, as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the
applicant and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
F. Area variances.
(1) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination the Board shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue other than
an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
§ 305-105 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-105
294:1007
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of
Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the
area variance.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances,
shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
G. Impositions of conditions.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both use
variances and area variances, have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions
shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and
shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
such variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination appealed from and shall make such
order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination as in
its opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter
and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative
official from whose order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination the appeal is taken.
(3) Pursuant to § 81 of the General City Law, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have the power to vary or modify the application of
any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter relating to the
use, construction, structural changes in, equipment or alteration of
buildings or structures, or the use of the land, where there are
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of this chapter, so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done.
H. Lapse. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a
decision shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain any necessary
building permit or comply with the conditions of such permit within six
months from the date of authorization thereof.
(1) Should the six-month period elapse, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be empowered to extend the variance for one additional six-
§ 305-105 AUBURN CODE § 305-105
294:1008
§ 305-106. Pending applications.
This chapter and any amendment thereof shall apply to all applications
pending and not yet finally decided by the authorized personnel or Board
on the effective date thereof, except, however, where a public hearing has
been held with respect to such pending application prior to such effective
date. Where such circumstances exist, the regulations in effect at the time
of the hearing shall be the basis for action on such pending application.
§ 305-107. Procedure and requirements for amendments.
month period upon making a determination that no building permit
has been issued or requested that have or would result in a
substantial change in the character of the neighborhood.
(2) When such permits have been requested or issued, the officer shall
report the same to the Zoning Board of Appeals and refer the
matter of extension to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
consideration and disposition.
A. Purpose. Amendments may be initiated by the City Council, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Planning Board, the owner of or other person having
contractual interest in property to be impacted by the amendment, or
the owners of 50% or more of the frontage of property to be impacted
by the proposed amendment.
B. Procedures.
(1) Amendments initiated by the City Council or Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be transmitted to the Planning Board for
consideration in accordance with this section.
(2) Amendments initiated by property owners shall be addressed to the
City Council and submitted to the Planning Board along with the
fee required by the duly enacted fee schedule and the following
information:
(a) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property.
(b) The owner's name and address, if different than the applicant,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(c) The name, residence and the nature and extent of the interest,
as defined by § 809 of the General Municipal Law of New York,
of any state officer or any officer or employee of the City of
Auburn or the County of Cayuga in the subject property if
known to the applicant.
(d) The precise wording of any proposed amendment to the text of
this chapter.
§ 305-105 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-107
294:1009
§ 305-108. Fees.
Fees authorized by this chapter shall be set by the City Manager in
accordance with the procedures established in the City of Auburn
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(e) A statement of the need and justification for the proposed
amendment.
(f) A statement as to the conformity of the proposed amendment
to the Comprehensive Plan and the reason for any deviation
from such plan.
(g) In the event that the proposed amendment would change the
zoning classification of any property:
[1] A street address or legal description of the property
proposed to be reclassified.
[2] The names and addresses of all owners of property located
on the same frontage or frontages as the front or side lot
line of the property proposed to be reclassified or on a
frontage immediately across from any such frontage or on
a corner diagonally across from a corner on which the
property proposed to be reclassified is located or within 50
feet of the rear lot line of the property proposed to be
reclassified, as shown in the records of the office of the
City Assessor.
[3] The present zoning classification and existing uses of the
property proposed to be reclassified.
[4] The area of the property proposed to be reclassified,
stated in square feet or acres, or fraction thereof.
[5] A map, drawn to scale, clearly showing and locating the
property proposed to be reclassified and its present zoning
classification and existing uses and all existing uses and
zoning classifications within 200 feet of such property.
[6] Where site plan approval is required by this chapter, a site
plan as defined by Article VI, Site Plan Review, shall be
supplied.
[7] Such other information or documentation as the Planning
Board may deem necessary or appropriate to a full and
proper consideration and disposition of the particular
application.
C. Public hearings. Upon filing with the Planning Board of an amendment
request as required by the terms of this chapter, the Planning Board
shall fix a time and place in accordance with Article VIII, § 305-105D,
Public hearings, and Article VI, Site Plan Review.
§ 305-107 AUBURN CODE § 305-109
294:1010
§ 305-109. Penalties for offenses.
A. Fines and imprisonment.
(1) General. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter, other than those charged with illegal conversions,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2) Conversions. Any person, firm or corporation who or which illegally
converts any residential property in the City of Auburn in violation
of the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(3) Other. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. Injunctive relief. Injunctive relief. In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this
chapter, or of any rule or regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the City Manager or, with his/her approval, the Code
Enforcement Officer or other proper official, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent or remove such unlawful erection, maintenance or use or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
§ 305-109 WATER, PROTECTION OF § 305-109
294:1011
Appendix
Chapter A308
TABLE OF LOCAL LAWS
§ A308-1. Local laws enacted by City.
This chapter contains a listing of local laws enacted by the City of Auburn.
Year Number Subject Matter
1924 1 Public hearings
1925 -- None
1926 1 Open, extend, widen and straighten streets
2 Appointment of commission to draft new Charter
1927 -- None
1928 -- None
1929 -- None
1930 1 Designation, nomination and election of Mayor
and Councilmen
1931 1 Nominations for Office of Mayor or Councilmen
1932 -- None
1933 1 Making of annual assessment roll
2 Unpaid property taxes; publication of notice of
sales
1934 -- None
1935 -- None
1936 1 Nomination and election of Mayor and
Councilmen
1937 1 Collection of state and county taxes
2 Utility corporations
1938 1 Collection of certain charges incurred by
property owners
2 Tax on utility companies
1939 1 Tax on utility companies
1940 1 Collection of certain charges incurred by
property owners
2 Tax on utilities
1941 -- None
1942 -- None
1943 -- None
§ 305-109 AUBURN CODE § A308-1
294:1012
Year Number Subject Matter
1944 1 Utility tax
1945 1 Utility tax
1946 1 Use of Water Department fund
2 Utility tax
3 Water Department: change date of fiscal year
1947 -- None
1948 -- None
1949 -- None
1950 -- None
1951 -- None
1952 -- None
1953 -- None
1954 1 Legislative powers and duties of City Council
2 Retail sales
3 Definitions and compensating use of taxes
1955 -- None
1956 -- None
1957 1 Collection of city, school taxes
2 Claims against city
3 Fees in actions or proceedings in court
1958 1 Tax payments, receipts and recording
2 Retail sales tax
3 Compensating use tax
1959 1 Mailing of civil defense preparedness cards with
county tax bills
2 Exempt Auburn Transit Corporation from utility
tax
1960 -- None
1961 -- None
1962 -- None
1963 1 Compensation plan for officers and employees,
etc.
2 Compensation plan for officers and employees,
etc.
3 Salaries of City Recorder and City Judge
4 Establish position of Bingo Inspector
5 Continuity of government
§ A308-1 WATER, PROTECTION OF § A308-1
294:1013
Year Number Subject Matter
6 Compensation plan for officers and employees,
etc.
7 Establish position of Superintendent of Public
Works, City Engineer, etc., salary range
8 Permanent personal registration
9 Additional vacation day for five consecutive
years of service
10 Establish position of Urban Renewal Director;
Sales Tax Auditor, etc.
11 Establishment of self-service laundries
12 Grade, salary of Welfare Commissioner
1964 1 Assessment and determination of taxes
2 Assessment and determination of taxes
3 Salary of Planning Director
4 Salary of Account Clerk
5 Salary of Assistant Relocation Director
6 Salary of Secretary; Corporation Counsel
7 Street maintenance
8 City, school taxes, etc.
9 Retail sales tax
10 Compensating use tax
1965 1 Collection of city and school taxes
2 Tax on hotel room occupancy, etc.
1966 1 Collection of real property taxes
1967 -- None
1968 1 Sales and use tax
2 Salaries of certain officials
3 Compensation of certain officials
1969 1 Salary grade of Recorder
2 Sewer rental charges
3 Change in number of quorum
4 Successor to City Manager
1970 1 Salaries
1971 -- None
1972 1 Modification of Board of Assessment Review
1973 -- None
1974 1 Amend sewer rental charges
§ A308-1 AUBURN CODE § A308-1
294:1014
Year Number Subject Matter
1975 -- None
1976 1 Exemption/taxes - job incentive program
1977 -- None
1978 -- None
1979 -- None
1980 1 Regulate electric power
1981 1 Annex to the City of Auburn the property of the
Auburn Comprehensive High School
1982 -- None
1983 -- None
Year Number Subject Matter
1984 1 Veterans exemption; election not to adopt
pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-a
1985 1 Retirement incentive program
2 Annexation of Sennett land
3 Annexation of Fleming land
4 Veterans exemption; acceptance pursuant to
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a
1986 1 Annexation of Malcom Estate and Martin Berry
property in Town of Aurelius
2 Annexation of property in Town of Throop
1987 1 Liability and Casualty Reserve Fund
2 Economic Development Zone Program
3 Flood damage prevention
1988 -- None
1989 1 Sale of city real estate and franchises
1990 -- None
1991 1 Charter generally revised
2 Codification of local laws
3 Appointment of Assistant City Manager
4 Retirement incentive program
5 Charter amendment: Board of Assessment
1992 1 Tax exemption for physically disabled persons
2 Veterans exemption
3 Retirement incentive program
1993 1 Charter amendment: sale of properties
§ A308-1 WATER, PROTECTION OF § A308-1
294:1015
Year Number Subject Matter
2 Charter amendment: Civil Service Commissioner
3 Charter amendment: expansion of public utility
systems
4 Charter amendment: exemption for capital
improvements
1994 1 Opt out of tax enforcement provisions
2 Charter amendment: foreclosure procedures
3 Veterans exemptions
4 Charter amendment: Deputy City Clerk
1995 1 Retirement incentive program
1996 1 Charter amendment: Civil Service
Commissioners
2 Charter amendment: Deputy City Clerk
1997 1 Retirement incentive program
2 Charter amendment: assessment of costs for
sewer lateral repairs
3 Charter amendment: assessment of costs for
water pipe repairs
1998 1 Claims against fire insurance proceeds
2 Retirement incentive program
1999 1 Retirement incentive program
2000 1 Business improvement district
2 Exemptions from sales and compensating use
taxes
2001 1 Downtown business improvement district
2 Tax exemption for historic properties
2002 1 Adoption of Code
2 Tax exemption for first-time homebuyers
3 Retirement incentive program
4 Request for Empire Zone boundary revision
5 Retirement incentive program amendment
2006 1 Sales and compensating use taxes amendment
2007 1 Approving and accepting Empire Zone
development policy
2 Establishing residency and proximity
restrictions for Level III sex offenders
3 Charter amendment: Council meetings
§ A308-1 AUBURN CODE § A308-1
294:1016
Year Number Subject Matter
4 Designation of regionally significant project
within Empire Zone
5 Flood damage prevention
6 Charter amendment: elimination of Civil Service
Commission and transfer of functions to Director
of Human Resources (failed at referendum)
7 Administration and enforcement of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code
8 Flood damage prevention
9 Impounding and towing
10 Approving and accepting Empire Zone
development policy
11 Tax exemption for improvement of multifamily
dwellings
2008 1 Sex offender residency restrictions amendment
2009 1 Charter amendment: enumeration of powers,
electric power, maximum amount expended and
bonded
2 Moratorium on requirement to install sidewalks
3 Designation of regionally significant project
within Empire Zone
2010 1 Retirement incentive program
2 Moratorium on installation of new sidewalks
2012 1 Real property conversion tax exemption
2 Charter amendment: Council meeting dates
Chapter A310
TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS
§ A310-1. Special acts enacted by City.
This chapter contains a listing of special acts enacted for the City of Auburn.
Year Chapter Subject Matter
1900 474 Health fund, amount to be received for;
Charter amended
1901 175 Charter amended, § 87, Repair of buildings,
etc.
§ A308-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § A310-1
A310:1017
Year Chapter Subject Matter
176 Charter amended, § 86, Repair money for
Fire Department; § 57, Bond in City Court;
§ 71, Receive money for police purposes
1902 45 East Genesee and Genesee Street paving,
issue bonds
46 South Street paving, issue bond for
49 City Treasurer to transfer money
498 Charter amended, general revisions, elected
officials
1903 133 Authorized to borrow money and issue
bonds for isolation hospital or pesthouse,
etc.
341 Auburn Water Works Company, purchase of
by city
430 Streets, paving of, bonds for
1904 463 Bonds for flushing streets, issue of
authorized; relief of poor; and sewers
550 Charter amended generally
1905 110 Streets, flushing and sprinkling of; Charter
amended
352 Paving of, payment for; act amended
356 Charter amended generally
460 Charter, certain sections revised
475 Subways or conduits, construction of, bonds
for
594 Claim of; against the state, Court of Claims
to hear and determine
1906 68 Public schools, organization and
maintenance of
185 Revised Charter (complete)
276 Constructing and equipping grammar and
high schools and improving school building,
bonds for
386 Duties of Water Commissioners; rents, rates
and penalties public
1907 None
1908 234 Board of Estimate and Control, revised;
Charter amended
236 Charter amended generally
§ A310-1 AUBURN CODE § A310-1
A310:1018
Year Chapter Subject Matter
1909 185 Charter amended, bonds issued for
extraordinary purposes, where payable
433 Appropriation for claim of city against state
for laying sidewalk in front of Auburn prison
591 Public school, annual estimate of money
necessary for support of
1910 379 Charter amended, curbstones, driveways,
gutters and sidewalks
380 Street pavements, Council's powers
402 Street flushing or sprinkling
404 Filtration plant, popular vote upon
593 Charter amended; police relief and pension
fund, trustees
678 Charter amended; lighting district; Council
may create or alter
1911 389 Water Works Superintendent, qualifications
and salary
422 Education Board, meetings without due
notice and maximum annual estimates;
school, elections, districts and opening of
polls
560 Charter amended; sidewalks, curbstones
and gutters, construction
1912 to 1913 None
1914 141 Water rates and charges, records
286 School expenses; per capita maximum
287 Streets, pavement contracts and bonds
421 South Division Street, pavement
proceedings legalized
1915 541 Charter amended; firemen's relief and
pension fund, establishment
1916 189 Charter amended; tax budget, contingent
expenses, amount increased
375 Charter amended; sewers, storm or surface
waters, cost, payment by city at large,
bonds, refund of certain taxes already paid
388 Charter amended; city officers, eligibility to
other city office
1917 379 Water filtration bonds, authorization
§ A310-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § A310-1
A310:1019
Year Chapter Subject Matter
441 Charter amended; city court, jurors,
compensation; recorders court, jurors,
compensation
1918 479 Charter amended; Deputy City Clerk,
designation or appointment; Police Pension
Fund, establishment, control and
maintenance
1919 Optional City Charter adopted Nov. 5, 1918;
limited Council with appointive City
Manager
1920 438 Revision and consolidation of Charter
1921 323 Bond issues; denominations
1922 to 1936 None
1937 406 Charter amended; collection of the county
and state tax
407 Copying of the county and state tax rolls by
City Clerk; county charge
514 City may elect to become and be a city
public welfare district
1938 None
1939 840 Sewage disposal; contract with state prison
1940 None
1941 907 Operating deficit; bond issue authorized
1942 to 1943 None
1944 543 State arterial highways; designation of
1945 to 1946 None
1947 266 Tax limit; exclude portion of school taxes
1948 241 Tax limit; exclude portion of school taxes
409 Housing authority; establish
1949 to 1956 None
1957 913 Auburn housing authority; establishment of
(Public Housing Law Title 33)
1958 205 Conveyance of old state armory property
367 State arterial highways; amendment
1959 None
1960 877 Auburn Permanent Firemen's Benevolent
Association Inc; creation, powers and duties
1961 861 State dam at Owasco lake outlet, transfer to
city; operation at city expense
§ A310-1 AUBURN CODE § A310-1
A310:1020
Year Chapter Subject Matter
1962 971 Bond issue, deficit financing; Charter
amendment to provide reserve for
uncollected taxes
1963 None
1964 881 State arterial highways
1965 69 Municipal urban renewal agency; Auburn
city school district
414 Transportation state aid
1966 to 1968 None
1969 915 Create Industrial Development Authority
1970 None
1971 575 Modify certain powers and duties of
Industrial Development Authority
863 Limit personal liability of members of
Industrial Development Authority
1972 62 Authorize Commissioner of Education to
apportion certain state school building aid
to the city school district for purchase of
Mount Carmel High School
543 Continue city court in conformity with
Uniform City Court Act and abolish the
Recorder's Court and City Justice Court
981 Amends law to enable Auburn Industrial
Development Authority to establish or
relocate medical facilities and facilities for
use by a federal agency
1973 407 Amends law to permit Auburn Industrial
Authority to continue full year
556 Amends law to enable Auburn Industrial
Development Authority to acquire or furnish
industrial pollution control facilities, to
grant options, and to revise bidding
requirements
1974 540 Amend public authorities law relating to
powers of Auburn Industrial Development
Authority
838 Amend public authorities law relating to
powers of Auburn Industrial Development
Authority to issue bonds
1975 284 Authorize transfer of sponsorship of Auburn
Community College to County of Cayuga
§ A310-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § A310-1
A310:1021
Year Chapter Subject Matter
1976 to 1987 None
1988 397 Establishes Uniform City Court Systems and
repeals L. 1972, c. 543 (Auburn City Court
Act) See UCCA § 2104
1989 to 1990 None
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Dispositions of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 9-2001 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
10-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
11-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
12-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
13-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
14-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
15-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
16-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
17-2001
5-24-2001 Petition state to
allow amendment of
Empire Zone
NCM
Ord. No.
18-2001
5-31-2001 Electricians
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
19-2001
6-14-2001 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
20-2001
6-21-2001 Management
Ordinance
amendment
NCM
§ A310-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1022
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
21-2001
6-21-2001 Management
Ordinance
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
22-2001
7-5-2001 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
23-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
24-2001
8-23-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 164
Ord. No.
25-2001
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
26-2001
11-8-2001 Electricians
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
27-2001
11-29-2001 Streets and public
places amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
28-2001
12-6-2001 Equal employment
opportunity
Ch. 30
Ord. No. 1-2002 1-17-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
L.L. No. 1-2002 2-28-2002 General provisions:
adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2002 5-9-2002 Property
maintenance
amendment
Ch. 230
Ord. No. 3-2002 3-28-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2002 4-11-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2002 4-11-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2002 5-9-2002 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 2-2002 5-23-2002 Tax exemption for
first-time
homebuyers
Ch. 265, Art. IX
Ord. No. 7-2002 5-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 8-2002 5-16-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
Ord. No. 9-2002 5-16-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
10-2002
6-6-2002 Noise amendment Ch. 210
Ord. No.
11-2002
7-2-2002 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1023
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-2002
Tabled
Ord. No.
13-2002
Tabled
Ord. No.
14-2002
7-25-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
15-2002
8-29-2002 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
16-2002
10-3-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
17-2002
10-10-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
18-2002
11-7-2002 Electricians
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
19-2002
12-5-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
20-2002
12-5-2002 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 3-2002 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2002 12-19-2002 Request for Empire
Zone boundary
revision
NCM
L.L. No. 5-2002 12-19-2002 Retirement incentive
program amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1-2003 1-16-2003 Taxation: senior
citizens exemption
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. II
Ord. No. 2-2003 Tabled
Ord. No. 3-2003 3-27-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2003 3-27-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2003 3-27-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2003 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 268
Ord. No. 7-2003 4-17-2003 Vendors amendment Ch. 289
Ord. No. 8-2003 5-8-2003 Historic
preservation
amendment
Ch. 178
Ord. No. 9-2003 Pulled
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1024
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-2003
10-16-2003 Cemeteries
amendment
Ch. 135
Ord. No.
11-2003
6-19-2003 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
12-2003
7-3-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
13-2003
7-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
14-2003
7-17-2003 Private security
alarm systems
Ch. 227
Ord. No.
15-2003
8-14-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
Ord. No.
16-2003
10-30-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2004 3-18-2004 Public conduct
amendment
Ch. 234
Ord. No. 2-2004 3-18-2004 Bicycles amendment Ch. 115
Ord. No. 3-2004 4-29-2004 Tax exemption for
persons with
disabilities and
limited incomes
Ch. 265, Art. X
Ord. No. 4-2004 4-28-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2004 4-28-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2004 Public conduct
amendment
Defeated
Ord. No. 7-2004 5-27-2004 Nuisances
amendment
Ch. 213
Ord. No. 8-2004 6-3-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 9-2004 6-3-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 164
Ord. No.
10-2004
6-3-2004 Animals amendment Ch. 104
Ord. No.
11-2004
6-3-2004 Electricians
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
12-2004
Zoning Tabled
Ord. No.
13-2004
Water service rates
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
14-2004
9-30-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1025
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-2004
10-21-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
16-2004
11-18-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
17-2004
11-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
18-2004
12-21-2004 Water service rates
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
19-2004
12-2-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2005 1-13-2005 Emergency
management plan
amendment
Ch. 22
Ord. No. 2-2005 2-3-2005 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2005 3-31-2005 Amended and
restated bond
ordinance 2-2005
NCM
Ord. No. 4-2005 3-31-2005 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2005 4-14-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 182
Ord. No. 6-2005 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Defeated
Ord. No. 7-2005 6-15-2005 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No. 8-2005 6-15-2005 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No. 9-2005 7-21-2005 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
10-2005
7-21-2005 Drain layers
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
11-2005
8-11-2005 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
12-2005
9-15-2005 Barrier-Free
Construction
Ch. 126
Ord. No.
13-2005
10-13-2005 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
14-2005
11-10-2005 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1026
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-2005
11-3-2005 Nuisances
amendment
Ch. 213
Ord. No.
16-2005
11-3-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 268
Ord. No.
17-2005
12-8-2005 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
18-2005
12-8-2005 Animals amendment Ch. 104
Ord. No. 1-2006 1-26-2006 Animals amendment Ch. 104
Ord. No. 2-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2006 Public conduct
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No. 4-2006 3-23-2006 Senior citizens tax
exemption
amendment; persons
with disabilities and
limited incomes tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 265, Arts. II and
X
Ord. No. 5-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2006 Number not used
Ord. No. 7-2006 4-13-2006 Trees amendment Ch. 277
Ord. No. 8-2006 4-13-2006 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No. 9-2006 5-18-2006 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
10-2006
5-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
Ord. No.
11-2006
6-13-2006 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
12-2006
Pulled
L.L. No. 1-2006 7-1-2006 Sales and
compensating use
taxes amendment
See Ch. 265, Art. VI
Ord. No.
13-2006
8-3-2006 Bingo amendment;
games of chance
amendment
Ch. 119, Arts. I and II
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1027
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
14-2006
9-7-2006 Building
construction; fire
prevention; unsafe
buildings
amendment
Ch. 125, Part 1
Ord. No.
15-2006
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Pulled
Ord. No.
16-2006
11-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
Ord. No.
17-2006
12-7-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
18-2006
Solid waste
amendment
Pulled
Ord. No.
19-2006
12-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2007 1-4-2007 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 1-2007 1-25-2007 Approval of Empire
Zone development
policy
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2007 2-1-2007 Sex offenders:
residency
restrictions
Ch. 245, Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2007 2-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 3-2007 3-8-2007 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No. 4-2007 3-8-2007 Noise amendment Ch. 210
L.L. No. 3-2007 3-22-2007 Charter amendment;
City Council:
meetings
amendment
§ C-8; Ch. 16, Art. I
Ord. No. 5-2007 3-22-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2007 4-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 7-2007 4-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 8-2007 4-26-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 9-2007 4-26-2007 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1028
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 4-2007 5-10-2007 Designation of
regionally significant
project as addition
to Empire Zone
NCM
L.L. No. 5-2007 6-14-2007 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 169
Ord. No.
10-2007
6-14-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
11-2007
6-7-2007 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
12-2007
6-7-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
13-2007
Sanitary sewers
amendment
Pulled
Ord. No.
14-2007
6-14-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
15-2007
6-14-2007 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
L.L. No. 6-2007 7-12-2007 Charter amendment Failed at referendum
L.L. No. 7-2007 7-12-2007 Building
construction and fire
prevention: Uniform
Code
Ch. 125, Part 2
L.L. No. 8-2007 7-26-2007 Flood damage
prevention
amendment
Ch. 169
Ord. No.
16-2007
7-26-2007 Management
personnel policy
NCM
Ord. No.
17-2007
7-26-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
L.L. No. 9-2007 8-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
L.L. No. 10-2007 8-23-2007 Approval of Empire
Zone development
policy amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
18-2007
8-23-2007 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1029
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 11-2007 9-13-2007 Taxation: exemption
for improvement of
multifamily
dwellings
Ch. 265, Art. XI
Ord. No.
19-2007
12-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
20-2007
12-13-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 1-2008 3-13-2008 Animals amendment Ch. 104
Ord. No. 2-2008 3-27-2008 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2008 3-27-2008 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2008 4-9-2008 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 1-2008 5-15-2008 Sex offenders:
residency
restrictions
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I
Ord. No. 5-2008 5-22-2008 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No. 6-2008 5-22-2008 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No. 7-2008 5-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 8-2008 6-12-2008 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No. 9-2008 6-26-2008 Charter amendment § C-87
Ord. No.
10-2008
7-24-2008 Management
personnel policy
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
11-2008
Bond Pulled
Ord. No.
12-2008
11-13-2008 Streets and public
places amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
13-2008
12-18-2008 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No. 1-2009 Bond Pulled
Ord. No. 2-2009 5-7-2009 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2009 5-7-2009 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Defeated
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1030
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 5-2009 6-18-2009 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
L.L. No. 1-2009 7-10-2009 Charter amendment § C-25
Ord. No. 6-2009 8-6-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 268
Ord. No. 7-2009 8-20-2009 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 2-2009 8-24-2009 Moratorium on
requirement to
install sidewalks
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2009 9-3-2009 Designation of
regionally significant
project within
Empire Zone
NCM
Ord. No. 8-2009 9-14-2009 Streets and public
places amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No. 9-2009 10-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
10-2009
11-12-2009 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
11-2009
Bond Not adopted
Ord. No. 1-2010 1-14-2010 Bond NCM
Res. 2-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 2-2010 3-18-2010 Records
management
program amendment
Ch. 75, Art. II
Ord. No. 3-2010 5-6-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2010 5-6-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2010 6-3-2010 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No. 6-2010 Bond Tabled
Ord. No. 7-2010 Bond Tabled
Ord. No. 8-2010 Bond Defeated
Ord. No. 9-2010 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 1-2010 8-12-2010 2010 retirement
incentive
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2010 9-9-2010 Moratorium on
installation of new
sidewalks
Ch. 259, footnote
only
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1031
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-2010
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not adopted
Ord. No.
11-2010
10-7-2010 Nuisances
amendment
Ch. 213
Ord. No.
12-2010
10-21-2010 Streets and public
places amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
13-2010
10-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
14-2010
10-14-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
15-2010
11-9-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
16-2010
11-23-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
17-2010
12-21-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 104
Ord. No. 1-2011 3-24-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 2-2011 3-24-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2011 3-24-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2011 4-7-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2011 4-7-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2011 8-25-2011 Historic Sites
Commission
amendment
Ch. 11, Art. IV
Ord. No. 7-2011 9-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 8-2011 9-15-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 9-2011 9-15-2011 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
10-2011
10-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
11-2011
12-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2012 1-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 2-2012 3-15-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 3-2012 4-19-2012 Ethics Ch. 33
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1032
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 4-2012 5-17-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2012 5-17-2012 Bond NCM
L.L. No. 1-2012 6-21-2012 Real property
conversion
exemption
Ch. 265, Art. XII
L.L. No. 2-2012 6-7-2012 Charter amendment;
City Council
meetings
amendment
§ C-8; Ch. 16
Ord. No. 6-2012 8-1-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 7-2012 7-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 8-2012 9-6-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 9-2012 9-6-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
10-2012
10-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2013 1-17-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 2-2013 3-7-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2013 5-2-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2013 Zoning amendment Tabled
Ord. No. 5-2013 5-30-2013 Vacant building
registry
Ch. 183
Ord. No. 6-2013 7-2-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 7-2013 8-1-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 8-2013 8-15-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 9-2013 Defeated
Ord. No.
10-2013
10-3-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
11-2013
10-17-2013 Nuisances
amendment
Ch. 213
Ord. No.
12-2013
12-5-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
13-2013
12-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2014 4-3-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 2-2014 3-20-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1033
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 3-2014 5-1-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2014 5-1-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2014 5-1-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 6-2014 5-1-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 7-2014 7-10-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 8-2014 10-16-2014 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No. 9-2014 10-16-2014 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
10-2014
11-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
11-2014
11-20-2014 Water service
amendment
Ch. 297
Ord. No.
12-2014
11-20-2014 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
13-2014
11-20-2014 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No.
14-2014
12-23-2014 Electricians
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No. 1-2015 1-22-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 2-2015 3-5-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2015 5-7-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2015 5-7-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2015 8-20-2015 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
Ch. 221
Ord. No. 6-2015 8-20-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 268
Ord. No. 7-2015 12-3-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1-2016 1-21-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 2-2016 2-18-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 3-2016 4-7-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2016 4-21-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2016 Not adopted
§ DL-1 AUBURN CODE § DL-1
A310:1034
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 6-2016 5-19-2016 Historic
preservation
amendment
Ch. 178
Ord. No. 7-2016 6-2-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 8-2016 Tabled
Ord. No. 9-2016 7-21-2016 Smoking policy Ch. 82
Ord. No.
10-2016
8-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
11-2016
8-25-2016 Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
Ch. 300
Ord. No.
12-2016
9-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No.
13-2016
12-1-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
14-2016
12-15-2016 Sanitary sewer
amendment
Ch. 242
Ord. No. 1-2017 3-2-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 2-2017 3-16-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 164
L.L. No. 1-2017 4-6-2017 Historic
preservation
Ch. 178
L.L. No. 2-2017 4-20-2017 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
Ch. 221
L.L. No. 3-2017 4-20-2017 Taxicabs Ch. 268
Ord. No. 3-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 4-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 5-2017 12-21-2017 Public arts Ch. 232
L.L. No. 1-2018 1-18-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 285
Ord. No. 1-2018 2-15-2018 Zoning Ch. 305
§ DL-1 TABLE OF SPECIAL ACTS § DL-1
A310:1035