Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-3-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993]
§ 1-1. Intent.
The Town Board intends to consolidate all existing legislation, including
ordinances, local laws and resolutions where appropriate in a code, which is
hereby designated and may be cited as the "Code of the Town of Amherst."
§ 1-2. Repealer.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature, not
identified in the Table of Contents for the Code of the Town of Amherst set
forth in this local law, are repealed. No other local laws and ordinances
are affected. The meaning and intent of previously adopted local laws and
ordinances is retained.
§ 1-3. Copies on file.
Following adoption of this local law, a copy of the Code shall be at all
times be filed in the Town Clerk's office. Legislation may be added to the
code from time to time, and the Code may be amended and provisions
thereof repealed or superseded in the manner permitted for the adoption,
amendment, repeal or superseding of ordinances, local laws and resolutions
as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 1-4. Codes to be kept up-to-date.
Code books maintained by the Town Clerk and in other offices and
departments of the Town of Amherst shall be kept up-to-date. The Town
Clerk is authorized to make necessary arrangements and enter into
agreements on behalf of the Town for the publication of Code Books and
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5. Tampering with Code.
No person shall tamper with a Code book of the Town of Amherst.
Tampering with a Town of Amherst Code book is an offense punishable of a
fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 1-6. Title; contents.
This local law shall be Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code of the Town of
Amherst. Existing legislation of the Town of Amherst is adopted as the Code
of the Town of Amherst, the Table of Contents of which is as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
1. General Provisions
Article I, Adoption of Code
4. Administration of Government
8. Citizens' Advisory Committees
9. Clerk
11. Continuity of Government
14. Defense and Indemnification of Employees
16. Employees' Rights of Organization
19. Ethics, Code of
28. Local Laws, Adoption of
39. Police Assistance, Power to Grant
45. Residency Requirements
52. Superintendent of Highways
54. Supervisor
57. Traffic Violations Bureau
PART II
GENERAL LEGISLATION
65. Alarms
68. Amusements
Article I, Entertainments, Shows and Amusements
Article II, Game Rooms
77. Bingo
78. Blasting and Explosives
79. Boats
83. Building Construction Administration
87. Cable Television
89. Canvassers and Solicitors1
99. Dogs
104. Environmental Quality Review
106. Excavations
110. Fire Prevention
114. Games of Chance
118. Gasoline Sales
120. Highways, Controlled Access
1. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 89, Canvassers and Solicitors, adopted 10-18-1965, was
superseded 4-11-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993. See now Ch. 148, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 1-6 AMHERST CODE § 1-6
1:4
122. House Trailers
125. Improvements, Construction of Public
126. Industrial Cost Recovery System
129. Junkyards
130. Landscapers
132. Lighting
138. Noise
139. Notification of Defects
140. Numbering of Buildings2
143. Parking for Handicapped
144. Parking, Off-Street
145. Parks, Playgrounds and Recreation Areas
148. Peddler and Soliciting
149. Picketing
151. Property Maintenance
155. Recreation and Open Space
158. Sewer Rates
Article I, Sewer Rents
Article II, Stormwater Drainage Districts Nos. 4, 6 and 26
160. Sewers
Part 1 (Reserved)
Part 2, Wastewater Collection and Treatment
166. Snowplowing
169. Solid Waste
Article I, Waste Management
175. Taxation
Article I, Real Property Exemption for Persons over 65
Article II, Tax Exemption for Businesses
Article III, Tax Exemption for Physically Disabled
Article IV, Veterans Exemption
177. Taxicabs
179. Trees
181. Trespassing3
2. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 140, Numbering of Buildings, adopted 4-17-1950, was repealed
7-6-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993. See now Ch. 85, Buildings, Numbering of.
3. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 181, Trespassing, adopted 3-2-1953, as amended, was repealed
7-6-2009 by L.L. No. 7-2009.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
184. Vehicles, Abandoned
186. Vehicles and Traffic
189. Vehicles, Removal and Storage of
191. Vending Machines
Article I, Tobacco Products
194. Watercourses4
Article I, Obstruction to or Dumping in Prohibited
Article II, Obstruction of Ellicott Creek
198. Weapons
Article I, Air Guns, Air Rifles and Pistols
Article II, Firearms
203. Zoning
§ 1-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this local law or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this local law are declared to be severable.
§ 1-8. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
4. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 194, Watercourses, was repealed 9-17-2007 by L.L. No. 11-2007.
§ 1-6 AMHERST CODE § 1-8
1:6
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citizens' advisory committees — See Ch. 8.
Continuity of government — See Ch. 11.
Employees' rights of organization — See Ch.
16.
Power to grant police assistance — See Ch.
39.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 57.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. Legislative findings and intent.
A. The Town Board finds and declares that the traditional structure of
Town government designed primarily for rural areas many years ago is
no longer suitable for the Town of Amherst. This has been caused by
rapid population growth, urban expansion and the attendant increase in
the demand for urban services, plus the complexity and scale of both
administrative and fiscal burdens on the Town government.
B. Executive and administrative responsibilities are presently allocated
among and in many cases shared by a variety of elective and appointive
officials.
C. There is a need for the formulation of new legislative policies which
would help the Town to adjust to the phenomena of urban growth. This
produces heavy demands on the time and energies of the members of
the Town Board. As a result, an ever-growing volume of details
concerning day-to-day government operations compete for their
attention.
D. The existing system by which committees of the Town Board and the
Supervisor assume responsibilities for and at times undertake the
performance of routine administrative tasks has resulted in a diffusion
of command and on occasions conflicting directives to subordinate
officers and employees, causing diffusion of accountability, diminution
of morale of the Town's work force, impairment of management and
operational efficiency and a waste of the Town's resources.
E. The desired effect of this chapter is to improve the efficiency of the
Town government by separating the executive and legislative
responsibilities of the Town Board and the Supervisor and to develop a
coherent departmental structure which will properly interrelate and
organize the functions of the various administrative agencies and
officers of the Town. A concomitant objective of this chapter is to
enhance the capacity of the Town Board to perform its legislative
functions, principally by relieving its committees of administrative
burdens so as to enable them to devote their resources to the
demanding tasks of formulating legislative policies, while at the same
time retaining and facilitating the Town Board's function of legislative
oversight of the activities of the executive branch.
F. The principal purpose of this chapter is to provide the foundation for
the development of an executive branch, separate from the legislative
body.
G. Initially this chapter establishes central management departments of
the executive branch but anticipates that, based on studies and
recommendations by the Supervisor and Town Board, additional
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:9
§ 4-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Amherst Government
Organization Law."
§ 4-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless otherwise indicated by the context:
CENTRAL MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT — One of the departments so
designated in § 4-13.
DEPARTMENT — A separate unit of Town government so designated by this
chapter or any other local law.
DEPARTMENT HEAD, DIVISIONAL HEAD (AND COGNATE TERMS) — The
offices or positions described in § 4-5.
FUNCTIONS — Includes powers and duties.
LEGISLATURE — The Legislature of the State of New York.
SPECIAL AGENCY — A board, commission, committee, council, bureau,
officer or other agency described or listed in § 4-4D.
SUPERVISOR — The Supervisor of the Town.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, Erie County.
TOWN BOARD — Includes the Town Councilmen and Supervisor,
constituting the Town Board of the Town.
departments may be established within that branch and perhaps the
other branches of the Town government.
§ 4-1 AMHERST CODE § 4-3
1:10
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Branches, Departments and Divisions
§ 4-4. Branches established.
The government of the Town shall comprise four branches, as follows:
A. The executive branch shall consist of:
(1) The Supervisor, except to the extent he performs legislative or
other functions as a member of the Town Board.
(2) The Engineering Department, Police Department, Assessment
Department, Building Department and Senior Citizens'
Department.
(3) The central management departments created by this chapter.
(4) Any other departments heretofore existing or hereafter created
and designated by this chapter or any other local law or by
resolution of the Town Board as being part of the executive branch.
(5) All other offices or agencies of the Town government performing
executive or administrative functions, except those expressly
included within the legislative, judicial or special agencies
branches.
B. The legislative branch shall consist of the Town Board and any officers
or employees designated under this chapter or any other law to serve
the Town Board in the performance of its legislative functions other
than those officers or employees expressly included in the special
agencies branch.
C. The judicial branch shall consist of:
(1) The Town Justices.
(2) The Clerk of the Town Justice Court.
(3) The civil officers.
(4) The Traffic Violations Bureau.
(5) Any other officers or employees appointed under an act of the
Legislature or a local law to assist in the performance of the
functions of the Town Justices or perform other functions assigned
to the judicial branch.
D. The special agencies branch shall consist of boards, commissions,
committees, councils, bureaus, officers or other agencies of the Town
which, by reason of the nature of their functions or responsibilities,
their elective status or their statutory status, enjoy a special measure of
autonomy from the supervision of the Town Board, Supervisor or Town
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:11
§ 4-5. Creation and modification of departments and divisions.
Justices. The special agencies branch shall include the following,
together with their subordinate units, officers and employees:
(1) The Town Clerk.
(2) The Town Superintendent of Highways.
(3) Refuse Control Officer.5 [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(4) The Board of Assessment Review.
(5) The Town Comptroller.
(6) The Town Attorney.
(7) The Board of Appeals.
(8) The Planning Board.
(9) The Traffic and Safety Board.
(10) The Recreation Commission.
(11) The Town of Amherst Youth Bureau.
(12) The Narcotics Guidance Council.
(13) The Citizens' Industrial Advisory Committee.
(14) The Conservation Advisory Council.
(15) The Senior Citizens' Advisory Council.
(16) The Town of Amherst Industrial Development Agency.
(17) The Old Amherst Colony Museum Park Board of Regents Trustees.
(18) The Board of Trustees of the Town Library.
(19) The Board of Plumbing and Drainage examiners.
(20) Such other boards, commissions, committees, councils, bureaus,
officers or other agencies previously or hereafter established which
shall be designated by local law, ordinance or resolution of the
Town Board as belonging to the special agencies branch.
A. In addition to the central management departments created under
Article IV, the Town Board may, by local law, create separate
departments within any of the branches of Town government for the
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), the Receiver of Taxes and Assessments, was
repealed 6-16-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. This local law, which was passed at a mandatory
referendum held 8-19-1997, also transferred the powers and duties of the Receiver of
Taxes and Assessments to the office of the Town Clerk and repealed L.L. No. 1-1997,
adopted 4-7-1997.
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-5
1:12
performance of particular functions. The Town Board may, by local
law, modify, consolidate or abolish departments and reassign their
functions.
B. Except as otherwise provided by § 4-6, the Town Board may, by local law
or resolution, create divisions within any department and may modify,
consolidate or abolish such divisions and reassign their functions;
provided, however, that any such modification, consolidation or
abolition shall be by local law if it affects a division or divisions
theretofore established by local law.
C. The divisions may be designated as such or as "bureaus" or "sections"
or by any other appropriate terms.
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:13

ARTICLE III
Organization of Executive Branch; Powers of Supervisor
§ 4-6. Internal organization of departments.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or any other local law, the
Supervisor shall be primarily responsible for the internal organization of
the departments within the executive branch and, for the purpose of
discharging such responsibility, shall have the following powers:
§ 4-7. Appointment of department and division heads.
A. Subject to the approval of the Town Board, the Supervisor may
establish a division or divisions within any of the departments in the
executive branch to perform particular functions. The divisions may be
designated as such or as bureaus or sections or by any other
appropriate terms.
B. Subject to the approval of the Town Board, the Supervisor may modify,
consolidate or abolish any such divisions or transfer functions from one
such division to another.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, and subject to
confirmation by the Town Board, the Supervisor shall appoint the
following:
(1) A department head to serve as the principal executive officer of
each department within the executive branch.
(2) A deputy department head who shall have the power to act
generally for and in place of such department head.
(3) Such divisional heads as the Supervisor may deem necessary to
direct the activities of particular divisions within any such
department, subject to the overall supervision of the department
head.
B. A department head or deputy department head may be designated and
appointed as a divisional head.
C. Department heads, deputy heads and divisional heads may be
appointed to offices or positions specifically created by local law for the
performance of the functions described in this section or may be
persons holding other offices or positions who are designated by
appointment under this section to perform such functions in addition to
their regular duties.
D. Department heads, deputy department heads or divisional heads may
be known by the title of "Director," "Commissioner," "Chairman" or such
other appropriate title as may be designated by an act of the
Legislature or by local law.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8
1:15
§ 4-8. Responsibilities of department heads.
The head of each department within the executive branch shall be its
principal executive officer. He shall be responsible to the Supervisor for the
execution of Town policies applicable to the functions of his department.
He shall have all the powers and duties conferred upon him by acts of
the Legislature, by local laws, ordinances or resolutions of the Town Board
or by delegation from the Supervisor. The department head shall consult
regularly with the Supervisor on all matters of policy affecting his
department and in its relationship to other departments or agencies. He
shall be responsible for the performance of all duties and functions of
his department within the limitations of appropriations or other resources
available to his department. He shall furnish the Supervisor with such
reports, surveys, recommendations and other information as may be
requested by the Supervisor or otherwise required by law.
§ 4-9. Executive functions of Supervisor.
The Supervisor shall be the chief executive officer of the Town and
administrative head of the executive branch. He shall be responsible for
the proper administration of Town affairs, law enforcement and the
maintenance of peace and order in the Town. He shall have such powers and
perform such functions and duties as shall be vested in him by this chapter
or any other local law or by act of the Legislature.
§ 4-10. Powers of appointment, removal and suspension.
A. The Supervisor shall appoint all officers and employees within the
executive branch.
B. All appointments by the Supervisor of officers or employees within the
executive branch shall be subject to confirmation by the Town Board,
with the exception of the Assistant to the Supervisor appointed under
§ 4-12.
C. Vacancies in any of the offices or positions in the executive branch with
respect to which the Supervisor is granted authority of appointment by
this chapter or any other local law or act of the Legislature shall be
filled by the Supervisor, subject to confirmation by the Town Board.
D. Subject to the Civil Service Law or any other applicable laws, all
officers and employees appointed by the Supervisor shall serve at his
pleasure and may be removed or suspended by him; provided, however,
that, with respect to persons in offices or positions to which they were
appointed prior to the effective date of this chapter, the power of
removal or suspension shall remain in the body or officer in whom such
power was vested prior to such effective date.
§ 4-8 AMHERST CODE § 4-11
1:16
§ 4-11. Delegation of powers of appointment, removal and
suspension.
The Town Board may, by resolution, authorize the Supervisor to delegate to
any department head or department heads any of the powers granted to the
Supervisor in § 4-10.
§ 4-12. Assistant to the Supervisor.
The position of Assistant to the Supervisor, heretofore established, is
continued. The Assistant to the Supervisor shall perform such
administrative functions as may be appropriately assigned by the
Supervisor. The Assistant to the Supervisor may not act for or on behalf of
the Supervisor in the Supervisor's capacity as a member of the Town Board,
either as a Deputy Supervisor appointed under § 42 of the Town Law or
otherwise.
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Central Management Departments
§ 4-13. Designation of departments. [Added 1-3-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017; amended 7-17-2017 by L.L. No. 18-2017; 12-11-2017 by L.L.
No. 25-2017]
The following are designated and shall function as central management
departments:
§ 4-14. (Reserved)6
§ 4-15. Personnel Department.
§ 4-16. Planning Department. [Amended 5-1-2006 by L.L. No.
6-2006; 12-11-2017 by L.L. No. 25-2017]
A. The Personnel Department.
B. The Planning Department.
C. Department of Contract Compliance.
D. Department of Economic Development. [Added 2-24-2020 by L.L.
No. 1-2020]
A. The Personnel Department shall:
(1) Be responsible for coordinating the personnel activities of the
Town.
(2) Assist in the preparation, negotiation, execution and administration
of contractual agreements between the Town and employee
organizations.
(3) Provide advisory services to management and supervisory staffs of
the various Town departments regarding such matters as staffing
needs, position classification, job evaluation, disciplinary problems,
training and employee relations.
(4) Maintain personnel roster records and employee files,
classification and salary plans and other personnel records and
documents.
(5) Assume responsibilities for the Town in regard to various personnel
fringe benefits, such as retirement, health insurance, workmen's
compensation and unemployment insurance claims.
B. The Personnel Director shall serve as head of the Personnel
Department.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 4-14, Finance Department, was repealed 3-22-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004.
§ 4-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:19
§ 4-17. Department of Contract Compliance and Administration.
[Added 1-3-2017 by L.L. No. 1-20177; amended 7-17-2017 by L.L.
No. 18-2017]
A. The Planning Department shall:
(1) Assist in the formation of development policies and help coordinate
the total governmental planning efforts of the Town.
(2) Provide planning services to the Planning Board, the Town Board,
the Supervisor and various departments of the Town.
(3) Assist in the analysis and review of proposed changes in the
Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 203, Zoning, and Zoning Map of
proposed subdivision developments, site plan approval submissions
and street abandonments.
(4) Through the making of studies or provision of design or other
technical services, assist in overall capital improvement planning
and in the planning for particular Town or special district works or
facilities.
(5) Provide services to the Board of Appeals when requested.
(6) Collaborate with the Comptroller in fiscal planning and
programming.
(7) Subject to direction by the Supervisor, serve as liaison with state,
regional, county or other governmental agencies concerned with
planning, development or environmental protection.
B. The Planning Director shall serve as head of the Planning Department.
A. The Department of Contract Compliance and Administration shall:
(1) Advise all successful bidders for the purchase contract which was
initiated by the Department of Contract Compliance and
Administration that they have been awarded the bid and obtaining
written contract for said successful bidder;
(2) Approve all pending contracts for compliance with General
Municipal Law §§ 103, 104, et al. as part of the contract routing
process;
(3) Comply with all rules, regulations, statutes and ordinances that
have been or may be established for said purchases;
(4) Maintain and establish the Town's procurement policy and assure
compliance therewith;
7. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 4-17 through 4-19 as §§ 4-18
through 4-20, respectively.
§ 4-16 AMHERST CODE § 4-17
1:20
(5) Maintain and establish the Town's contract administration policy
and assure compliance therewith;
(6) Oversee, train and supervise the purchasing of all materials,
supplies, equipment and any purchasing contracts for the Town;
(7) Oversee, train and educate the staff of all Town departments how to
inspect and coordinate the inspection of all deliveries of purchased
goods and services to ensure quality, quantity and conformity to
contract;
(8) Confer with Department Heads and their representatives on the
purchasing needs of their area of responsibility;
(9) Confer with Department Heads and their representatives on the
need for contracts and assist in administering them;
(10) Direct the bidding procedures and ensure legal compliance;
(11) Direct the RFP process and assure legal compliance;
(12) Train the staff of all Town departments on the bidding and RFP
process;
(13) Review bids and quotes and awards contracts of sale to vendors
after approved by the Town Board;
(14) Administer all contracts after approval by the Town Board with the
assistance of the originating Department Head.
(15) Analyze purchasing procedures and work systems to determine
opportunities for cost reduction and increased effectiveness and
efficiencies to assure compliance with GML §§ 103 and 104;
(16) Design procurement policies for acquisition of items which are
routinely ordered;
(17) Subject to development of a complete centralized procurement and
contract management system; assist in establishing and
maintaining computer based records for inventory control and
pricing. This will require the relevant departments/individuals to
cooperate with properly inputting or transferring the data needed
into a designated centralized database where the data can be
captures and used to create reports. The relevant departments/
individuals will be charged with continuously updating the data
stored therein;
(18) Prepare a variety of records and reports related to work as
requested;
(19) Formulate and/or oversee procedures for dispensing of surplus,
obsolete or unused materials, supplies, and equipment after the
relevant department has complied with Town's Disposition Policy.
§ 4-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17
1:21
§ 4-17.1. Department of Economic Development. [Added 2-24-2020
by L.L. No. 1-2020
The Department of Economic Development shall be established under this
Chapter in the following manner:
(20) Perform such other duties and functions associated with the
management of contracts where the Town of Amherst is a
signatory.
B. The Finance Director shall serve as head of the Department of Contract
Compliance and Administration. The Finance Director, or his/her
designee, shall perform, the duties and powers set forth above.
A. Department Established; Appointment, Salary and
Qualifications.
There shall be in the Town of Amherst a Department of Economic
Development. The executive officer of such Department shall be the
Director of Economic Development, who shall be appointed by the Town
Board for the term fixed by the Town Board at such salary as may, from
time to time, be fixed by the said Town Board. The Director of Economic
Development shall be appointed on the basis of his/her administrative
experience and qualifications for the duties of such office. The Director
should administer, develop, manage, implement and promote individual
and business programs serving the interest and welfare of the residents
of the Town of Amherst.
B. Organization of Department.
The Department of Economic Development with such other and further
divisions as may, from time to time, hereafter be deemed necessary
and be established by the Town Board. Each shall be supervised by the
Director of Economic Development.
C. General Powers and Duties.
The Department of Economic Development shall have the following
powers and duties, to be exercised under the general supervision of the
Director:
(1) Lead Town staff and its agents, as well as the business community,
in promoting business growth and other economic development
interests within the community. Specific focus to be given to
priority development and redevelopment areas, as defined by the
Town Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Research and maintain employment, real estate, market and other
data to provide the Town and public with an annual economic
report to inform decision making which will be posted on the
Department webpage.
§ 4-17 AMHERST CODE § 4-17.1
1:22
(3) Assist the Town Planning Department as assigned in the
development of short and long-term plans, as well as the gathering
of information and preparation of studies, reports, and
recommendations to achieve such goals.
(4) Assist the Planning Department and Amherst Industrial
Development Agency to maintain and draft updates to economic
development text and policies in the Town's Comprehensive Plan.
(5) Assist the Executive office and Finance office in the central
management of projects and grants where individual Departments
are working together to achieve a common goal.
(6) Assist the Executive office, Attorney's office, and Planning
Department in decision making regarding real estate transactions
where the Town is either the purchaser or seller of property as
necessary.
(7) Maintain a Town-wide database of State, Federal, and other
relevant funding sources received by the Town.
(8) Review and provide comments on economic/market analyses
submitted with land use and planning applications to Town boards
as requested.
(9) Collaborate with appropriate agencies to develop and implement
an economic development "tool box" of policies and incentives to
encourage economic (re)development, including marketing and
branding strategies.
(10) Collaborate with other Departments to increase efficiencies in
Town development practices and support special projects that
bolster the property-tax base of the Town.
(11) Serve as Town staff liaison to relevant regional and local Economic
Development non-profits and agencies as deemed necessary by the
Director, a list of which will be maintained on the Department
webpage.
§ 4-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.1
1:23

ARTICLE V
Construction; Severability; Effective Date
§ 4-18. Construction.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed as altering or in any manner
impairing the status, rights or privileges of any present officer or employee
of the Town, except to the extent that functions are transferred to the
Supervisor.
§ 4-19. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 4-20. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1977.
§ 4-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20
1:25
Chapter 5
DESIGN ADVISORY BOARD
§ 5-1. Design Advisory Board.
§ 5-2. Powers and duties.
Review Authority: The Design Advisory Board shall be responsible for
reviewing and making recommendations to the Planning Board regarding
the following:
§ 5-3. Meetings/notice.
A. The members of the Design Advisory Board shall be appointed by the
Town Board.
B. The Design Advisory Board shall consist of five (5) members who shall
serve without compensation and as now constituted shall continue in
office until the expiration of their present term. Thereafter, their
successors shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years.
C. At least one member must be a Planning Board member who will also
act as the Board Chair. At least one member of such Board shall be a
professional architect licensed to practice in the State of New York.
D. All members of the Design Advisory Board shall be residents of the
Town of Amherst and qualified by reason of training or experience in
art, architecture, community planning, land development, real estate,
or landscape architecture.
E. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be
filled by the Town Board for the unexpired term. The Town Board shall
have the power to remove any member of the Design Advisory Board for
cause and after public hearing.
F. The Planning Director shall designate a member of the Planning
Department staff to act as the Clerk to the Design Advisory Board.
G. The Planning Director shall designate a Planning Department staff
person to act as liaison to the Design Advisory Board.
H. Membership on the Design Advisory Board is limited to two consecutive
full terms.
A. Major Site Plan Applications
B. Minor site plan applications as referred by the Planning Director
A. Meetings of the Design Advisory Board shall be held monthly, or at the
call of the Chair.
§ 4-20 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:26
§ 5-4. Reference to guidelines and standards in the review.
See Town of Amherst Design Guidelines -Mixed Use
§ 5-5. Administration and enforcement.
B. All meetings of the Design Advisory Board shall be held at Town Offices
and shall be open to the public
C. Notice of the meetings shall be posted on the Town website.
D. The Design Advisory Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and
shall keep records of its findings and other official actions.
E. Three (3) members of the Design Advisory Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
F. Member training(s) shall be held from time to time.
A. Design Advisory Board application process.
(1) Pre-Application Conference: Before submitting an application
for design review approval, each petitioner shall schedule a
pre-application conference with the Planning Department to
discuss the procedures, standards and regulations for design
review approval in accordance with the standards and design
guidelines of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Application Requirements. The following requirements shall
apply to all applications for Design review.
(a) Who May Submit Applications. Applications shall be
accepted only from persons having the legal authority to
submit such applications (owners or lessees of property,
persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent
upon their ability to acquire the necessary approval under the
Zoning Ordinance, or persons with written authorization from
the owner).
(b) Forms. Application forms shall be available from the Planning
Department. The content of such application forms shall be
determined by the Planning Director and may be amended
from time to time.
(c) Acceptance of Applications for Review. An application will
be accepted for review when it contains all information
necessary to determine whether or not the design as proposed
will comply with all the requirements of the standards and
guidelines, as determined by the Planning Director.
(d) Meeting Notice. At least 5 days prior to the meeting date, the
Town shall post notice, via the Town's website, of the meeting
agenda. These notice provisions are non-jurisdictional. Failure
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:27
to provide notice or failure of the notice to provide the
information called for shall not affect the validity of any action
taken by the Design Advisory Board, Planning Board and Town
Board.
(3) Application Requirements. The following information shall be
submitted as part of the formal application for Design Advisory
Board review.
(a) Application form with checklist, including all necessary
documentation
(b) Project description, including a narrative addressing the
following factors:
[1] Potential effects on neighborhood character.
[2] How the project shall enhance the public space.
(c) Aerial views; photographs.
(d) Site Plan.
(e) Elevations and cross sections.
(f) Renderings and floor plans.
(g) Manufacturer samples of exterior colors, materials, roofing,
window and door design.
(h) Sign concepts and locations.
(4) Action by the Design Advisory Board
(a) The Design Advisory Board shall review the petition and
evaluate the application. The Design Advisory Board shall
schedule a meeting and give notice via the Town's website.
(b) Within 10 days following the close of the meeting, the Design
Advisory Board shall furnish to the Planning Board and
petitioner its findings that:
[1] The application is generally consistent with the design
standards, guidelines and purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance, and approval is recommended;
[2] The application is recommended for approval with
modification(s); or,
[3] The application is inconsistent with the design standards,
guidelines and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Board recommends disapproval.
§ 5-5 AMHERST CODE § 5-5
1:28
§ 5-6. Notice of decision.
§ 5-7. Applicability of design review.
Application of the standards is required for any development as follows:
Chapter 6
ARTS AND CULTURE IN PUBLIC PLACES BOARD
§ 6-1. Legislative findings; declaration of policy.
It is hereby found that public art and culture improve the health, safety,
general welfare and quality of life for the citizens of the Town of Amherst.
It is further found that provision of the opportunity to view, listen to, touch,
(c) The Design Advisory Board may include in a favorable report a
recommendation that conditions be included as a part of any
resolution approving the application.
(d) An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefore
and, if appropriate, point out to the petitioner what changes
might be necessary in order to receive a favorable report.
A. The decision of the Design Advisory Board shall immediately be filed in
the Building and Planning Departments and the Town Clerk's Office. All
decisions shall be public record.
B. The Design Advisory Board shall recommend to approve, approve with
modification(s) or disapprove an application to the Planning Board;
provided that, prior to disapproval, the applicant has been afforded an
opportunity to confer upon suggestions for any change(s) to the
proposed action.
C. Approval of any application hereunder shall be by a majority of the
Design Advisory Board members.
A. All major site plan applications in the following Specific Zoning
Districts: Traditional Infill 2.5 (TI-2.5); Traditional Infill 4 (TI-4); Center
2.5 (CTR-2.5); Center 5 (CTR-5); Center 8 (CTR-8); Deep Corridor 5
(DC-5) and Shallow Corridor 3 (SC-3) and any other minor site plans as
determined by the Planning Director.
B. Minor changes as defined below are exempt from this Section:
(1) Ordinary maintenance and repair, including in-kind replacement of
windows and doors; and siding if less than 25% of the existing
exterior surface. (Replacement of or use of materials with types
allowed in the District is encouraged.)
C. The Planning Department may send referrals to the Design Review
Board.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1
1:29
otherwise enjoy and/or participate in musical concerts, dance and ballet
recitals, art exhibits, theater, comedy and other forms of cultural, historical
and literary displays is a valid and proper local government object and
purpose. It is therefore determined and declared to be the policy of the
Town of Amherst to promote public art and culture within the Town and to
collaborate and cooperate with various and appropriate individuals, groups,
associations, organizations and institutions concerned with arts and culture
to promote, ensure and enhance the function, object and mission of arts and
culture in the Town.
§ 6-2. Establishment of Board; membership; terms; meetings.
[Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 28-2011]
There shall be and hereby is created and established an Arts and Culture
in Public Places Board of the Town of Amherst. It shall consist of nine
(9) members, each member appointed by the Town Board. Each member
shall serve a three (3) year term commencing at the biannual town
reorganization meeting, with the exception of the first such Board, which
shall be appointed forthwith after the adoption of this chapter, and shall
serve until the next following biannual town reorganization meeting. The
terms of the members are to be staggered to prevent the entire Board from
overturning at one time. Existing membership terms are to be adjusted to
have the terms of three (3) members expire on 12/31/2011, the terms of two
(2) members expire on 12/31/2012 and the terms of two (2) members expire
on 12/31/2013. Board members are limited to serving three (3) consecutive
terms. Said members shall be representative of the performing and fine
arts, and cultural endeavor and experience. In making such appointments,
the Supervisor and members of the Town Board shall give due consideration
to the recommendations made by recognized and representative local, civic,
educational, arts and cultural associations, organizations and groups that
are concerned with or engaged in the production and/or presentation of the
various and diverse forms of art and culture. The Arts and Culture in Public
Places Board shall select its own Chair, establish its own rules of operation
and procedure and meeting times, except that such Board will regularly
meet in the Town of Amherst Municipal Building, and shall meet no less
than once in every two (2) calendar months.
§ 6-3. Duties.
The Arts and Culture in Public Places Board shall promote, stimulate,
encourage and coordinate the voluntary exhibition and presentation of
arts and culture in all their varied and diverse forms at and in all the
appropriate public buildings and facilities owned and operated by the Town
of Amherst, throughout the calendar year; encourage public sculpture,
murals, collages, monuments and other appropriate public art forms in
commercial and industrial developments, in and along public highways,
buildings, facilities and places that will serve to commemorate Town history,
and establish appropriate and distinguishing landmarks for the future;
promote contests and competitions to enhance the development and growth
of public arts and culture; and make appropriate recommendations in the
§ 6-1 AMHERST CODE § 6-3
1:30
development process concerning the visual aspects of the environment, and
other elements and considerations relative to arts and culture in public
places.
§ 6-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 8
CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ 8-1. Authorization to appoint; powers of committees. [Amended
4-16-1973 by L.L. No. 1-1973; 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 15-2018]
For the purpose of promoting the safety, health and general welfare of the
residents and owners of property in the Town of Amherst, the Town Board
of said Town shall be authorized to appoint a Traffic Safety Board, and
such other advisory committees as the Town Board shall deem appropriate
to act in an advisory capacity to the Town Board and to serve without
compensation. Such advisory committees shall have no powers other than
advisors.
§ 8-2. Composition of Traffic Safety Board; terms of members;
election of Chairman. [Added 2-6-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978; amended
6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 15-2018]
A. The Traffic Safety Board (ATSB) shall consist of ten (10) voting
members nominated by a Town Board member and approved by a
majority vote of the Town Board.
B. A Traffic Safety Coordinator shall be appointed to the ATSB by the Town
Engineer. In addition, Department Liaisons from the Building
Department, Planning Department, Highway Department and Police
Department shall be chosen by the Heads of those Departments and
will be expected to attend each meeting of the ATSB.
C. The Town Board shall have the authority to remove any member of the
ATSB for just and good cause after a hearing conducted pursuant to
Chapter 58 of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
D. In the event of a personal and/or family related illness, a member may
request a "Leave of Absence" from the ATSB for a period of no longer
than six (6) months. A member of the military may request a leave of
absence for a period up to twelve (12) months if called to active duty. If
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:31
§ 8-3. Posting and publication.
The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this chapter to be published in the
Amherst Bee, the official newspaper of the Town of Amherst, together with
a notice of public hearing thereon to be held at a meeting of the Town Board
of the Town of Amherst on the 20th day of March 1967 at 8:00 p.m. Eastern
standard time at the Municipal Building in the Village of Williamsville, New
York, for the purpose of hearing all persons interested in said proposed
chapter and shall post one copy, together with a notice of hearing, on the
signboard at his office. The Town Clerk shall also make copies of such
proposed chapter available at his office for inspection by any interested
persons during business hours.
§ 8-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect within 10 days after its adoption and
publication in the official newspaper of the Town of Amherst.
§ 8-3.Establishment of Open Government Advisory Board;
membership; terms; meetings. [Added 10-10-2016 by L.L. No.
12-2016]
either request is denied by the ATSB, their recommendation will be
presented to the Town Board for a final decision.
E. Members of the ATSB shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years
from and after the expiration of the terms of their predecessors in
office. Terms of office shall commence upon appointment by the Town
Board and shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year their
term expires.
F. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be
filled by the Town Board by appointment for the unexpired term.
G. The members of the Traffic Safety Board shall elect a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson annually from their members.
§ 8-2 AMHERST CODE § 8-4
1:32
A. There shall be and hereby is created and established an Open
Government Advisory Board of the Town of Amherst. It shall consist
of ten (10) members, two appointed by the Supervisor and two by
each individual member of the Town Board. Each member shall serve
a three (3) year term. Terms of office shall commence upon
appointment and expire on the 31st day of December in the year
their term expires. The terms of the members are to be staggered
to prevent the entire Board from overturning at one time. Existing
membership terms are to be adjusted to have the terms of four
(4) members expire on 12/31/2017, the terms of three (3) members
expire on 12/31/2018 and the terms of three (3) members expire
on 12/31/2019. Board members are limited to serving three (3)
consecutive terms. Said members shall be concerned citizens who
are representative of the Amherst community. The Open Government
Advisory Board shall select its own Chair, establish its own rules of
operation and procedure and meeting times, except that such Board
will regularly meet in the Town of Amherst Municipal Building, and
shall meet no less than once in every two (2) calendar months.
B. Duties. The Open Government Advisory Board shall develop goals
and objectives of the steps that the Town of Amherst can take to
incorporate the principles of open government into its daily activities.
Such goals/objectives shall be formulated with the input of senior
policy, legal, and technology leadership in the Town; open
government experts; and the general public. The goals and objectives
of the Board should focus at a minimum on the three areas listed
below:
(1) Transparency: Steps the Town can take to conduct its work more
openly and publish its information online, including ready public
access to ordinances and regulations, policies, legislative records,
budget information, crime statistics, public health statistics, and
other information. Each Town department and agency shall be
encouraged to develop a schedule for making information
available to the public and updating it on a regular basis. To the
extent practicable and subject to valid restrictions, departments
and agencies shall publish information on line (in addition to
other planned or mandated publication methods), and in an open
format. The open format will provide data in a form that can
be retrieved, downloaded, indexed, searched and reused by
commonly used web search applications and software.
(2) Public Participation: Enhancing and expanding opportunities
for the public to participate throughout each department's
decision-making process, including instructions for online access
to published information and opportunities for comment; methods
for identifying stakeholders and other affected parties and
encouraging their participation; links to appropriate websites
where the public can engage in the Town's existing participatory
processes; and proposed changes to internal management and
administrative policies to increase public participation.
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:33
(3) Collaboration: Steps the Town can take to enhance and expand
cooperation among its departments and agencies, other
governmental agencies, private and nonprofit entities, and the
public, to fulfill Town goals and obligations; including proposals
to use technology platforms and links to appropriate websites
to improve, and inform the public about, existing collaboration
efforts, and use of innovative methods to obtain ideas from and to
increase collaboration with those in the private sector, nonprofit
and academic communities.
The Open Government Advisory Board shall annually file a report
with the Amherst Town Board highlighting its accomplishments and
recommendations for making Town government more transparent,
participatory and collaborative.
Chapter 9
CLERK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of
employees — See Ch. 14.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
Freedom of information — See Ch. 22.
§ 9-1. Term of Office.
The term of office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst shall be four
years.
§ 9-2. Effective date.
A. Upon filing of an application for a marriage license, the applicant shall
pay a fee of Forty Dollars ($40) to the Town Clerk. Such fee is due and
payable before at the time the license shall be issued.
B. When either of the parties applying for such marriage license is an
active member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Town of
Amherst shall not collect that portion of the fee which would otherwise
be transmitted to the New York State Commissioner of Health pursuant
to Section 15 (4) of New York's Domestic Relations Law.
C. When either of the parties applying for such marriage license is an
active member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Town of
Amherst shall waive the portion of the fee to which it is entitled.
D. When either of the parties applying for such marriage license is an
active member of the Armed Forced of the United States, the Town of
Amherst shall also waive the Ten Dollar ($10) Clerk's Office
Preservation Fee to which it is entitled.
§ 8-4 AMHERST CODE § 9-2
1:34
Chapter 10
COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4.
Clerk — See Ch. 9.
Superintendent of Highways — See Ch. 52.
Supervisor — See Ch. 54.
E. This law shall take effect January 1, 2020.
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:35

ARTICLE I
Elected Officials
[Adopted 3-15-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
§ 10-1. Title.
This article shall be known as "A Local Law to Adjust the Compensation of
Elected Officials in the Town of Amherst for Fiscal Year 2004."
§ 10-2. Legislative findings and intent.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that elected officials in
the Town of Amherst have not had an increase in their compensation in
14 years. In the intervening years, the issues which must be addressed
by all elected officials have become increasingly complex. Whether
oversight of the ever more challenging fiscal issues facing the Town of
Amherst or responding to increased demands on the Town Clerk, or the
increasing responsibility of the Highway Superintendent as the total
mileage of Town roads has increased, to the disposition of some of the
heaviest case loads carried by any town court in the State of New York,
the demands on the elected officials of this Town have increased
substantially.
B. The Town Board further finds that, in order to address the question of
fair compensation for elected officials in a nonpartisan objective
manner, the Supervisor appointed a Citizens Salary Review Commission
made up of a cross-section of residents of the Town of Amherst. After a
thoughtful, professional and balanced review, the Supervisor's Citizens
Review Commission submitted its recommendation to the Town Board
for salary increases for elected officials. After negotiations, proposed
salary increases for elected officials were put forward and were enacted
as part of the 2003 Town budget, but the salary increases were not paid
by the Supervisor.
C. The Town Board further finds that a resolution was adopted by this
Board at its meeting held February 2, 2004, which reconvened the
Citizens Salary Review Commission and requested that the Commission
renew its recommendations regarding salaries for elected officials in
the Town of Amherst. The Citizens Salary Review Commission has met
and made its recommendations to this Board.
D. The Town Board finds that the power to fix salaries of Town employees
is vested by the Constitution of the State of New York in the State
Legislature. The Board further finds that the State Legislature has
expressly delegated to Town Boards, and only to Town Boards, the
authority to set salaries for both appointed and elected Town officials
and that this express delegation is found in Town Law § 27(1). This
express authority is in furtherance of the general power of the Town
Board to control Town finances found in § 64 of the Town Law. The
Board further finds that it may set elected officials salaries at amounts
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:37
§ 10-3. Salaries of elected officials.
greater than those approved in the Town's annual budget through the
adoption of an appropriate local law.
E. It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst, through the
passage of this article, to establish a compensation structure for elected
officials for the fiscal year 2004 which adequately reflects the
responsibilities assumed and duties performed by the elected officials
and to address the corrosive effect of inflation on the salaries of elected
officials in the intervening years since their last salary increase. It is
also the intent of the Town Board to ensure that the salaries authorized
by this article are paid as established herein.
A. The annual salaries of elected officials of the Town of Amherst for the
fiscal year 2004 provided in the Town budget for fiscal year 2004 are
hereby amended and set as follows upon the effective date of this
article:
(1) Supervisor: $75,000.
(2) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(3) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(4) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(5) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(6) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(7) Town Councilman: $25,500.
(8) Town Justice: $69,500.
(9) Town Justice: $69,500.
(10) Town Clerk: $62,500.
(11) Superintendent of Highways: $71,483.
(a) Additional responsibilities:
[1] Parks: $7,500.
[2] Signs/signal/storm drainage: $2,500.
[3] Total (Superintendent of Highways): $81,483.
B. These salaries shall be paid pursuant to § 10-4 of this article.
§ 10-2 AMHERST CODE § 10-4
1:38
§ 10-4. Payment of salaries. [Amended 12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
25-2017]
Within forty-five (45) days of the adoption of this article, the Supervisor
as required by § 29(7) of the Town Law of the State of New York and the
Personnel Director shall take any and all steps necessary to pay the salaries
established in § 10-3 of this article. Funding for these salaries shall be
paid from the balances remaining from unappropriated unreserved monies
remaining in the budget of the Town Court of the Town of Amherst or from
contingent funds, surplus monies, unexpended balances or any other legal
funding source.
§ 10-5. Validity.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of § 27(1) of the Town
Law of the State of New York regarding compensation of Town officers and
employees, which section authorizes a Town Board to increase the salary of
certain elected officials of the Town at an amount in excess of the amount
specified in the notice of public hearing on the preliminary budget for not
more than one year by local law pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
It is also enacted pursuant to the general authority given to Town Boards
by § 64(1) of the Town Law of the State of New York. It is enacted by virtue
of the authority to manage their property, affairs, and government vested in
Town governments by § 10, § 20 and § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law
of the State of New York.
§ 10-6. When effective.
In accordance with the provisions of § 24(2)(h) of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, this article shall not become operative unless and until 45 days have
elapsed after its adoption and no petition protesting against it, signed and
authenticated as required by said section, has been filed with the Town
Clerk of the Town of Amherst, or if such petition is filed, a proposition for
the approval of this article has been submitted at the next general election
or a special election for that purpose pursuant to said section and received
the affirmative vote of a majority of qualified electors voting thereon.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:39
Chapter 11
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Residency requirements — See Ch. 45.
§ 11-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy
or foreign nation upon the United States causing, or which may cause,
substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the United
States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shell fire or
nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other
weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is vacant or at
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
of the incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to
the provisions of any general or special law other than the sections of law
pursuant to which this chapter is adopted.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but
not the office, of a Town officer in the event that neither such officer nor
any duly authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the Town or
other physical, mental or legal absence, to perform the powers and duties
of the office.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that a substantial number
of the residents of the Town of Amherst either sustain injury, become ill,
are infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as
the result of injury, disease or exposure or the property of a substantial
number of such residents is imperiled, damaged or destroyed, and it is
necessary and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare
that the continuity of the government of the Town of Amherst be assured in
order that it be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise
its essential powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such disasters,
catastrophe and emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to,
conflagrations, explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature,
floods, tidal waves, pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged
failure of electric power or essential transportation services or any incident
or occurrence which causes or threatens to cause danger to life, health or
property from exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
§ 10-6 AMHERST CODE § 11-2
1:40
§ 11-2. Designation of emergency interim successors.
A. Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this
chapter, and thereafter within 30 days after first entering upon the
duties of his office, each elective officer shall, in addition to any duly
authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim
successors to the powers and duties of his office and specify their rank
in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there
will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, to perform the powers and
duties of the office.
B. Appointive officers. Each officer or body of officers empowered by law
to appoint officers shall within the time specified in Subsection A of this
section, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for each
such appointive officer such number of emergency interim successors
to such officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any
duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination
thereof, for each such officer. Where such a body of officers consists of
members having overlapping terms, such body of officers shall review
and, as necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency
interim successors by such Board within 30 days after a new member
elected or appointed to such body of officers first enters upon the duties
of his office as a member of such body of officers.
C. Review of designations. The incumbent, in the case of those elective
officers specified in Subsection A of this section, and the appointing
officer or body of officers specified in Subsection B of this section shall
from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to ensure that at all
times there are at least three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, for each elective and
appointive officer of the Town.
D. Qualifications. No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency
interim successor unless he is legally qualified to hold the office of the
person to whose powers and duties he is designated to succeed.
E. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
F. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary unless otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution. He shall,
however, be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily
incurred in the performance of his powers and duties.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:41
§ 11-3. Assumption of powers and duties.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in
Subsection A or B of § 11-2 of this chapter or his duly authorized deputy,
if any, is unable, due to death, absence from the Town or other physical,
mental or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the office,
the emergency interim successor of such officer highest in rank in order
of succession who is able to perform the powers and duties of the office
shall, except for the power and duty to discharge or replace duly authorized
deputies and emergency interim successors of such officer, perform the
powers and duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall
perform such powers and duties only until such time as the lawful
incumbent officer or his duly authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office or
undertakes the performance of the powers and duties of the office, as the
case may be, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly
elected or appointed to fill such vacancy and qualified as provided by law.
§ 11-4. Record of designations; notification of designated persons.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the Town Clerk,
and each designation, replacement or change in order of succession of any
emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order
of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such data
regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors, and
same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify, in writing,
each designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim
successor and his rank in order of succession and also shall notify, in
writing, any person previously designated who is replaced or whose place
in order of succession is changed.
§ 11-5. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible,
emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other
things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and
duties of the office to which they may succeed.
§ 11-6. Suspension of quorum requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Supervisor, or his duly
authorized deputy or emergency interim successor performing his powers
and duties, may suspend quorum requirements for the Town Board. If
quorum requirements are suspended, any ordinance, resolution or other
action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative vote of
a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or approved by
the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting thereon.
§ 11-3 AMHERST CODE § 11-7
1:42
§ 11-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 11-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption, its publication and posting
as prescribed by § 133 of the Town Law and the filing of one certified copy
thereof with the Town Clerk, one certified copy in the office of the State
Comptroller and three certified copies in the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 12
EMPLOYEE SUGGESTION PROGRAM
§ 12-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Town of Amherst Employee Suggestion Program is to
secure for the Town of Amherst and its taxpayers the maximum benefit
from the conservation of Town resources. The program recognizes that
the employees of the Town represent an unlimited source of ideas for
better ways to serve the public. Monetary awards are intended to offer
a significant incentive for employees to become involved in the creative
process and to amplify the capabilities of management. The program
recognizes that every employee will, by identifying problems and providing
possible solutions, become, in a very real sense, a part of the creative
management team.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE — All Town employees, whether full-time, part-time,
or volunteer, are eligible to submit suggestions. Former employees are also
eligible as long as (1) the suggestions were submitted prior to separation
of service with the Town; (2) such separation was voluntary; (3) and the
suggestions are implemented within one (1) year of submittal. Department
heads and supervisors, where supervisors' job responsibilities call for them
to seek methods to improve operations or services, shall not be eligible for
cash awards for suggestions which deal with operations under their own
supervision. They may, however, receive cash awards for suggestions that
deal with operations other than those under their supervision or assigned
general responsibility. Elected officials of the Town may never receive cash
awards.
§ 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:43
MERIT AWARD BOARD — Consists of the following individuals: the Town
Board of the Town of Amherst and two (2) private citizens with business
backgrounds, to be appointed annually by a majority vote of the Town Board
at the Town reorganization meeting.
SUGGESTION — A definite, constructive, original idea or a new application
of an old idea, submitted in writing by one or more eligible Town employees,
which is intended to do the following: increase productivity; conserve Town
resources; reduce Town costs; or improve the morale of Town employees.
The suggestions must not be the kind which employees are reasonably
expected to develop in the course of their regular duties.
SUGGESTION REVIEW COMMITTEE — Consists of the following
individuals: the Director of Human Resources; the Comptroller; a Town
Board member; three (3) private citizens with business backgrounds, to be
appointed by the majority of the Town Board (these individuals shall not
also serve on the Merit Award Board), with one (1) member employed as
a representative of a labor organization (public or private) and the Town
Attorney.
The Merit Award Board shall have the power and duty to make rules
and regulations pertaining to the payment of employee awards. All
decisions of the Merit Award Board regarding the worthiness of a
suggestion for an award and the amount of such award shall be final
and binding and shall not be subject to review in any court or before
any other body, except as provided for in the rules and regulations
promulgated in accordance with this chapter.
A.
Members of the Merit Award Board shall not receive any salary or
compensation for service as members of such Board. However, Town
Board members will continue to receive their regular salaries as
provided by law.
B.
The Suggestion Review Committee shall receive all suggestions, as
defined above, review them and forward its recommendations to the
Merit Award Board for final determination. The Suggestion Review
Committee may use other resources in order to complete its
investigation/analysis.
A.
The Suggestion Review Committee shall have the power to make all
rules and regulations implementing the receipt of suggestions by
employees, the review of such suggestions by the Suggestion Review
Committee, and the criteria for determining which suggestions shall be
forwarded to the Merit Award Board. All decisions of the Suggestion
Review Committee shall be final and binding and shall not be subject
to review in any court or before any other body, except as provided for
in rules and regulations promulgated in accordance with this chapter.
A copy of the rules shall be on file with the Town Clerk.
B.
Members of this Suggestion Review Committee shall not receive any
salary or compensation for service as members of the Committee.
C.
§ 12-2 AMHERST CODE § 12-3
1:44
§ 12-3. Procedures.
All necessary procedures for the submission and review of suggestions, or
for the awarding of monetary awards, will be established by the Suggestion
Review Committee or the Merit Award Board, respectively, subject to the
following guidelines:
A. All suggestions become the property of the Town of Amherst upon their
receipt, and all decisions of the Merit Award Board or the Suggestion
Review Committee shall be final and binding and nonreviewable, except
as provided for in the rules and regulations promulgated in accordance
with this chapter.
B. Duplicate suggestions cannot be given consideration for cash awards. If
duplicate suggestions are dated on the same day, the time received in
the Town Personnel Office shall govern, and the first filed shall be the
only one eligible for award.
C. In order to be eligible for a cash award, a suggestion with tangible
benefits must result in at least One Thousand Dollars and Zero Cents
($1,000.00) in projected savings during the first year after
implementation.
D. The amount of the cash award shall be ten percent (10%) of the first
year's tangible monetary benefit, with no cap.
E. All employees who have a suggestion adopted, either individually or in
collaboration with others, will receive an Employee Suggestion Award
Certificate and a letter of commendation, both of which will become a
permanent part of their personnel record. Any suggestion which have a
tangible monetary benefit will have the same noted on the Award
Certification which shall also state the amount at issue.
F. All monetary awards will be charged to the budget or department which
benefits most from the suggestion.
G. Rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall govern the
character and quality of acceptable suggestions, the method of
submission and the procedures for their review, the manner in which
the suggestions will be passed on to the Merit Award Board, the value
of awards, the issuance and payment of such awards, and any other
policies and procedures as may be deemed necessary or appropriate for
the proper administration of this chapter.
H. Nothing herein shall be construed to change or otherwise modify the
terms of any collective bargaining agreement existing between the
Town of Amherst and any duly organized employee union of the Town of
Amherst.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:45
§ 12-4. Funding and expenditure of moneys.
The Town Board is hereby empowered to fund and expend moneys for the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 12-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this chapter or application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or
part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 12-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York, pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law
of the State of New York and the Code of the Town of Amherst.
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clerk — See Ch. 9.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
Superintendent of Highways — See Ch. 52.
Supervisor — See Ch. 54.
§ 14-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection
for various individuals serving the Town of Amherst, its districts and other
public entities from losses arising from actions which may be brought
against them in their individual capacity as a result of their acting within
the scope of their public employment or duties.
§ 14-2. Conferral of benefits; liability for costs. [Amended 9-3-1985
by L.L. No. 4-1985; 1-21-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst, on behalf of the Town of Amherst,
New York, the various improvement and special districts therein and all
commissions, agencies and corporations which the Town Board appoints or
the Town funds, including, without limitation, the Amherst Public Library,
the Amherst Museum Colony Park, the Town of Amherst Industrial
Development Agency and the Town of Amherst Development Corporation,
does hereby determine:
§ 12-4 AMHERST CODE § 14-2
1:46
§ 14-3. Benefits to be supplemental.
The benefits under § 18 of the Public Officers Law shall supplement and be
available in addition to defense and indemnification protections conferred
by any other provision or enactment.
§ 14-4. Indemnification of employees. [Amended 11-7-1983 by L.L.
No. 4-1983; 1-21-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
The Town of Amherst shall indemnify and save harmless its officers and
employees, as defined in § 18 of the Public Officers Law, in the amount
of any costs, attorney's fees, damages, fines or penalties which may be
imposed by reason of adjudication that they, while acting within the scope of
public employment or duties, have, without willfulness or intent, violated a
prior order, judgment, consent, decree or stipulation of settlement entered
in any court of this state or of the United States.
§ 14-5. Police officers. [Added 12-1-1986 by L.L. No. 6-1986]
The Town of Amherst shall provide for the defense for any civil action or
proceeding brought against a duly appointed police officer of the Town of
Amherst and shall indemnify and save harmless such police officer from
any judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction whenever such action,
proceeding or judgment is for punitive or exemplary damages arising out of
a negligent act or other tort of such police officer committed while in the
proper discharge of his duties and within the scope of his employment.
A. To confer the benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of
New York upon the employees of the Town and of those districts,
commissions, agencies, corporations and entities, as such employees
are defined in said § 18 of the Public Officers Law.
B. That the Town and/or the districts shall be held liable for the costs
incurred under these provisions.
C. In addition to benefits provided by said § 18 of the Public Officers Law,
the benefits provided under this chapter shall include the defense of
any civil action or proceeding arising out of any alleged act or omission,
including alleged violations by an officer or employee of civil rights
under Title 42, §§ 1981 and 1983, of the United States Code and the
legal representation of any officer or employee sued, investigated,
subpoenaed or otherwise requested to testify before any administrative
committee or department of federal, state or Town government
concerning a matter or matters within the scope of the official duties of
the officer or employee, and the indemnification in the amount of any
judgment or settlement or claim obtained or made in connection
therewith, provided that the act or omission occurred while the officer
or employee was acting in good faith and within the scope of the
officer's or employee's public employment, powers or duties.
[Amended 11-3-2008 by L.L. No. 14-2008]
§ 14-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5
1:47
Chapter 14A
DISABILITIES, COMMITTEE ON
§ 14A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as a "Local Law To Establish an Amherst
Committee on Disabilities."
§ 14A-2. Legislative findings; intent; purpose.
It is hereby found that the establishment of a committee for the purposes
of enhancing compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act
with respect to Town facilities is a valid and proper government objective
and purpose. It is therefore determined and declared to be the policy of
the Town of Amherst to promote enhancement of access to Town facilities
by Town of Amherst residents with disabilities, whenever and wherever
possible.
§ 14A-3. Establishment; membership; terms; meetings. [Amended
11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 14-2016]
There shall be and hereby is created and established an Amherst Committee
on Disabilities. It shall consist of fifteen (15) members, three (3) appointed
by the Supervisor and three (3) each individual member of the Town Board.
Members of the Amherst Committee on Disabilities shall be residents of the
Town of Amherst. Each member shall serve a two (2) year term commencing
at the biennial Town reorganization meeting with the exception of the first
such committee, which shall be appointed forthwith after adoption of this
chapter and shall serve until the next biennial Town reorganization meeting.
The Amherst Committee on Disabilities shall select its own Chair, establish
its own rules of operation and procedure and meeting times, except that
such Committee will regularly meet in the Town of Amherst Municipal
Building and shall meet no less than once in every two (2) calendar months.
§ 14A-4. Duties.
The Amherst Committee on Disabilities shall study and offer suggestions
and recommendations to improve compliance of the Town of Amherst with
the goals and objectives of the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act, as
well as to consider any other issues relevant to and important to disabled
Town residents.
Chapter 15
EMPLOYEE POSITION VACANCY CONTROL PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ 14-5 AMHERST CODE § 14A-4
1:48
§ 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an employee position vacancy
control plan for the Town of Amherst, New York.
§ 15-2. Standard for filling vacant position; petition for waiver.
Following a retirement or resignation, no vacant position shall be filled
unless a 50% savings of the total position cost (salary plus benefits) between
the replacement employee and the employee leaving service can be
demonstrated over the two-year period following the retirement or
resignation. Department heads who believe an urgent or compelling reason
exists for filling a position despite the fact that such savings cannot be
realized may petition the Town Board for a waiver from the savings
requirement.
§ 15-3. Procedure. [Amended 12-11-2017 by L.L. No. 25-2017]
A. Department heads seeking to fill positions vacated by retiring or
resigning employees should submit to the Personnel Office a completed
personnel action request form and a plan summary setting forth the
manner in which the required savings will be achieved, along with a
time frame for filling the position. The proposed savings plan will then
be forwarded to and reviewed by the Personnel Director and Town
Comptroller.
B. Within ten (10) working days of receiving the report, the Personnel
Director and Town Comptroller will make a determination as to whether
or not the required savings will be achieved by the proposed plan. If the
plan is approved by the Personnel Director and Town Comptroller, the
Town Board will then make a final determination with regard to filling
the position as quickly as possible. If the review of the Personnel
Director and the Town Comptroller is not received within ten (10) days,
the proposal shall be submitted to the Town Board for its action, upon a
review of the proposed savings.
C. Department heads who believe a position must be filled despite the fact
that the required savings cannot be realized must submit a personnel
action request form to the Personnel Office along with a request for a
waiver from the savings requirement, explaining the rationale and
justification for filling the position. The request and supporting
documentation will then be forwarded to the Town Board. If necessary,
the Board may request whatever additional data, documentation,
justification or other information it deems necessary to make a proper
determination with regard to filling the position.
§ 14A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:49
§ 15-4. Criteria for filling vacancies.
Criteria to be weighed when considering the necessity and/or timing for
filling a vacant position include, but are not limited to, concerns for public
safety; impact on delivery of services to Town residents; impact on revenues
generated by the Town; impact on departmental operations; costs
associated with not filling the vacancy; civil service, bargaining unit and
contractual issues; liability issues; and permitting or state mandate issues.
§ 15-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 16
EMPLOYEES' RIGHTS OF ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 45.
§ 16-1. Legislative findings and declaration.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst in Erie County, New York, hereby
finds and declares that it is in the best interests of the citizens of said Town
and the employees of the Town of Amherst government to provide for the
effective implementation of the requirements of the Public Employees' Fair
Employment Act, as set forth in Article 14 of the Civil Service Law as added
by Chapter 392 of the Laws of 1967, by establishing local provisions and
procedures with respect to the determination of the representation status
of employees' organizations and the resolution of disputes in the course
of collective negotiations with such organizations. It is the purpose of said
Act and the local provisions and procedures herein established to promote
a harmonious and cooperative relationship between the Town government
and its employees and to protect the public by assuring, at all times, the
orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of Town government.
With this end in view, this Board also creates, as hereinafter provided, a
local public employment board and establishes herein further procedures
relating to the prohibition against strikes by public employees as provided
in said Act.
§ 16-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Public Employment Relations Board created by § 16-5 of this
chapter.
§ 15-4 AMHERST CODE § 16-2
1:50
CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER — The Town Attorney.
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION — An organization of any kind having as its
primary purpose the improvement of terms and conditions of employment of
public employees, except that such terms shall not include an organization:
membership in which is prohibited by § 105 of the Civil Service Law of
the State of New York; which discriminates with regard to the terms or
conditions of membership because of race, color, creed or national origin; or
which, in the case of public employees who hold positions by appointment
or employment in the service of the Board and who are excluded from the
application of this chapter by rules and regulations of the Board, admits to
membership or is affiliated directly or indirectly with an organization which
admits to membership persons not in the service of the Board, for purposes
of any provision of this chapter other than §§ 16-9 and 16-10.
GOVERNMENT or PUBLIC EMPLOYER — The Town of Amherst.
MEMBERSHIP DUES DEDUCTION — The obligation or practice of the
Town to deduct from the salary of a public employee, with his consent,
an amount for the payment of his membership dues in an employee
organization and transmitting the sums so deducted to an employee
organization.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by appointment or
employment in the service of the Town of Amherst.
STRIKE — Any strike or other concerted stoppage of work or slowdowns by
public employees.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT — Salaries, wages, hours
and other terms and conditions of employment.
§ 16-3. Right of organization.
Employees of the Town of Amherst shall have the right to form, join and
participate in, or to refrain from forming, joining or participating in, any
employee organization of their own choosing. The term "employees" as
used herein shall mean those persons holding a position by appointment or
employment in the service of the Town of Amherst.
§ 16-4. Right to representation.
Such employees shall have the right to be represented by employee
organizations to negotiate collectively with the Town in the determination
of their terms and conditions of employment and the administration of
grievances arising thereunder. The terms "employee organization" and
"terms and conditions of employment," as used in this section, shall have
such meaning as is defined in § 201 of Article 14 of the Civil Service Law as
added by Chapter 392 of the Laws of 1967.
§ 16-5. Public Employment Relations Board.
§ 16-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:51
A. There is hereby created a board to be known as the "Public Employment
Relations Board of the Town of Amherst." Said Board shall consist of
three members to be appointed by the Supervisor, upon the advice and
consent of the Town Board, from persons representative of the public.
Not more than two members of the Board shall be members of the same
political party. Said members shall be appointed for a term of six years,
except that of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a
term of two years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of six
years. The aforesaid Board shall choose a Chairman from among its
members. A vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the unexpired term.
B. Members of the Board shall hold no other Town of Amherst office or be
employed by the Town of Amherst in any other capacity.
C. The members of such Board shall receive such compensation as may be
provided by the Town Board. Nothing herein shall be construed to
require the Town Board to provide compensation for such members,
however. Said Board shall appoint such officers and employees as may
be provided by the Town Board, except as hereinafter provided.
D. In addition to the powers and functions as may be provided by law or
elsewhere in this chapter, said Board shall have the following powers
and functions:
(1) To establish procedures to resolve disputes concerning the
representation status of employee organizations after consultation
with interested parties.
(2) To resolve, pursuant to such procedures, disputes concerning the
representation status of employee organizations of employees of
the Town of Amherst upon request of any employee organization or
the Town of Amherst.
(3) To conduct studies of problems involved in representation and
negotiation, including, but not limited to:
(a) Whether employee organizations are to be recognized as
representatives of their members only or are to have exclusive
representation for all employees in the bargaining unit.
(b) The problems of unit determination.
(c) Those subjects which are open to negotiation in whole or in
part.
(4) To establish, after consulting representatives of employee
organizations, the Town Attorney and the Town Board, panels of
qualified persons broadly representative of the community and, as
far as practicable, who are versed in the field of labor relations, to
be available to serve as mediators or members of fact-finding
boards.
§ 16-5 AMHERST CODE § 16-5
1:52
§ 16-6. Resolution of disputes concerning representation status.
For purposes of resolving disputes concerning representation status, the
Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of Amherst shall:
(5) To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems
necessary for the Board to properly carry out its functions and
powers.
(6) For the purpose of such hearings and inquiries, the members of
such Board shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations and to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books and papers.
(7) To make, amend and rescind, from time to time, such rules and
regulations, including but not limited to those governing its
internal organization and conduct of its affairs, and to exercise
such other powers as may be appropriate to effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter.
E. The members of the Board shall be free of supervision, direction or
control by any officer, board, department or agency of the Town of
Amherst.
A. Define the appropriate employer-employee negotiating unit, taking into
account the following standards:
(1) The definition of the unit shall correspond to a community of
interest among the employees to be included in the unit.
(2) The departmental officials at the level of the unit shall have the
power to make effective recommendations to their departmental
heads or, in the case of a departmental head, to the Town Board of
the Town of Amherst, with respect to the terms and conditions of
employment upon which the employees desire to negotiate.
(3) The unit shall be compatible with the joint responsibilities of the
Town and its employees to serve the interests of the public.
B. Ascertain the Town employees' choice of employee organization as their
representative in those cases where agreement has not been reached
on the means to ascertain the choice, on the basis of dues deduction
authorization and other evidences or, if necessary, by conducting an
election.
C. Certify an employee organization upon:
(1) The determination that such organization represents that group of
Town employees it claims to represent; and
(2) As provided in § 207, Subdivision 3(b), of the Civil Service Law, the
affirmation by such organization that it does not assert the right to
strike against any government, to assist or participate in any such
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:53
§ 16-7. Rights extended upon certification and recognition.
The Town of Amherst shall extend to an employee organization certified or
recognized pursuant to this chapter, the following rights:
§ 16-8. Resolution of disputes in collective negotiations.
strike or to impose an obligation to conduct, assist or participate in
such a strike.
A. To represent the employees in negotiations and in the settlement of
grievances.
B. To membership dues deduction, upon presentation of dues deduction
authorization cards signed by individual employees.
C. To unchallenged representation status until the next succeeding budget
submission date and thereafter for an additional period of either 12
months or, if the parties so agree, not less than 12 months nor more
than 24 months, which period shall commence 120 days prior to such
next succeeding budget submission date. The term "budget submission
date" as used herein shall be the date for the filing of the Town budget
by the Town Board.
A. For purposes of this section, an impasse may be deemed to exist if the
parties fail to achieve agreement at least 60 days prior to the aforesaid
budget submission date.
B. The Town may enter into written agreements with recognized or
certified employee organizations setting forth procedures to be invoked
in the event of disputes which reach an impasse in the course of
collective negotiations. In the event that such procedures fail to solve
the impasse or in the event that no such written agreement is entered
into, either the Town or the organization, or both, may request the
Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of Amherst to render
assistance, or the Board may render such assistance on its own motion,
as hereinafter provided.
C. On request of either party, or upon its own motion as provided herein,
and in the event that said Board determines that an impasse exists in
collective negotiations between such employee organization and the
Town as to the conditions of employment, the Board shall render
assistance as follows:
(1) To assist the parties to effect a voluntary resolution of the dispute,
the Board shall appoint a mediator or mediators representative of
the public from the list of qualified persons maintained by the
Board.
(2) If the impasse continues, the Board shall appoint a fact-finding
board of not more than three members, each representative of the
public, from the list of qualified persons maintained by the Board,
§ 16-6 AMHERST CODE § 16-8
1:54
§ 16-9. Strikes prohibited.
which fact-finding board shall have, in addition to the powers
delegated to it by the Board, the power to make public
recommendations for the resolution of the dispute.
(3) If the dispute is not resolved at least 15 days prior to the budget
submission date, the fact-finding board, acting by a majority of its
members, shall immediately transmit its findings of fact and
recommendations for resolution of the dispute to the Town Board
and to the employee organization involved and shall simultaneously
make public such findings and recommendations.
(4) In the event that the findings of fact and recommendations are
made public by a fact-finding board established pursuant to
procedures agreed upon by the parties and the impasse continues,
the Public Employment Relations Board shall have the power to
take whatever steps it deems appropriate to resolve the dispute,
including the making of recommendations after giving due
consideration to the findings of fact and recommendations of such
fact-finding board, but no further fact-finding board shall be
appointed.
(5) In the event that either the Town or the employee organization does
not accept in whole or part the recommendations of the fact-finding
board, the Supervisor shall, within five days after receipt of the
findings of fact and recommendations of the fact-finding board,
submit to the Town Board a copy of the findings of fact and
recommendations of the fact-finding board, together with his
recommendations for settling the dispute, and the employee
organization may also submit to the Town Board its
recommendations for settling the dispute.
A. No employee of the Town of Amherst or employee organization shall
engage in a strike, and no employee organization shall cause, instigate,
encourage or condone a strike.
B. Any employee of the Town who violates the aforesaid provision of this
section shall be subject to the disciplinary penalties provided by law for
misconduct, in accordance with procedures established by law.
C. Actions upon violation.
(1) Any employee organization which is determined by the Public
Employment Relations Board of the Town of Amherst to have
violated the provisions of Subsection A of this section shall, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, lose the rights
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) In the event of a violation of Subsection A of this section, it shall be
the duty of the Supervisor forthwith to so notify the Public
Employment Relations Board of the Town of Amherst and the Town
§ 16-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:55
Attorney and to provide said Board and the Town Attorney with
such facilities, assistance and data as will enable said Board and
the Town Attorney to carry out their duties.
(3) In the event of a violation of Subsection A of this section, the Town
Attorney, or the Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of
Amherst on its own motion, shall forthwith institute proceedings
before the Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of
Amherst to determine whether such employee organization has
violated the provisions of Subsection A of this section.
(4) Proceedings against an employee organization under this section
shall be commenced by service upon it of a written notice, together
with a copy of the charges. A copy of such notice and charges shall
also be served, for its information, upon the Town Board of the
Town of Amherst. The employee organization shall have eight days
within which to serve its written answer to such charges. The
hearing of the Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of
Amherst shall be held promptly thereafter, and at such hearing the
parties shall be permitted to be represented by counsel and to
summon witnesses in their behalf. Compliance with the technical
rules of evidence shall not be required.
(5) In determining whether an employee organization has violated
Subsection A of this section, said Board shall consider whether the
employee organization called the strike or tried to prevent it,
whether the employee organization made or was making good faith
efforts to terminate the strike and whether, if so alleged by the
employee organization, the Town or its representative engaged in
such acts of extreme provocation as to detract from the
responsibility of the employee organization for the strike.
(6) If said Board determines that an employee organization has
violated the provisions of Subsection A of this section, said Board
shall order forfeiture of the rights granted pursuant to the
provisions of § 16-7B of this chapter for a specified period of time
as the Board shall determine, but in no event to exceed 18 months;
provided, however, that where a fine imposed on an employee
organization pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 751 of the Judiciary Law
remains wholly or partly unpaid after the exhaustion of the cash
and securities of the employee organization, said Board shall direct
that, notwithstanding such forfeiture, such membership dues
deduction shall be continued to the extent necessary to pay such
fine, and the Town of Amherst shall transmit such moneys to the
court.
(7) An employee organization whose rights granted pursuant to the
provisions of § 16-7B of this chapter have been ordered forfeited
pursuant to this section may be granted such rights after the
termination of such forfeiture only after complying with the
provisions of § 16-6C(2) of this chapter.
§ 16-9 AMHERST CODE § 16-9
1:56
§ 16-10. Termination or amendment of provisions.
§ 16-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 20 days after adoption.
Chapter 19
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14.
§ 19-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the The Code of Ethics."
§ 19-2. Statutory authority; intent.
The Code of Ethics is enacted pursuant to Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law and in recognition of the policy of the State of New York
and the Town of Amherst to maintain the highest standards of integrity
D. Orders of the Public Employment Relations Board of the Town of
Amherst made pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to
orders made pursuant to Subsection C of this section, shall be
reviewable as provided by law and enforceable as provided by § 210(4)
of the Civil Service Law.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst may terminate the provisions
of this chapter by a local law, ordinance or resolution which shall
become effective no sooner than 60 days after filing with the New York
State Public Employment Relations Board a certified copy of such local
law, ordinance or resolution or on the date specified in the local law,
ordinance or resolution, whichever is later. The Town Board shall give
public notice of the termination at least 45 days prior to the effective
date thereof by posting on the bulletin board maintained by the Town of
Amherst and at such other location as may be designated by the Town
Board for not less than five working days and publication in the official
newspaper of the Town of Amherst for not less than one day.
B. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst may amend this chapter as
provided by law, which amendment shall not become effective until the
New York State Public Employment Relations Board finds that the
provisions and procedures as amended are substantially equivalent to
the provisions as set forth in Article 14 of the Civil Service Law and the
Rules of the New York State Public Employment Relations Board as
amended from time to time.
§ 16-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:57
in public service. It is intended to afford Town officers and employees
guidance in conforming to ethical standards; to promote public confidence
in the integrity of Town government; to require public disclosure of financial
interests that may influence or be perceived as influencing actions of Town
officers and employees; to minimize unwarranted suspicion; and, to provide
for fair and effective administration of this code. This Code of Ethics shall
be in addition to all of the restrictions, standards and provisions pertaining
to the conduct of Town officers and employees.
§ 19-3. Definitions.
As used in the Code of Ethics, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any office, board, body, advisory board, council, commission,
agency, department, district, administration, division, bureau or committee
of the Town of Amherst; and shall include but not be limited to the Town
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Traffic Safety Board,
Recreation Commission, Library Board of Trustees, Board of Ethics,
Government Study Committee, Youth Board, Board of Assessment Review,
Senior Citizens Advisory Board, Amherst Industrial Development Agency,
9/11 Commemoration Commission, Amherst Committee on Disabilities,
Amherst Community Diversity Council, Amherst Veterans Committee, Arts
and Culture in Public Places Board, Board of Electrician Examiners, Board
of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners, Citizens' Financial Advisory
Committee, Employee Suggestion Review Committee, Energy Conservation
Committee, FOIL Board, Glen Park Joint Board, Historic Preservation
Commission, Information Technology Advisory Committee, Minority/Woman
Owned Business in Amherst, Open Government Advisory Board, Recycling
and Waste Committee or an improvement district as provided by Article 12
of the Town Law.
APPEAR and APPEAR BEFORE — Communicating in whatever form,
whether personally or through another person.
BUSINESS DEALING — Having or providing any contract, service or work
with a municipality; buying, selling, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring
from or dispensing to a municipality any goods, services or property; or
applying for, petitioning, requesting or obtaining any approval, grant, loan,
license, permit or other privilege from the municipality.
DISCRETIONARY ACT — Any action involving the exercise of judgment
or discretion by a municipal officer or employee, either individually or as
a member of any agency, and includes but is not limited to negotiation,
approval, advice, recommendation, authorization or audit.
FAMILY MEMBER — A spouse, child, stepchild, brother, sister, parent,
half-child, brother/sister-in-law, parent-in-law or dependent of a municipal
officer or employee.
GOVERNING BODY — The Town Board of the Town of Amherst.
§ 19-2 AMHERST CODE § 19-3
1:58
MINISTERIAL ACT — An action performed in a prescribed manner without
the exercise of judgment or discretion as to the propriety of the act.
PAID TOWN OFFICER, EMPLOYEE OR OFFICIAL — Any Town officer,
employee or official who receives a salary from the Town or who is
compensated by the Town on a per-diem or hourly basis, but does not
include a Town officer, employee or official who is solely reimbursed by the
Town for expenses incurred in the course of his or her duties.
PARTICULAR MATTER — Any business dealing with the Town or any
application therefor or any case, proceeding, determination, investigation,
charge, accusation or arrest or any other matter involving a discretionary
act of a Town officer or employee, but does not include the proposal,
consideration or enactment of local laws, ordinances or regulations of
general application.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association, LLC, LLP and all other legal entities.
SPOUSE — A husband or wife from whom the Town officer or employee is
not legally separated.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, and includes all agencies thereof and
officers, employees and officials thereof.
TOWN CLERK — The Clerk of the Town of Amherst.
TOWN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — Any officer or employee of the Town
of Amherst, whether paid or unpaid, including public officials and all other
members of any agency in the Town of Amherst, but does not include the
Town Justices, officers or employees of the Unified Court System. Volunteer
firemen and civil defense volunteers shall not be deemed to be Town officers
or employees.
TOWN OFFICIAL — Any Town officer or employee who has the authority,
either alone or as a member of an agency/committee/board to perform
discretionary acts on behalf of the Town with respect to any business
dealing. "Town official" shall not include Town Justice and any Town officer
or employee who performs only ministerial acts and duties.
§ 19-4. General regulations.
A. No Town official or employee shall:
(1) Act as attorney, agent, broker, employee, consultant or
representative for any person in connection with any business
dealing that person has with the Town.
(2) Directly or indirectly, solicit any gift or accept or receive any gift or
series of gifts having an annual value of $75 or more, whether in
the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise or in any other form, under circumstances in
which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to
influence him or could reasonably be expected to influence him in
the performance of his official duties or was intended as a reward
§ 19-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:59
for any official action on his part. The foregoing limitation shall not
apply to campaign contributions not otherwise prohibited by law.
(3) Take or refrain from taking any action or agree to take or refrain
from taking any action or induce or attempt to induce any other
Town officer or employee to take or refrain from taking any action
on any matter before the Town in order to obtain a pecuniary or
material benefit for:
(a) Himself or herself;
(b) A family member;
(c) Any partnership, LLP or unincorporated association of which
the Town officer or employee or family member, is a member or
employee or in which he or she has a proprietary interest;
(d) Any corporation, LLC of which the Town officer or employee, or
family member is an officer or director or of which he or she
legally or beneficially owns or controls more than 5% of the
outstanding stock;
(e) Any person with whom the Town official, or his or her family
member, has an employment, professional, business or
financial relationship; or
(f) Any person from whom the Town officer or employee or his or
her spouse has received within any twelve-month period
during the previous 24 months a pecuniary or material benefit
having an aggregate value greater than $1,000, unless said
individuals make up less than 5% of a class of individuals
benefited.
(4) Appear before the agency/committee/board served by or which
employs such Town officer or employee except on behalf of the
Town or on his or her own behalf.
(5) Appear before the Town except on behalf of the Town or on his or
her own behalf. This subsection shall only apply to officers and
employees who are elected or who are paid by the Town.
(6) Appear as attorney or counsel against the interests of the Town in
any matter in which the Town is a party or a complainant.
(7) Solicit any nonelected officer or employee of the Town to
participate in an election campaign. This subsection shall not
prohibit an elected officer from soliciting such participation from
officers and employees who are appointed by and directly
subordinate to such elected officer and who serve in positions
which are in the exempt classification or the unclassified service
under the Civil Service Law.
§ 19-4 AMHERST CODE § 19-4
1:60
(8) Directly or through a person, campaign committee or other
organization authorized to act on his or her behalf solicit any
nonelected officer or employee of the Town to pay or promise to pay
any assessment, subscription or contribution to a political party,
political party organization or election campaign. This subsection
shall not prohibit a general solicitation of a class of persons.
(9) Directly or through a person or campaign committee or other
organization authorized to act on his or her behalf, solicit
participation in an election campaign or payment or promise of
payment of any assessment, subscription or contribution to a
political party, political party organization or election campaign
from any person who, to the knowledge of the municipal officer or
employee, has or, within the previous 12 months, has had any
business dealing with the municipality. This subsection shall not
prohibit a general solicitation of a class of persons.
(10) Directly or through a person or campaign committee or other
organization authorized to act on his or her behalf, utilize Town
property, the Town Seal, the Town Logo or stationery where the
header or footer states the person's employment as a Town of
Amherst employee, to solicit participation in an election campaign
or payment or promise of payment of any assessment, subscription
or contribution to a political party, political party organization or
election campaign.
(11) Except where such disclosure is authorized by law, disclose any
confidential information acquired in the course of his or her official
duties or use any such information to advance the financial or other
private interest of himself or herself or any other person.
(12) After termination of his or her term of office or employment with
the Town, appear before the Town or receive compensation for any
services rendered on behalf of any person other than the Town in
relation to any particular matter upon which he or she took any
discretionary act during his or her term of office or employment
with the Town.
B. No partnership, LLP, LLC or corporation or unincorporated association
of which a Town official is a member or employee or in which he or she
has a proprietary interest nor any corporation, LLC of which he or she
is an officer or director or legally or beneficially owns or controls more
than 5% of the outstanding stock shall appear before the agency served
by such Town official on behalf of any person other than the Town or
itself.
C. No partnership, LLP or unincorporated association of which a Town
official who is elected or paid by the Town is a member or employee or
in which he or she has a proprietary interest nor any corporation, LLC
of which he or she is an officer or director or of which he or she legally
or beneficially owns or controls more than 5% of the outstanding stock
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:61
§ 19-5. Transactional disclosure and recusal; definitions.
shall appear before the Town on behalf of any person other than the
Town or itself.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a Town officer or
employee or any other person from receiving a municipal service or
benefit or using a municipal facility which is generally available to
residents or a class of residents in the Town.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any Town officer
or employee listed in § 11 of the Domestic Relations Law from accepting
any gift or benefit having a value of $75 or less for the solemnization of
a marriage by that Town officer or employee at a place other than the
Town officer's or employee's normal place of business or at a time other
than the officer's or employee's normal hours of business and except as
may be otherwise restricted by law.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a Town officer or
employee from performing any ministerial act.
G. A person who knowingly violates any provision of this section may, in
addition to any penalty contained in any other provisions of law, be
dismissed, suspended or removed from office or employment in the
manner provided by law.
A. Whenever a Town official is requested or required to take any action on
a matter before the Town and, to his or her knowledge, either the
performance or nonperformance of that action would provide a
pecuniary or material benefit to himself or herself or to any related
person different from that which would be derived from the action by
reason of its general application to a broad class of persons deriving
such benefit, the Town official shall not participate in that matter unless
the official's recusal prohibits Town action, then said officer or
employee shall participate after full disclosure and reference to the
particular legislation otherwise prohibiting Town action. The Town
officer or employee also shall file promptly with his or her immediate
superior, if any, and with the Town Clerk a signed statement disclosing
the nature and extent of that interest.
B. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
RELATED PERSON —
(1) A family member.
Any corporation of which the municipal officer or employee is an
officer or director or of which he or she legally or beneficially owns
or controls more than 5% of the outstanding stock.
(2)
§ 19-4 AMHERST CODE § 19-5
1:62
§ 19-6. Disclosure statement.
Any person with whom the municipal officer or employee or his
or her family member has an employment, business or financial
relationship.
(3)
Any person from whom the municipal officer or employee or his or
her spouse has received within any twelve-month period during the
previous twenty-four (24) months a pecuniary or material benefit
having an aggregate value greater than $1,000.
(4)
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a Town officer or
employee from performing any ministerial act or to require a Town
officer or employee to file a disclosure statement pursuant to
Subsection A of this section prior to performing any ministerial act. The
award of a contract by an officer or employee pursuant to the public
bidding requirements of § 103 of the General Municipal Law shall be
deemed a ministerial act.
A. Long Form Disclosures: All elected Town officials, all department heads
and all Town Officials who are elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, who
are members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Youth
Board, Traffic Safety Board, Government Study Committee, Recreation
Commission, Board of Assessment Review Amherst Industrial
Development Agency, Board of Ethics, Board of Electrician Examiners,
Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners, Citizens' Financial
Advisory Committee, Energy Conservation Committee, FOIL Board,
Historic Preservation Commission and the Open Government Advisory
Board shall file with the Town Clerk, who for the purpose of this section
shall also be deemed the Secretary of the Board of Ethics as hereinafter
set forth, a signed, annual disclosure statement within thirty (30) days
of taking office and no later than April 30 of each year thereafter. Within
thirty (30) days of any change in the information contained in his or her
most recently filed statement, the public official shall file a signed
amendment to the statement indicating the change.
B. Information to be disclosed by all those Town officials defined in Section
19-6A shall be in the following form:
Annual Statement of Financial Disclosure
Town of Amherst
For Calendar Year _____
(1) Name:
Address:
Email Address:
If married, spouse's name:
(2) (a)Title of Town position:
(b)Department, agency or other governmental entity:
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6
1:63
(3) Do you receive any benefits, compensation or other
consideration that are derived directly or indirectly from your
employment or association with the Town of Amherst, other than
your remuneration from the Town?
Yes_____ No _____
If YES, please describe the nature, source of and amount such
benefits, compensation or other consideration.
Nature Source Amount
(4) List the address and SBL of all real property in which you, your
spouse or other family member of your household has an
ownership or other financial interest.
Name of Owner Address
(5) List the name and address of any partnership, unincorporated
association, corporation, business or employer of any sort of
which you or your spouse is a member, officer or employee or
from which you or your spouse derive income of any nature,
giving your position and/or your spouse's position, if any, with
such entity.
Self/Spouse Position Organization and
Address
(6) List the name and address of any corporation, partnership,
unincorporated association or business of which you or your
spouse legally or beneficially owns or controls more than 5% of
the issued and outstanding stock or other ownership rights.
Self/Spouse Organization and
Address
§ 19-6 AMHERST CODE § 19-6
1:64
§ 19-7. Civil penalty; penalties for offenses.
(7) State any self-employment, and the general nature thereof, from
which you or your spouse has derived gross income in excess of
$2,000 during the previous calendar year.
Self/Spouse General Nature
(8) If you are unable, after reasonable effort, to obtain any of the
information required herein, so state and explain.
Signature of Reporting
Individual
(month, day, year)
C. Short Form Disclosure. All Town officials who are appointed, paid or
unpaid, to any board of committee for who a long form disclosure is not
required shall file a Short Form Disclosure form containing the
following information:
(1) Name, Address, Email Address, Telephone Number (Both Home
and Cell) and if married, Spouse's name.
(2) Title of Position (Name of Board or Committee)
(3) I hereby certify that I have read Chapter 19 of the Town of Amherst
Town Code (Code of Ethics) and understand its restrictions upon
my activities. I further certify that I will follow these provisions.
Name & Date
A. Statement of financial disclosure.
(1) A reporting individual who knowingly and willfully fails to file an
annual statement of financial disclosure as provided shall be
presumed to have voluntarily withdrawn from membership on the
committee/board they were appointed to.
(2) A reporting individual who knowingly and willfully with intent to
deceive makes a false statement or gives information which such
individual knows or should have known to be false on such
statement of financial disclosure filed pursuant to this Chapter
shall be assessed a civil penalty in an amount not exceed Ten
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00). Assessment of a civil penalty
hereunder shall be made by the Town of Amherst Board of Ethics
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-7
1:65
following a hearing which follows the procedure set forth in the
rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Ethics.
(3) A reporting individual fails to file an amended financial disclosure
within thirty (30) days of any change in information contained in
his/her most recently filed financial disclosure statement shall be
presumed to have withdrawn from membership in the committee or
board that they were appointed to.
(4) For a violation of this subsection 2, the Town of Amherst Board of
Ethics may, in lieu of a civil penalty, refer said violation to the
District Attorney and, upon such conviction, but only after such
referral, such violation shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
other penalty, civil or criminal, may be imposed for failure to file or
for false filing of such statement, except that the appointing
authority may impose disciplinary actions as otherwise provided by
law.
B. For violations of the conflict of interest and transactional disclosure
provisions of this chapter, the Town of Amherst Board of Ethics shall
assess a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 or, in lieu
thereof, issue a public censure or private admonition. In addition, the
appointing authority may impose disciplinary action as otherwise
provided by law.
C. For violations of the Section 19-4(A)(10) the Town of Amherst Board of
Ethics shall assess a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed
$10,000.00 or, in lieu thereof, issue a public censure or private
admonition. In addition, the appointing authority may impose
disciplinary action as otherwise provided by law including removal from
office/employment. For a violation of Section 19-4(A)(10), the Town of
Amherst Board of Ethics may, in lieu of a civil penalty, refer a violation
to the District Attorney and upon such conviction but only after such
referral, such violation shall be punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
D. The Town of Amherst Board of Ethics shall adopt rules governing the
conduct of adjudicatory proceedings and appeals relating to the
assessment of civil penalties herein authorized. Such rules shall provide
for due process procedural mechanisms substantially similar to those
set forth in Article 3 of the State Administrative Procedures Act, but
such mechanisms may not be identical in terms or scope.
E. No reporting individual shall be subject to the sanction contained in
Subsections 1 or 2 for any offense that occurred more than two (2)
years before Notice is provided to that individual that he/she has
violated the provisions of the Ethics Code.
F. Assessment of a civil penalty shall be final unless modified, suspended
or vacated within thirty (30) days of imposition and, upon becoming
final, shall be subject to review at the instance of the affected reporting
§ 19-7 AMHERST CODE § 19-7
1:66
§ 19-8. Maintenance of disclosure statements.
Transitional disclosure statements and annual disclosure statements shall
be a matter of public record and shall be filed and indexed with the Town
Clerk. The Town Clerk shall retain such disclosure statements for a period
of not less than seven years from the date of filing.
§ 19-9. List of officials; notice and verification of filing.
§ 19-10. Board of Ethics.
individual in a proceeding commenced against the Town of Amherst
Board of Ethics pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
A. On or before the first day of April of each year the Town Supervisor,
together with the Town Clerk, shall:
(1) File with the Town Clerk a list of names and offices or positions of
all officials and employees required to file annual disclosures; and
(2) Notify all persons required to file annual disclosure forms and
request that the same be filed with the Town Clerk no later than
April 30th of each year. Said notifications are to be sent to the
person's current residence on file with the Town Clerk and also be
sent via email, if email is available.
B. On or before the 15th day of May of each and every year, the Board of
Ethics shall meet to ascertain and verify that every required individual
has filed the required disclosure statement.
C. Failure of the Supervisor and the Town Clerk to notify any or all
individuals required to file disclosure statements shall not relieve Town
officials or employees of their duty to file the disclosure statements.
A. A Board of Ethics is established and shall be known as the "Town of
Amherst Board of Ethics."
B. The Board of Ethics shall consist of five (5) members who shall serve
five (5) year terms of office, one such term expiring each year. Members
shall be appointed by the Supervisor, subject to confirmation by the
Town Board. If the Supervisor shall fail to appoint the members within
thirty (30) days after the establishment of the Board of Ethics or within
thirty (30) days after a vacancy occurs on the Board of Ethics, the Town
Board shall appoint such member or members as the case may be. Only
one (1) member of the Board shall be an officer or employee of the Town
of Amherst. In the event that a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of
the five (5) year term, such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of
such term in the same manner as members are appointed to full terms.
All members shall reside within the Town of Amherst. All members shall
serve without compensation except that any member who is a Town of
Amherst officer or employee shall be entitled to his usual compensation
§ 19-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-10
1:67
§ 19-11. Duty to report.
Every Town officer or employee shall report to the Erie County District
Attorney or the Town Attorney any action which may reasonably be
interpreted as an improper attempt to influence him in the conduct of his
office.
Chapter 22
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Town Clerk — See Ch. 9.
Defense and indemnification of
employees — See Ch. 14.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
§ 22-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Local Law Implementing the New York
State Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) in the Town of Amherst, New
York."
when attending upon the business of the Board during normal working
hours.
C. No more than two (2) members of the Board may be affiliated with the
same political party. No member of the Board of Ethics may hold an
officer's position in any political party except such person may be a
member of a county committee of a political party. For purposes of this
section, "political party" shall mean any political party which appears
on the ballot in the last biennial Town election. The members shall elect
a Chairman from among themselves and such other officers as may be
deemed necessary from time to time.
D. A Board of Ethics member may be removed by the Town Supervisor
with the approving consent of not fewer than four (4) members of the
Town Board after a finding of substantial neglect of duty, gross
misconduct in office, inability to discharge the powers or duties of the
office or violation of this chapter after written notice of the charges and
an opportunity for reply.
E. The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Board of Ethics. All documents
filed with the Town Clerk shall be deemed for the purposes of this
chapter to be filings with the Board of Ethics.
F. The Board of Ethics shall have all the powers and duties as prescribed
by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law. The Board of Ethics may
adopt and amend such rules or procedures as are appropriate.
§ 19-10 AMHERST CODE § 22-2
1:68
§ 22-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the New York State Freedom of
Information Law (FOIL) in the Town of Amherst.
§ 22-3. Legislative findings.
§ 22-4. Statutory authority; supersession of conflicting laws.
The authority of Article IX of the New York Constitution (home rule) and
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii)(d)(3) (supersession authority) is
hereby invoked. Pursuant to this authority, other laws are specifically
superseded by this chapter to the extent they vary or conflict with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Town Board or any Town department, board, bureau,
division, commission, committee, public authority, public corporation,
council, office or other governmental entity performing a governmental or
proprietary function for the Town of Amherst.
RECORD — Any information kept, held, filed, produced or reproduced by,
with or for any Town of Amherst agency in any physical form whatsoever
including, but not limited to, reports, statements, examinations,
A. The Amherst Town Board hereby finds that Town government best
serves the interests of its citizens when it is responsive and responsible
to the public, and makes the public aware of government actions. The
more open a government is with its citizens, the greater the
understanding and participation of the public in government.
B. As Town government services increase and public problems become
more sophisticated and complex, it is incumbent on the Town to extend
public accountability wherever and whenever feasible.
C. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making
and to have access to the records leading to determinations is basic to
the good and proper operation of Town government.
D. The Town Board declares that Town government is the public's business
and that the public, individually, and collectively represented by a free
news media, should have unimpaired access to records of Town
government as set forth herein.
E. The Town of Amherst will comply fully with the provisions of the New
York State Freedom of Information Law of 1974, as amended by
Chapter 933(3) of the Laws of 1977, and will seek to protect and
promote the public's right of access to Town government records.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5
1:69
memoranda, opinions, designs, drawings, maps, photos, letters, microfilms,
computer tapes or discs, rules, regulations or codes.
RECORDS ACCESS OFFICER — The Town Clerk and any person or persons
designated by the head of a Town agency or department, indicating the
name or specific job title and business address of said person or persons,
who shall have the duty of coordinating the agency response to public
requests for access to records. The Agency Record Access Officer shall
respond to FOIL requests for citizen committees or other bodies when
dealing with issues within the jurisdiction of such agency or department.
§ 22-6. Personnel records. [Amended 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 14-2018]
The Director of Human Resources shall compile an itemized record setting
forth the name, public office address, title and salary of every officer or
employee of each Town agency. Such records shall be made available for
inspection to any person upon submission of written notice. The records
may be inspected or copied under the supervision of a designated employee
of the Human Resources Department in the departmental offices during
regular working hours on regular working days or at such other place as
may be convenient to the Director of Human Resources. However, nothing
herein shall be construed to require the disclosure of the name of any Town
officer or employee, if such information would be otherwise exempt from
disclosure under § 22-9 hereof.
§ 22-7. List of agency records.
Each agency head shall maintain and shall make available for public
inspection and copying through a designated representative, in conformity
with such regulations as may be issued by the New York State Committee
on Open Government, a reasonably detailed current list by subject matter
of all records in its possession, whether or not the records are available
under this chapter or § 87, Subdivision 2, of the Public Officers Law. The
subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit identification
of the category of the record sought. This list shall be known as the
"departmental records list" of each agency. A copy of the list shall be filed
with the Town Clerk. The list is to be updated semiannually, and the date of
the most recent updating shall appear on the first page of the list.
§ 22-8. Records to be maintained and made available to public.
A. Each agency, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter, in addition to records it may be required to maintain and make
available pursuant to any other law, shall maintain and make available
for public inspection and copying all records, except that such agency
may deny access to records or portions thereof that:
(1) Are specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
statute;
§ 22-5 AMHERST CODE § 22-8
1:70
§ 22-9. Prevention of unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
(2) If disclosed would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy under the provisions of § 22-9B of this chapter;
(3) If disclosed would impair present or imminent contract awards or
collective bargaining negotiations;
(4) Are trade secrets or are maintained for the regulation of
commercial enterprise which, if disclosed, would cause substantial
injury to the competitive position of the subject enterprise;
(5) Are compiled for law enforcement purposes and which, if disclosed,
would:
(a) Interfere with law enforcement investigations or judicial
proceedings;
(b) Deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial
adjudication;
(c) Identify a confidential source or disclose confidential
information relating to a criminal investigation; or
(d) Reveal criminal investigative techniques or procedures, except
routine techniques and procedures.
(6) If disclosed would endanger the life or safety of any person;
(7) Are interagency or intra-agency materials which are not:
(a) Statistical or factual tabulations or data;
(b) Instructions to staff that affect the public; or
(c) Final agency policy or determinations; or
(8) Are examination questions or answers which are requested prior to
the final administration of such questions.
B. In addition to the requirements imposed by Subsection A hereof, each
agency shall maintain a record of the final vote of each member in every
agency proceeding in which the member votes.
A. To prevent an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, each agency
will observe guidelines for the deletion of identifying details from
specified records promulgated by the New York State Committee on
Open Government. In the absence of such guidelines, an agency may
delete identifying details when it makes records available.
B. An unwarranted invasion of personal privacy includes, but shall not be
limited to:
(1) Disclosure of employment, medical or credit histories or personal
references of applicants for employment;
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-9
1:71
§ 22-10. Procedure for examination or copying of records.
Procedure for the examination and copying of records will be in conformity
with such regulations as may be issued by the New York State Committee on
Open Government, but in the absence of a regulation relating to a specific
procedure by that body, the following regulations shall prevail:
(2) Disclosure of items involving the medical or personal records of a
client or patient in a medical facility;
(3) Disclosure of lists of names and addresses if such lists would be
used for commercial or fund-raising purposes;
(4) Disclosure of information of a personal nature when disclosure
would result in economic or personal hardship to the subject party
and such information is not relevant to the work of the agency
requesting or maintaining it; or
(5) Disclosure of information of a personal nature reported in
confidence to an agency and not relevant to the ordinary work of
such agency.
C. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, disclosure shall not be
construed to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy
pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section:
(1) When identifying details are deleted.
(2) When the person to whom a record pertains consents in writing to
disclosure.
(3) When upon presenting reasonable proof of identify, a person seeks
access to records pertaining to him.
A. The head of each Town agency or the governing body of such agency
shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the regulations
herein, and shall designate one or more persons as Records Access
Officer by name or by specific job title and business address, who shall
have the duty of coordinating agency response to public requests for
access to records. The designation of one or more Records Access
Officers shall not be construed to prohibit officials who have in the past
been authorized to make records or information available to the public
from continuing to do so.
B. The Records Access Officer is responsible for assuring that agency
personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list;
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary;
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection; or
§ 22-9 AMHERST CODE § 22-10
1:72
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain in
writing the reasons therefor;
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records;
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy; and
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The agency is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the agency is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
C. Any member of the public desiring to inspect or to obtain or make a
copy of any agency's records shall submit to the Records Access Officer
of that agency a request form prescribed by the Town Clerk, unless the
Records Access Officer waives the requirement of a written request.
The request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought. No records may be removed
by the requester from the office where the record is located without the
permission of a representative of the agency involved authorized by the
head of the agency to give such permission.
D. Records of an agency shall be made available for inspection or copying
or copies shall be furnished at the principal office of an agency, if one
exists, and if not, at a place designated by the Records Access Officer,
during regular business hours on regular working days. Records in
storage or at a location different from the principal office of an agency
shall be available for examination at those locations or at the principal
office of the agency, as determined by the Records Access Officer.
E. An agency shall respond to any request reasonably describing the
record or records sought within five business days of receipt of the
request. If the agency does not provide or deny access to the record
sought within five business days of receipt of a request, the agency shall
furnish a written acknowledgement of receipt of the request and a
statement of the approximate date when the request will be granted or
denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied within 15
business days after the date of acknowledgement of receipt of a
request, the request may be construed as a denial of access that may be
appealed. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any
agency to prepare any record not already possessed or maintained by
such agency, except the records specified in §§ 22-6, 22-7 and 22-8B of
this chapter.
§ 22-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-10
1:73
§ 22-11. Denial of access. [Amended 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 14-2018;
3-9-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
F. After locating the record, the Records Access Officer, before permitting
inspection, furnishing copies, or permitting copies to be made, may
delete any information which would constitute an unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy as set forth in § 22-9B of this chapter. [Amended
6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 14-2018]
G. Any copying desired to be done by the applicant shall be done at a place
specified or approved by the Records Access Officer and in the
presence of a person designated by the Records Access Officer.
H. If a record of which an agency is the legal custodian cannot be found
after a reasonable search therefor, the applicant shall be so advised,
and the Records Access Officer, if so requested orally by the applicant,
shall furnish the applicant with a certification that the record could not
be found.
I. Fees. Except when a different fee is otherwise prescribed by law.
[Amended 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 14-2018]
(1) There shall be no fee charged for the following:
(a) Inspection of records;
(b) Search for records; or
(c) Any certification pursuant to this section.
(2) An agency may provide copies of records without charging a fee; or
(3) An agency may charge a fee for copies of records, provided that:
(a) The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for
photocopies not exceeding nine inches by fourteen inches. This
section shall not be construed to mandate the raising of fees
where agencies in the past have charged less than $0.25 for
such copies.
(b) In agencies which do not have photocopying equipment, a
transcript of the requested records shall be made upon
request. Such transcripts may either be typed or handwritten.
In such cases, the person requesting records shall be charged
for the clerical time involved in making the transcript.
(c) The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsection I(3)(a)
and (b) shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost, which is
the average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed
costs of the agency, such as operator salaries.
§ 22-10 AMHERST CODE § 22-11
1:74
A. In the event the Records Access Officer denies access in whole or in
part to the record requested, the party denied the access requested
may appeal on a form prescribed by the Town Clerk.
B. Denial of access shall be reviewed by the Town Attorney's Office before
issuance and shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
person or body established to hear appeals, and that person or body
shall be identified by name, title, business address, and telephone
number.
C. If an agency fails to respond to a request within five (5) business days of
receipt of a request as required in § 22-10E hereof, such failure shall be
deemed a denial of access by the agency.
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within thirty (30) days
of a denial to the Town Attorney.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the Town Attorney or body
designated to hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of written
appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records;
(2) The records that were denied; and
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
F. The Town Attorney or his designee authorized to determine appeals
hereunder shall inform the appellant and the Committee on Open
Government of its determination in writing within ten (10) business
days of receipt of an appeal. In the event that the Town Attorney or his
designee designated to determine appeals shall deny access to the
record, he shall, as part of his written determination, fully explain to the
person requesting the record the reasons for further denial. Following
denial of the appeal, the party denied access to a record may, in writing,
request a further appeal to a board composed of a Town official
designated by the Town Supervisor, a Town official designated by the
Town Board and a third person selected by the other two within ten (10)
business days from receipt of the Town Attorney's denial of the appeal.
The third person shall not be a member or employee of any Town
agency. A decision on the appeal shall be made by the FOIL Board
within twenty (20) days from receipt of the appeal. The decision on the
appeal shall be made by majority vote. The reason(s) for any decision
shall be explained fully in writing which shall be sent to the requestor. A
copy of the final determination of the board shall also be sent to the
Committee on Open Government within twenty (20) days of receipt of
an appeal.
G. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection F of this section, shall be subject to court review, as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 22-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-12
1:75
§ 22-12. Public notice.
Each agency shall post in a conspicuous location in its principal office and in
any place where it maintains records and file with the Town Clerk a notice,
setting forth the following items:
§ 22-13. Notification to New York State Committee on Open
Government.
In addition to the information required to be transmitted to the New York
State Committee on Open Government under § 22-11F hereof, the Town
Attorney shall transmit to the aforementioned Committee, copies of all
appeals upon receipt thereof. Said official or board shall also forward to
the Committee the record upon review, including copies of any final judicial
determination, whenever any agency determination is reviewed pursuant to
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 22-14. Existing rights to records not affected.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or abridge any existing
right of access at law or in equity of any person to public records kept
by any agency of the Town. Notwithstanding any rights granted herein,
the members of the Town Board shall have a right independent of this
chapter to access in a reasonable manner and at a reasonable time to all
Town records in order to obtain information which may be appropriate
or essential to them in the proper and good faith discharge of their
responsibilities as Board members.
§ 22-15. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately.
A. The name, title, business address, business telephone number, or home
address and home telephone number, if there is no business address or
business telephone, of the designated Records Access Officer for that
agency;
B. Where and when public records will be made available for inspection
and copying, or in the case of agencies having no regular office or daily
regular business hours, the procedure by which a person may arrange
for an appointment to inspect and copy records, and the specified
procedure must include the name, position, address and telephone
number of the party to be contacted for the purpose of making an
appointment;
C. The right of appeal by any person denied access to a record for
whatever reason, and the name and business address of the person to
whom an appeal is to be directed.
§ 22-12 AMHERST CODE § 22-16
1:76
§ 22-16. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of other provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 25
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL INCENTIVE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax exemption for businesses — See Ch. 175,
Art. II.
Industrial and commercial tax
exemption — See Ch. 175, Art. V.
§ 25-1. Establishment; members.
An Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board for the Town of Amherst
consisting of five members is hereby established. The Town Board shall
appoint the members and designate one of them as Chairperson by
resolution.
§ 25-2. Reports.
The Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall, within a time to be
fixed by the Town Board, present a report and plan to the Town Board
concerning the following:
A. The various types of business real property which should be granted
eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad valorem levies
authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
B. Limiting the applicability of the exemption to specific divisions and
major groups as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual published by the United States Government.
C. Whether the exemption shall be computed in the manner specified in
Subdivision 2 or 12 of Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
D. Specific geographic areas of the Town within which the exemption
should be offered.
E. Reduction of the per centum of exemption otherwise allowed pursuant
to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
F. The minimum value of construction, alteration, installation or
improvement required to qualify for the exemption.
G. Other actions deemed desirable to improve the economic climate within
the Town.
§ 22-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2
1:77
§ 25-3. Considerations of Board.
In developing the plan and report to the Town Board, the Board shall
consider the planning objectives of the Town and the areas thereof within
which exemptions pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b shall be
offered, the necessity of the exemption to the attraction or retention of
business, the creation or retention of permanent private-sector jobs, the
need to allow the exemption to provide employment opportunities and
broaden the tax base and other factors the Board deems relevant.
Chapter 28
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ 28-1. Public hearing required; notice.
No local law shall be adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Amherst
until a public hearing has been held thereon before such Town Board not
less than three days nor more than 30 days after public notice has been
given of the time and place of the holding of such public hearing. The notice
shall be given by the Town Clerk by causing the same to be published once
in the official newspaper of the Town. The notice shall contain the title of
the proposed local law with its text verbatim or by reference, as hereinafter
provided, or a brief explanatory statement thereof.
§ 28-2. Publication following enactment.
Upon adoption of a local law by the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall cause
a notice thereof containing the text of the law verbatim or by reference, as
hereinafter provided, to be published in the official newspaper of the Town.
Proof of publication shall be filed by the Clerk in his office.
§ 28-3. Enactment by reference.
Local laws may be proposed and enacted by reference to all or parts
of model laws, codes, ordinances, regulations and rules or laws, codes,
ordinances, regulations and rules enacted or published by the Town of
Amherst, Erie County, New York State or the United States of America, or
their agencies or departments, or by any other person, organization or body.
The notice of hearing or adoption shall contain the title, publication date
and edition number of the law, code, ordinance, regulation or rule to which
reference is made. A copy of the material referred to shall be filed in the
Town Clerk's office.
H. Other factors as the Town Board may direct.
§ 25-2 AMHERST CODE § 28-4
1:78
§ 28-4. Numbering.
Each local law shall be numbered consecutively beginning with number one
for each calendar year.
§ 28-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 32
MINORITY AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS UTILIZATION
COMMITMENT
§ 32-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the "Town of Amherst MBE/WBE Utilization
Commitment Act."
§ 32-2. Intent.
The Town Board hereby finds, declares and determines that Town of
Amherst residents comprise a diverse workforce, consisting of many local
residents employed by businesses owned by minorities or women. The Town
Board further finds that the existing local policy concerning MBE/WBE
utilization has not been successful toward the goal of equality of opportunity
for minority-owned and women-owned businesses, as it relates to contracts
for the provision of goods and services to the Town of Amherst.
§ 32-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which performs a
commercially useful function, at least 51% of which is owned by minority
group members or, in the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51%
of all stock is owned by minority group members, with such ownership
certified by the Erie County Office of Equal Employment Opportunity or by a
state or federal agency. For the purposes of this definition, "minority group
members" are citizens of the United States who are African-American,
Hispanic-American, Asian-American, and Native American (American
Indian).
SUPPLIER — Any person, business, company, entity, or independent
contractor seeking to enter into contractual agreements with the Town
of Amherst or an entity acting as an agent for the Town of Amherst for
the provision of supplies, materials, equipment, insurance, professional,
technical or other consultant services, in accordance with the Town's
competitive procurement procedures, local, state and federal laws
governing such agreements.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:79
WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — A business which performs a
commercially useful function, at least 51% of which is owned by a woman or
women or, in the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51% of all stock
is owned by a woman or women, with such ownership certified by the Erie
County Office of Equal Employment Opportunity or so certified by a state or
federal agency.
§ 32-4. Provisions and conditions of bid specifications.
A. The following provisions shall be inserted in and made a condition of all
bid specifications prepared by the Town of Amherst or its agents as
follows:
(1) All public works contracts in excess of $100,000.00;
(2) All purchase contracts in excess of $50,000.00; and
(3) The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to any
contracts which are excepted or exempted from the bidding
requirements of New York State General Municipal Law § 103,
including emergency, "piggybacking" and professional contracts.
B. Minority- and women-owned business utilization commitment.
(1) The supplier of all which are subject to the requirements of this
Chapter, shall take reasonable steps to provide equal opportunity
to such firms and organizations to contract with the Town of
Amherst through the utilization of a bona fide minority business
enterprise (MBE) and women business enterprise (WBE) on all
contracts, including entering into subcontracts with MBE/WBE
firms. Reasonable action shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Utilizing a source list of MBEs and WBEs;
(b) Solicitation of bids, RFQs and RFPs from MBEs and WBEs;
(c) Providing MBEs and WBEs sufficient time to submit proposals
in response to solicitations;
(d) Maintaining records showing utilization of MBEs and/or WBEs
as well as the specific efforts taken to identify and utilize these
companies;
(e) A policy goal of awarding at least 10% of the total dollar value
of the Town's contribution to a contract to MBEs and/or WBEs
and at least 2% of the total dollar value of the Town's
contribution to regulations with respect to MBE and/or WBE
hiring, the prevailing percentage set forth therein, whichever
is higher, subject to a waiver as provided below; and
(f) Entering into subcontracts with MBE/WBE firms, if
appropriate and feasible, to effectuate the policy goal set forth
herein.
§ 32-3 AMHERST CODE § 32-4
1:80
§ 32-5. Waiver.
The Town Board, upon written request by the supplier and subject to the
authorization of the Town Board by resolution, may grant a complete or
partial waiver of the provisions of § 32-4B(1)(e) where the availability of
MBEs and/or WBEs in the market area of the contract is less than the 10%
MBE goal and the 2% WBE goal. However, the supplier must illustrate good
faith efforts in its attempts to reach the policy goals.
(2) All bidders or proposers on each contract subject to this chapter
shall submit to the Purchasing Department a list of all MBEs and
WBEs from which the supplier has solicited bids or proposals, or
with which the supplier has signed a binding contractual
agreement, or with which the contractor is presently negotiating
an agreement, for the purposes of meeting the MBE and WBE
utilization goals provided in Subsection B(1)(e) above.
A supplier's bid or proposal shall not be considered where the
supplier fails to submit a list of MBEs and WBEs as provided for
herein. A supplier's bid or proposal shall not be considered where
examination of said list of MBEs and WBEs evidences failure by the
supplier to comply with the requirements provided herein, except
that the Town Board may grant a complete or partial waiver of the
provisions of Subsection B(1)(e) herein, in accordance with § 32-5
of this chapter.
(3) As evidence of reasonable compliance with the policy goals set
forth in Subsection B(1)(e) above, the supplier shall submit to the
representative of the Purchasing Department at the time of the bid
a schedule for MBE and WBE participation, listing the MBEs and
WBEs which the supplier intends to utilize; specifying the agreedupon
price to be paid for such goods or services and identifying in
detail the contract intent or items to be supplied or performed by
each MBE and WBE. Contingent upon a contract award, a letter of
intent to enter into a purchase agreement, signed by both the
supplier and the MBE and/or WBE, indicating the agreed-upon
price and scope of work, shall be provided.
(4) As evidence of good faith efforts to obtain the goals set forth in
Subsection B(1)(e) above, the supplier shall provide to the Town of
Amherst Purchasing Department copies of all the subcontracts and/
or purchase agreements with the MBEs and WBEs within 15 days
of contract award.
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-5
1:81
Chapter 36
OPEN BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blasting and explosives — See Ch. 78.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Landscapers — See Ch. 130.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Recreation and open space — See Ch. 155.
Waste management — See Ch. 169, Art. I.
Trees — See Ch. 179.
§ 36-1. Title.
This Local Law shall be referred to as, "A Local Law Regulating Open
Burning."
§ 36-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Local Law shall be to protect and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Town of Amherst by prohibiting the
burning of garbage, rubbish and refuse and regulating open burning and
recreational fires.
§ 36-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Local Law, the following words, phrases and terms
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Approved Container — A properly maintained and utilized barbeque grill,
barbeque pit or outdoor fireplace that utilizes a spark-arresting screen and
a lid or wherein products of combustion pass through a stack or chimney
from an enclosed chamber.
Bonfire — An outdoor fire that has a horizontal dimension of more than
three (3) feet in length, width or diameter.
Garbage — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
Open Burning — The burning of materials outside of an Approved
Container wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the
ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed
chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudge pots and
similar devices associated with safety or occupational users typically
considered open flames.
Recreational Fire or Camp Fire — An outdoor fire burning materials
in an approved container or an open fire where the fuel being burned is
§ 32-5 AMHERST CODE § 36-3
1:82
contained within a horizontal dimension of less than three (3) feet in length,
width or diameter and two (2) feet or less in height for pleasure, religious,
ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes and excluding the burning
of material for the sake of disposal.
Refuse — Solid waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and any
parts thereof, agricultural waste, commercial waste, industrial waste,
construction and demolition debris.
Town — The Town of Amherst outside of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 36-4. Prohibited Burning.
Except as allowed in Section 36-5, no person shall burn, cause, suffer, allow
or permit the burning of any materials in an open fire.
§ 36-5. Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Camp Fires.
A. General. A person shall not kindle or maintain, or authorize to be
kindled or maintained, any outdoor fires or open burning unless
conducted and approved in accordance to this Chapter.
B. Burn Permits Required. Individual property owners shall be allowed to
conduct bonfires and to burn brush and tree limbs with the issuance of
a permit by the Town of Amherst's Commissioner of Building, who shall
consider the factors of fire safety, environmental pollution and
proximity of neighbors. Commercial burning of brush, wood and wood
products shall be allowed only upon approval of the Department of
Environmental Conservation of the State of New York and issuance of a
permit by the Town of Amherst Commissioner of Building. Practice
burns of brush, wood and structures by fire companies shall be allowed
upon the issuance of a permit by the Town of Amherst Commissioner of
Building.
C. A Recreational Fire or Camp Fire is exempt from the requirement of a
permit. Except for fires in an Approved Container, the fuel used in a
Recreational Fire or Camp Fire shall be seasoned wood (not freshly
cut).
D. Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than ninety
(90) feet from a residence, occupied building, housing unit, or mobile
home other than that of the owner or occupant on the same premises
that the open burning is occurring.
E. Attendance. Open burning, recreational fires and bonfires shall be
continuously attended until the fire is extinguished.
§ 36-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-6
1:83
§ 36-6. Penalties for Offenses.
A violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable
by a fine of not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 36-7. Enforcement.
The foregoing Law shall be enforced by any authorized police officer or
peace officer defined by the laws of the State of New York. In addition, any
code enforcement officer duly appointed by the Town Board of the Town of
Amherst may enforce this law.
Chapter 39
POLICE ASSISTANCE, POWER TO GRANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ 39-1. Delegation of authority.
The powers of the Supervisor of the Town of Amherst to request of or grant
to another local government police assistance are hereby delegated to the
Chief of Police.
§ 39-2. Definitions.
The definitions of "local government" and "Chief of Police" as used in this
chapter shall be those contained in § 209-m of the General Municipal Law.
§ 39-3. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon adoption and filing with the Secretary of
State as required by law.
Chapter 40
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minority- and women-owned business
utilization commitment — See Ch. 32.
§ 36-6 AMHERST CODE § 40-1
1:84
§ 40-1. Authority.
New York General Municipal Law § 103 allows the Town to authorize, by
local law, the award of certain purchase contracts, including contracts for
services, subject to competitive bidding under General Municipal Law § 103
on the basis of "best value" as defined in § 163 of the New York State
Finance Law. The "best value" option may be used, for example, if it is more
cost efficient over time to award the good or service to other than the lowest
responsible bidder if factors such as lower cost of maintenance, durability,
higher quality and longer product life can be documented.
§ 40-2. Award based on best value.
The Town of Amherst may make purchases, including purchases for
services, on the basis of "best value," as that term is defined in New York
State Finance Law § 163. The "best value" purchases shall be permitted
only through the use of a contract let by the United States of America or
any agency thereof, any state or political subdivision or district thereof,
as is recognized by Section 103 of the General Municipal Law. All other
purchases, whether for services or goods, must be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder.
§ 40-3. Procurement policy superseded where inconsistent.
Any inconsistent provision of the Town's procurement policy, as adopted
prior to the effective date of this chapter by resolution of the Town Board,
or as amended thereafter, shall be deemed superseded by the provisions of
this chapter.
Chapter 42
PROPERTY, LEASE OR SALE
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:85

ARTICLE I
Lease of Property by Town Board
[Adopted 7-21-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
§ 42-1. Maximum term established.
Pursuant to § 220, Subdivision 3, of the New York State Town Law, the
Town Board of the Town of Amherst is hereby authorized to enter into a
lease agreement in connection with any real property necessary for Town
purposes for an original term up to and not to exceed 25 years.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-1
1:87
Chapter 43
LICENSING OF PROPERTY MANAGERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lease or sale of property — See Ch. 42. Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
§ 43-1. Legislative Findings and Intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst hereby finds and declares that
the management and rental of residential properties constitutes a business
which impacts upon the public health, safety, general welfare, comfort,
peace and prosperity of the people of the Town of Amherst. The intent of
this Chapter is to regulate the management of residential rental properties
to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, comfort, peace and
prosperity of the people of the Town of Amherst by providing for a licensing
procedure for property managers who engage in the management of three
(3) or more residential units in the Town of Amherst.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building forming a
single habitable unit which may be occupied by a person for living, sleeping,
eating, working and access to sanitation facilities at all times.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT — The engaging on behalf of an owner of
residential property of those activities commonly associated with the
operation and rental of three (3) or more residential rental units, including
but not limited to the advertising or soliciting of apartments or rental units
for rent; tenant review and screening; the collecting and/or oversight of
rental profits; and/or the conducting of and/or arranging for minor repairs
and maintenance of residential properties in the Town of Amherst.
PROPERTY MANAGER — An individual or entity who engages in the
property management of three (3) or more residential rental units in the
Town of Amherst. The individual must reside in Erie, Niagara or Genesee
Counties or the entity must be based in Erie County. A residential property
occupied by its owner shall not be included in any calculation to determine
property manager status.
RESIDENTIAL — For the purposes of this section and only this section the
term "residential" shall refer to a property with any number of dwelling
units and is not limited to one- or two-unit properties. If a dwelling unit
is owner-occupied, that unit will not be included in the calculation to
determine property manager status. For example, if a property has three
(3) dwelling units and one unit is occupied by the owner of the property, a
§ 42-1 AMHERST CODE § 43-2
1:88
property manager is not required for the property. A residential unit shall
not include a facility which targets residents over the age of 55 or a senior
living facility.
§ 43-3. License Required.
No person, firm, corporation or entity shall act as a property manager
or engage in property management activities within the meanings of this
Chapter for three (3) or more non-owner-occupied, residential rental units
without first obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Building.
§ 43-4. Applications; Filing of Required Information.
§ 43-5. Referral of License Application.
A. Every applicant for a license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
submit the following information to the Building Department:
(1) The name, address, e-mail address (if applicable) and telephone
number of the individual or entity applying for the license. The
address provided shall be in Erie, Niagara or Genesee Counties.
(2) A description of all properties proposed to be managed by the
applicant, including the street addresses, owners and number of
units.
(3) Proof of liability and casualty insurance in amounts satisfactory to
the Building Department, if deemed necessary by the
Commissioner of Building or his/her designee.
(4) If an applicant will collect rents or negotiate rental of property, a
copy of his New York State real estate broker's license is required.
If an applicant is licensed as "Associate Real Estate Broker" or
"Real Estate Salesperson" a copy of the real estate broker's license
they work under is required. If an applicant is strictly performing
maintenance and no rents are collected or negotiating of rental
property is done, then a broker's license is not required.
(5) Other additional information as required by the Building
Commissioner.
B. The information required by this Chapter shall be filed and updated
annually with the Building Department.
A. All applications for licenses and renewals thereof shall be referred by
the Commissioner of Building to the Amherst Police Department for
approval. Upon receipt of said referral, the Amherst Police Department
shall promptly cause an investigation to be made into the criminal
background and professional fitness of the applicant and shall promptly
report to the Building Commissioner as to whether or not approval and
issuance of the license is recommended. If approval is not
recommended, such report shall state the reasons therefore.
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:89
§ 43-6. License Conditions.
§ 43-7. Expiration of License.
All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire annually on the
31st day of March unless otherwise approved by the Town Board. Each
new applicant for re-issuance or renewal shall be required to submit a new
application in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Chapter.
B. All applications for licenses and renewals shall also be forwarded to the
Planning Department, Building Department and Town Attorney for
review and comment. The relevant department shall have fourteen (14)
days to review and comment upon the application after its receipt
thereof, based on his/her familiarity with the applicant from past cases
they may have been involved in.
C. All new applications for a property manager license shall be referred to
the Town Board for approval.
A. If a property manager collects rents or negotiates the rental of property,
a real estate broker, associate real estate broker or real estate
salesperson license as issued by the New York State Department of
State pursuant to Article 12-A of the New York State Real Property Law
is required. As per Article 12-A of the New York State Real Property
Law, a property manager or property management company who
negotiates the rental of property or collects rents is required to be
licensed as a real estate broker, associate real estate broker or real
estate salesperson in the State of New York.
B. Upon approval of the license, a property manager must contact tenants
in all dwelling units managed by the property manager and provide
them with contact information as the property manager or property
management company. This must be completed within thirty (30) days
of approval.
C. If, subsequent to receiving a property management license, a property
manager acquires additional properties in the Town of Amherst, he/she
shall notify the Building Department, in writing, of the additional
properties he/she now manages. Said notification must occur within
forty-five (45) days of acquiring the additional properties.
D. If a property manager is found by the Town to be in violation of this
Chapter, or any section of the Town Code pertaining to his duties as a
property manager, the Town Board shall have the authority to summon
him/her to appear before it for review of his/her license.
E. The Town of Amherst may impose additional conditions upon any
license issued pursuant to this Chapter.
§ 43-5 AMHERST CODE § 43-8
1:90
§ 43-8. Inspections.
The Town of Amherst, its departments, and agents may inspect any property
managed by a licensee at any reasonable hour.
§ 43-9. Revocation of License.
A license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or suspended
for cause by the Building Commissioner after notice and a hearing. Any
violation of or failure to comply with any of the laws or ordinances
applicable to the management of residential properties, fair housing
complaints or tenants rights complaints shall be cause for revocation or
suspension. The Building Commissioner may consider such factors,
including, but not limited to, the property manager's conduct during the
license period, including relevant criminal or housing court actions and
dispositions, the nature and disposition of any notices of violation issued for
conduct at any of the properties included on said license and the nature
and frequency of complaints about the properties generated from, among
other sources, Police Department incident reports, 911 calls, complaints to
the Building Department, property inspection reports and other verifiable
information reported to the Town. The procedures for revocation or
suspension shall be as follows:
§ 43-10. Transferability of License.
Licenses issued hereunder are not transferable.
A. Whenever the Building Commissioner determines that a building or a
dwelling unit contained therein is in violation of the housing code, he/
she shall issue a notice of violation setting forth at a minimum:
(1) The location of the subject property;
(2) Specific violations of the housing code; and
(3) A reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for the correction
of any violations.
B. Such notice may contain any additional information as determined by
the Building Commissioner which may be necessary to achieve the
goals of this Chapter.
C. For purposes of this Chapter, the Building Commissioner, upon good
cause shown, may grant additional time to correct violations of the
housing code beyond thirty (30) days for sufficient cause as determined
by the Building Commissioner. Any such extensions shall be issued in
writing by the Building Commissioner stating the reasons for such
extension and otherwise in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
D. The notice of violation may be mailed by first class mail to the address
provided by the owner pursuant to § 43-4 of this Chapter.
§ 43-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-11
1:91
§ 43-11. Penalties for Offenses.
Any individual or entity engaging in activity in violation of this Chapter shall
be subjected to the penalties provided in § 83-1-5 and Chapter 83 of the
Town Code.
§ 43-12. Fees.
The fees for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be Seventy-Five
Dollars and Zero Cents ($75.00). Any individual or entity possessing proof of
a valid "Real Estate Broker," "Associate Real Estate Broker" or "Real Estate
Salesperson" license as issued by the New York State Department of State
pursuant to Article 12-A of the New York State Real Property Law shall be
exempt from having to pay the fee provided for in this Chapter upon the
presentation of said license to the Building Commissioner.
§ 43-13. Severability.
The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If any court of competent
jurisdiction decides that any section, clause, sentence, part, or provision
of this Chapter is illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect, impair, or invalidate any of the remaining sections, clauses,
sentences, parts, or provisions of the Chapter.
Chapter 44
RENTAL UNIT REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of property managers — See Ch. 43. Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
§ 44-1. Legislative findings and intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst hereby finds and declares that
the rental of dwelling units constitutes a business which impacts upon the
public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Town of
Amherst. The intent of this Chapter is to regulate the offering for rental
of dwelling units to protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the people of the Town of Amherst and to further achieve the following
beneficial purposes:
A. The protection of the character and stability of residential areas;
B. The correction and prevention of housing conditions that adversely
affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare
and health, including the physical, mental and social well-being of
persons occupying dwellings;
§ 43-11 AMHERST CODE § 44-1
1:92
§ 44-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Building or his/her designee.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building forming
a single habitable unit which may be occupied by a person for living or
sleeping.
HOUSING CODE — All state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations for the establishment and maintenance of housing standards.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the dwelling unit or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee or agent of the owner.
SHORT TERM RENTAL — The rental of a dwelling unit for a time period
between one and thirty days.
§ 44-3. Rental dwelling unit registration required; exemptions.
§ 44-4. Application for registration.
C. The enforcement of minimum standards for heating, plumbing,
adequate bathroom facilities and other recognized acceptable sanitary
living conditions necessary for health and safety;
D. The enforcement of minimum standards for light and ventilation
necessary for health and safety;
E. The enforcement of minimum standards for the maintenance of existing
residential buildings and the prevention of slum and blight conditions;
F. The preservation of the value of land and buildings throughout the
Town.
A. Registration required. No person shall allow to be occupied, or rent to
another for occupancy, any dwelling unit unless the owner has first
obtained either a short term rental dwelling unit registration certificate
or a rental dwelling unit registration certificate as hereafter provided.
B. Exemptions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to owneroccupied
properties containing two or fewer dwelling units; properties
subject to the Erie County PHA Consortium Section 8 Renters
Association; hotels; motels; properties located in MFR-4a, MFR-5,
MFR-6 and MFR-7; hospitals; nursing homes; assisted living facilities;
group homes or other dwelling units which offer or provide medical or
nursing services if such units are subject to state or federal licensing or
regulations concerning the safety of the users, patients or tenants.
A. Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Chapter, the
owner of each non-exempt rental dwelling unit existing on the effective
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-4
1:93
date of this Chapter shall make written application to the Commissioner
for a rental dwelling unit registration certificate. In addition, the owner
of each dwelling unit constructed after the effective date of this Chapter
shall make written application to the Commissioner for a rental
dwelling unit registration certificate as herein provided prior to initial
occupancy. Such application shall be made on a form furnished by the
Commissioner and shall set forth the following information, in addition
to other information required by the Commissioner from time to time
which may be necessary to administer, enforce, and insure compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter and the housing code:
(1) Name, principal residence address, principal business address and
telephone number, including cell phone number, of the owner.
(2) If the owner is an association, limited liability partnership, joint
tenancy, tenancy in common or tenancy by the entirety, then each
and every owner or general partner shall be indicated on the
application and register an address in accordance with Subsection
A(1) of this section.
(3) If the owner is a corporation or LLC, the principal place of business
of the corporation must be provided and the name, title and
residence address of all officers, managing or general agents must
be included.
(4) If the owner has designated an agent or management company,
then the name, principal residence address, principal business
address and telephone number, including all phone numbers of
such agent or management company must be included in addition
to that of the owner.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to properly register any
change of address, agent or any other information which occurs
after the filing of the application.
(6) For purposes of this section, a post office box shall not be accepted
as the owner's address. Further, the building intended to be
licensed shall not be accepted as the owner's address unless it is
the principal place of business or residence of the owner.
(7) The owner shall specify the address to which all notices of violation
issued pursuant to § 44-14 of this Chapter, and other violations of
the housing codes, and invoices for fees are to be forwarded.
(8) If the owner does not reside within the County of Erie (New York
State), the name address and telephone number of a contact/agent
who resides in the County of Erie; Niagara or Genesee must be
provided.
(9) If the property was constructed prior to 1978, the owner shall
certify that the owner is aware of the possibility of lead paint in the
property; that the owner is aware of federal disclosure
§ 44-4 AMHERST CODE § 44-4
1:94
§ 44-5. Issuance or denial of rental dwelling unit registration.
The Town of Amherst shall issue a short term rental dwelling unit certificate
or a rental dwelling unit certificate for such properties after satisfactory
completion of the Town's inspection. If upon completion of an inspection of a
building and dwelling units therein the Commissioner finds noncompliance
with the housing code, the Commissioner shall issue a notice of violation in
accordance with § 44-14 of this Chapter for the correction of any violations
of the housing code. Upon re-inspection, if the Commissioner finds
noncompliance with the notice of violation the Commissioner shall deny a
certificate or revoke any issued certificate in accordance with the procedure
set forth in § 44-14 of this Chapter. The Commissioner shall issue a written
statement setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation.
§ 44-6. Effect of denial or revocation.
requirements concerning property that may contain lead paint and
has complied with federal disclosure requirements; and that the
owner is familiar with the use of lead-safe methods during painting,
renovation, or repair of the property. Said certification will be made
available for completion on the Town of Amherst webpage and in
the Building Department at Town Hall.
(10) Properties may only be used for the purpose of short term rentals if
the Town has issued a short term rental certificate. Properties used
for the purpose of short term rentals shall be subject to an annual
inspection to determine compliance with the housing code.
B. Failure to provide any of the information required by sub-section A as
set forth above shall be grounds to deny a short term rental dwelling
unit registration certificate or a rental dwelling unit certificate.
A. Vacant units. When either a short term rental dwelling unit registration
certificate or rental unit registration certificate has been denied or
revoked, no further rental and occupancy of dwelling units then vacant
shall be permitted until a rental dwelling unit registration certificate
has been issued.
B. Occupied units. In addition to other penalties under this Chapter, when
a short term rental dwelling certificate or rental dwelling unit
registration certificate has been denied or revoked, the dwelling units
containing such violations shall be vacated after the Commissioner
provides notice to the owner and the occupants of the dwelling units
containing said violations. Such notice shall direct the owner and
occupants of the dwelling units containing such violations to vacate
within a period of time as determined by the Commissioner and may
provide a reasonable period for the owner or occupants an opportunity
to correct such violations. For the owner, such notice shall be mailed by
first class mail to the owner at the address provided by the owner
pursuant to § 44-4 of this Chapter or personally served upon the owner
by delivering the notice to the owner or by delivering the notice to a
§ 44-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:95
§ 44-7. Term of rental dwelling unit registration.
A rental dwelling unit registration issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
expire no later than three (3) years after the date of its issuance, unless
sooner revoked pursuant to § 44-14. A short term rental unit certificate
issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire one (1) year after its date of
issuance. Within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of a rental dwelling
unit registration certificate or a short term rental unit certificate, the owner
shall make written application for a rental dwelling unit registration
certificate in accordance with § 44-4 of this Chapter. In no event shall a
certificate be issued pursuant to this Chapter remain in effect more than
three (3) years after the date of its issuance unless further extended by the
Commissioner for sufficient cause.
person of suitable age and discretion at the owner's residence or place
of business. For the occupants, such notice shall be mailed to the
occupant at the dwelling unit or posted conspicuously at the occupant's
dwelling unit. Vacated dwelling units shall not be reoccupied until a
rental dwelling unit registration certificate has been issued.
C. Occupied units: immediate hazard. In addition to other penalties under
this Chapter, when a short term rental unit certificate or rental dwelling
unit registration certificate has been denied or revoked for reasons
which, in the determination of the Commissioner, present violations of
the housing code that create an immediate hazard to the health and
safety of the occupants, the dwelling units containing such violations
shall be vacated within the period of time determined by the
Commissioner. The Commissioner's determination shall be in writing
and shall direct the owner and occupants of the dwelling units
containing such violations to vacate the premises within a period of
time not to exceed thirty (30) days, as determined by the Commissioner.
The Commissioner's determination shall be mailed by first-class mail to
the owner at the address provided by the owner pursuant to § 44-4 of
this Chapter or personally served upon the owner by delivering the
notice to the owner or by delivering the notice to a person of suitable
age and discretion at the owner's residence or place of business. The
Commissioner's determination shall also be posted at the subject
building and, to the extent possible, it shall also be posted
conspicuously at each dwelling unit. Vacated dwelling units shall not be
reoccupied until a rental dwelling unit registration certificate has been
issued.
D. The notices provided under this section shall not be used to institute, or
deemed to establish sufficient grounds for, a summary eviction
proceeding under the Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law.
E. Failure to comply with the inspection requirement shall result in denial
or in the immediate revocation of the rental dwelling unit certificate.
F. The terms and conditions of this section shall apply to holders of short
term rental dwelling unit certificates.
§ 44-6 AMHERST CODE § 44-8
1:96
§ 44-8. Transfer of rental dwelling unit registration.
The terms and conditions of this section shall also apply to holders of short
term rental dwelling unit certificates. A rental dwelling unit registration
issued pursuant to this Chapter is transferable to any person who has
acquired ownership of a registered building for the unexpired portion of
the term for which it was issued, provided that an application to transfer
such certificate is filed with the Commissioner within thirty (30) days of title
transfer, the information required by § 44-4 is provided and the dwelling
units therein are in compliance with the housing code.
§ 44-9. Revocation of rental dwelling unit registration certificate.
§ 44-10. Duties of certificate holder.
The terms and conditions of this section shall also apply to holders of short
term rental dwelling unit certificates. Every holder of a rental dwelling unit
registration certificate shall:
A. The terms and conditions of this section shall also apply to holders of
short term rental dwelling unit certificates. A rental dwelling unit
registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked
by the Commissioner for any one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement as to a material fact
in the application.
(2) A finding that a rental dwelling unit registration was issued in error
and not in accordance with applicable law.
(3) A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, including
noncompliance with a notice of violation issued pursuant to
§ 44-14.
(4) The Commissioner, or his/her designated representative,
determines that the rental dwelling unit does not substantially
conform with this chapter or the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
B. Prior to such revocation, the Commissioner shall hold a hearing, after at
least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing provided
to the owner. The Commissioner shall issue a written statement setting
forth the reasons for his/her decision.
A. Conspicuously post the certificate in a protected mounting in the public
corridor, hallway or lobby of the building for which the certificate was
issued. This posting shall be in a common entrance. If no common
entrance exists, then posting shall be made at the entrance of each
dwelling unit. In the alternative to such posting, the license shall be
produced by the owner at the request of a tenant, a prospective tenant
or upon demand of the Commissioner.
§ 44-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-10
1:97
§ 44-11. Review of fee schedule.
The Commissioner shall annually review the fee schedule set by § 44-20 and
recommend changes as he/she deems appropriate to the Town Board.
§ 44-12. Penalties for offenses.
B. Conform with all other applicable state, county and Town laws and
ordinances on matters not specifically addressed in this Chapter.
C. The rental agreement or lease for a dwelling unit regulated under this
Chapter must include a disclosure of the smoking policy for the
premises on which the dwelling is located. The disclosure must state
whether smoking is prohibited on the premises, allowed on the entire
premises or allowed in limited areas on the premises. If the smoking
policy allows smoking in limited areas on the premises, the disclosure
must identify the areas on the premises where smoking is allowed.
A. Any violation of this Chapter by a person, firm, corporation or other
entity shall be a violation punishable in accordance with the general
penalty provisions under § 83-1-5 of the Town Code of the Town of
Amherst, with said penalties to be in addition to the revocation of a
rental dwelling unit registration certificate issued under the provisions
of this Chapter. In addition, the annual registration fee will double
thirty (30) days after the due date has passed and a second invoice for
payment has been sent first-class mail to the owner. In addition, a
summons will be issued sixty (60) days after the due date has passed
and a fine in the amount of Seventy-Five Dollars and Zero Cents
($75.00) will be imposed in addition to all outstanding registration fees
and late charges. Furthermore, a notice to vacate may be issued and all
tenants removed for failure to register a dwelling unit thirty (30) days
after the due date has passed and after notice to the owner and
occupants by the Commissioner.
B. Notwithstanding the lack of a specific reference thereto, failure to
comply with any section, provision or requirement of this Chapter or of
the Town Code or of any other State or federal law, code or ordinance
shall be a violation and shall be punishable by a fine or penalty of not
more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars and Zero Cents
($1500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, for each such offense and any
other applicable state statutes. This Chapter is a part of the Town's
health, safety, housing, building, fire prevention and housing codes, and
a violation thereof shall be deemed to be a violation for purposes of
state statutes allowing escrow of rent to remedy violations. Any charges
involving violations of this Chapter may be brought before the Amherst
Town Court.
C. Lead-based paint violations are subject to fines pursuant to § 83-1-5 of
the Town Code of the Town of Amherst, Schedule of fines and penalties.
In addition, upon a finding of existing lead-based paint violations, the
§ 44-10 AMHERST CODE § 44-12
1:98
§ 44-13. Enforcement inspection criteria and authority.
§ 44-14. Notice of violation.
owner of the affected property must remediate said violation.
Remediation is complete when a licensed lead inspector provides a
letter of compliance for said property, or when a licensed lead risk
assessor provides a one (1) year letter of interim control for the
property. Letters of interim control are valid for one (1) year and may be
renewed only once. In addition, the Commissioner or his/her designee,
may determine that a lead-based paint violation is in compliance.
Failure to remediate may result in the revocation of the property's
rental registration certificate.
A. Upon the rental dwelling unit being registered, the owner of the rental
dwelling unit consents to the inspection of the dwelling unit by the
Commissioner or his/her designated representative. The Commissioner,
or his/her designated representative, may make an inspection of the
rental dwelling unit to determine whether or not such rental dwelling
unit is in substantial compliance with this chapter and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. At the conclusion of
said inspection, the Commissioner, or his/her designated
representative, shall provide the owner, or the owner's representative,
at the inspection with a copy of the results of the inspection.
(1) For properties constructed prior to 1978, the owner of the rental
dwelling unit consents to the inspection of the dwelling unit for
lead violations or hazards. Upon testing of paint in the property,
any owner found to have a property with existing lead-based paint
violations must remediate the violation according to provisions set
forth in this chapter. Where violations or hazard are present, the
rental dwelling unit registration certificate holder must submit
proof of completion of a local EPA Accredited Renovation, Repair
and Painting Training Program in the time allotted by the Building
Department.
B. If the results of the inspection conducted pursuant to § 44-13A above
demonstrate that the dwelling unit is in substantial compliance with
this Chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the owner of the dwelling unit shall be entitled to retain
his/her her rental dwelling unit registration certificate.
A. Whenever the Commissioner determines that a building or a dwelling
unit contained therein is in violation of the housing code, he/she shall
issue a notice of violation setting forth at a minimum:
(1) The location of the subject property;
(2) Specific violations of the Town Code; and
§ 44-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-14
1:99
§ 44-15. Tenant accountability.
(3) A reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for the correction
of any violations.
B. Such notice may contain any additional information as determined by
the Commissioner which may be necessary to achieve the goals of this
Chapter.
C. For purposes of this Chapter, the Commissioner, upon good cause
shown, may grant additional time to correct violations of the housing
code beyond thirty (30) days for sufficient cause as determined by the
Commissioner. Any such extensions shall be issued in writing by the
Commissioner stating the reasons for such extension and otherwise in
accordance with the requirements of this Section.
D. The notice of violation may be mailed by first class mail to the address
provided by the owner pursuant to § 44-4 of this Chapter.
E. The terms and conditions of this section shall also apply to holders of
short term rental dwelling unit certificates.
A. The terms and conditions of this section shall also apply to holders of
short term rental dwelling unit certificates. With respect to the dwelling
unit which the tenant occupies, controls or uses, the tenant shall be
responsible for the following:
(1) Occupancy limitations and the lawful use of a dwelling unit.
(2) Maintenance of the dwelling unit in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition.
(3) Maintenance of plumbing, cooking and refrigeration equipment,
appliances, fixtures and facilities contained in the dwelling unit in a
clean and sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the
operation and use thereof.
(4) Keeping exits in the dwelling unit free and clear.
(5) Disposing of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a
sanitary manner and keeping the dwelling unit free and clear from
garbage, refuse and debris.
(6) Keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
B. To the extent that the owner can provide the Commissioner with
competent evidence that tenants have not complied with the above
standards or that the tenants have contributed to the existence of
housing code violations at the property, the Commissioner may deem
such circumstances to be sufficient cause to extend time for the
correction of the violations pursuant to § 44-14 of this Chapter.
§ 44-14 AMHERST CODE § 44-16
1:100
§ 44-16. Appeals.
A. Any person affected by any notice or order which has been issued under
any provision of this Chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of a written
petition from such person, which petition shall contain a brief
statement of the grounds therefor, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold a hearing, at which time such person shall be given an opportunity
to show why such notice or order should be modified or withdrawn. No
such hearing shall be required unless the petition therefor shall have
been filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within five (5) days after
the date the notice or order was issued. On receipt of such petition, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than the next scheduled meeting of the Zoning
Board of Appeals date after which the petition was filed. After such
hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals may sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice or order complained of by the petitioner, depending upon his
finding as to whether the provisions of this Chapter and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. After
any such hearing, in the case of any notice or order suspending any
permit required by this Chapter, when such notice or order has been
sustained by the Zoning Board of Appeals, such suspended permit shall
be deemed to have been revoked. The proceedings at such hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals,
shall be reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record
with the Town Clerk. Such record shall also include a copy of every
notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal
therefrom to any court of competent jurisdiction under the procedures
provided by the laws of this State.
B. No provision or requirement herein contained for a hearing shall in any
way whatsoever affect or impair the right of the Commissioner to at any
time bring such legal proceedings, actions or prosecutions as otherwise
or elsewhere are permitted by law or ordinance.
C. Whenever the Commissioner finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he/she may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this Chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but,
upon written petition to the Commissioner, shall be afforded a hearing
as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his/her finding
as to whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the
Commissioner shall continue such order in effect or modify or revoke it.
§ 44-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-17
1:101
§ 44-17. Severability.
If a term, part or provision, section, subdivision or paragraph of this
Chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, in whole or in
part, such determination shall not be deemed to affect, impair or invalidate
the remaining terms, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions and
paragraphs.
§ 44-18. Commissioner's regulations.
The Commissioner is authorized to promulgate regulations consistent with
the provisions of this Chapter in order to carry out the objectives of this
legislation.
§ 44-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The provisions of this Chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to and
do not supersede or preempt other remedies or provisions of the town,
state, or federal laws and housing codes as may apply.
§ 44-20. Fees.
A. Certificate issuance. There is no fee at the time of application, for the
issuance of a rental dwelling unit registration certificate. The certificate
shall be valid for three (3) years. Upon application, the owner shall
schedule the property for an inspection at which point a fee of seventyfive
dollars ($75) per rental unit shall be paid.
B. Short term rental dwelling unit certificate fees. All owners engaged in
short term rentals where the property is owner occupied, shall pay an
annual fee of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per unit. The owner
of a property engaged in short term rentals where the property is not
owner occupied shall pay an annual fee of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) per unit.
Renewal fee. The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall pay an annual
renewal fee of Seventy Five Dollars and Zero Cents ($75.00) per rental
unit. The owner remains obligated to pay such fee during ownership
of the rental dwelling unit and shall pay any delinquencies therein
before transferring all or any part of the ownership of said unit.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a new owner making application for a
certificate is obligated, and shall be required, to pay all such current
and delinquent annual fees with the application. All funds generated
from the Rental Dwelling Unit Registration Ordinance shall be placed
in a designated account. The use of these funds shall be solely for
the hiring of an additional staff person and/or necessary equipment
for the Rental Dwelling Unit Registration Program in the Building
Department.
§ 44-17 AMHERST CODE § 44-20
1:102
Chapter 45
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Clerk — See Ch. 9.
Superintendent of Highways — See Ch. 52.
Supervisor — See Ch. 54.
§ 45-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Residency Requirements."
§ 45-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
RESIDENCE — Domicile.
RESIDENT — Domiciliary.
TOWN SERVICE — Service as an employee of the Town of Amherst or of
any agency thereof other than service exempted from municipal residence
requirements pursuant to the Public Officers Law or any other state law.
§ 45-3. Employees to be Town residents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 45-4, any person who enters Town service
on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be a resident of the Town
on the date that the employee enters Town service and shall thereafter
maintain residence in the Town as a condition of employment. Any employee
who, on the effective date of this chapter, does not maintain his or her
residence within the corporate limits of the Town of Amherst shall, within
six months from the effective date of this chapter, establish residence
within the corporate limits of the Town of Amherst and shall thereafter
C. No fee for new buildings. There shall be no fee charged for the issuance
of a rental dwelling unit registration certificate for new dwellings at the
completion of their construction covered by a building permit.
D. Inspection fees. Every property owner shall pay a fee of Seventy-Five
Dollars and Zero Cents ($75.00), to be assessed against the property,
for each inspection after the second inspection in which violations of a
state or local building code are found, unless such fee is waived by the
Commissioner. Inspectors shall assess the fee, after consultation with
the Commissioner, when, in the evaluation of the inspector, the status of
the violation has not progressed or been satisfactorily completed. The
fee shall not be applicable to inspections ordered after the
commencement of a court action.
§ 44-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-3
1:103
maintain residence within the Town as a condition of employment. Failure
to establish or maintain Town residence as required by this section shall
constitute a forfeiture of employment; provided, however, that prior to
dismissal for failure to establish or maintain Town residence, an employee
shall be given notice of and the opportunity to contest the charge that his
or her residence is outside the Town.
§ 45-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
Chapter 52
SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS
A. To elected officials or other employees whose residence requirements
are otherwise established by law; or
B. To any employee who is a member of a collective bargaining unit that
has a valid collective bargaining agreement with the Town of Amherst,
the terms of which govern the residency requirements of the members
of that collective bargaining unit. At all times, however, an employee
who is a member of that collective bargaining unit must maintain
residence as required by the collective bargaining agreement or be
subject to discipline as provided in the collective bargaining
agreement; or
C. Where the Town Board, after investigation, determines that
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter work an undue hardship
upon any employee. Upon the adoption of a resolution providing
therefor, the Town Board may grant such relief to the employee as the
Board deems just and proper. The fact that an employee who maintains
residence outside the Town on the effective date of this chapter will be
required to establish residence in the Town within six months in order
to comply with this law does not constitute undue hardship for purposes
of this subsection; or
D. To any employee whose regular worksite for the Town is outside the
Town; or
E. To any employee during a leave of absence duly granted; or
F. Where the Town Board, after investigation, determines that there is
difficulty in the recruitment of personnel for a position and that to
restrict recruitment of personnel to Town residents would not be in the
public interest. The Town Board shall adopt an appropriate resolution
establishing the public interest involved and the position or positions to
which such waiver of the residency requirements shall apply and the
time frame within which such waiver shall apply.
§ 45-3 AMHERST CODE § 52-1
1:104
§ 52-1. Term of office.
The term of office of the Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town of
Amherst shall be four years.
§ 52-2. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect the first day of January 1984.
Chapter 54
SUPERVISOR
§ 54-1. Term of office.
The term of office of the Supervisor of the Town of Amherst shall be four
years.
§ 54-2. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect the first day of January 1982.
Chapter 55
TERM LIMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 45.
Supervisor — See Ch. 54.
§ 55-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Term Limits Law."
§ 55-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst to expand
participation in the electoral process and to bring new ideas to governance
of the Town of Amherst. To these ends, the Town Board of the Town of
Amherst adopts this chapter to limit terms of office for elected officials in
the Town of Amherst.
§ 55-3. Term limits established.
No elective public officer of the Town of Amherst shall have more than two
consecutive terms of four years each in the same public office. For purposes
of this chapter, "same public office" shall mean any and all public offices
that are the same as the office that the elective public officer last held. Any
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:105
terms of office held prior to the November 6, 2007, general election shall
not be counted for term limitation purposes.
§ 55-4. Partial term of office.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an elective public officer in the
Town of Amherst from holding either an elective or appointive partial term
in the same elective public office, immediately prior to election to that
elective public office for a full term. In that event, the partial term shall not
be counted for purposes of the term limitation imposed by this chapter.
§ 55-5. Other elective office.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit an elective public officer
from seeking, being elected to, or holding another and different elective
public office in the Town of Amherst at the conclusion of a term of public
office as required by this chapter.
§ 55-6. Exclusion.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to the office of Town Justice of
the Town of Amherst.
§ 55-7. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a) of the Municipal Home
Rule Law of the State of New York which authorizes towns to adopt local
laws concerning the mode of selection and terms of office of elected
officials.
Chapter 56
TAX BILL ENCLOSURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 175.
§ 56-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Tax Bill Enclosures Local Law."
§ 56-2. Legislative findings; intent; purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst find that § 1826 of the Tax Law
of the State of New York generally forbids a municipality from mailing
or delivering with tax bills any notice, circular, pamphlet, card, or other
printed material unless the insertion of such material is authorized by law.
However, in no case, by local law or practice, may a municipality include
§ 55-3 AMHERST CODE § 56-2
1:106
with the tax bill material that is advertising, political or propaganda. The
Town Board wishes to take advantage of the ability to reach the many
residents of the Town that is afforded by inserting notices in the tax bill but
also wants to do so in a manner that does not violate the prohibitions of
§ 1826 of the Tax Law. To that end, the Town Board adopts this chapter.
§ 56-3. Statutory authority.
This local law is adopted pursuant to the power granted to towns to adopt
local laws by § 10(a)(xii) and § 22 of the Municipal Home Rule Law to
authorize the Town to include appropriate notices in mailings with tax bills.
§ 56-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INSERTION — A notice, circular, pamphlet, card, handbill, or other
enclosure concerning a matter of public concern, but excluding any and
all matter that is of a political nature, is propaganda, or is any type of
advertising.
TAX BILLS — An annual tax bill of the Town of Amherst or any special
district thereof, or notification of a tax to be levied or assessed by the Town
of Amherst, or any special district thereof, or any receipt from the payment
of any tax or levy, but excluding the school tax bill of any school district
located partly or wholly within the Town of Amherst.
§ 56-5. Requirements for insertions.
Insertions shall be included with tax bill of the Town of Amherst only if:
A. The insertion has been authorized by a resolution of the Town Board
passed by a two-thirds majority thereof.
B. Any proposed insertion must be on the desks of the Town Board
members in final form at least five days prior to adoption of the
resolution authorizing its insertion with the tax bill.
C. The insertion shall include upon it a notation that it is included with the
tax bill "by order of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst."
D. The insertion may mention elected officials of the Town by office but no
elected official shall be mentioned by name.
E. Each insertion shall be approved by a separate resolution.
F. The resolution authorizing the insertion shall identify a source of
funding for printing of a suitable number of insertions as well as
funding for folding and placing the insertions in the envelope with the
tax bill and to pay for any additional postage required as a result of the
insertion.
§ 56-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-6
1:107
§ 56-6. Severability.
If any section, clause, or provision of this chapter or its application to any
person is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other sections,
clauses, provisions, or the application thereof that can be sustained or given
effect without the invalid section, clause, provision, or application, and to
this end the various sections, clauses, or provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
Chapter 56A
TOWN BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Compensation of elected officials — See Ch.
10.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
Supervisor — See Ch. 54.
Term limits — See Ch. 55.
§ 56A-1. Purpose; word usage.
The purpose of this Local Law is to decrease the number of Town
Councilmen from six to four, under the authority of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Pursuant to New York State Town Law §20-5-a, the terms
“Councilman” and “Councilmen” whenever used in this Local Law shall
include persons of both the male and female gender.
§ 56A-2. Number of Councilmen.
The number of Town Councilmen shall be decreased from six to four, as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 56A-3. Election of Councilmen.
A. The Councilman position which is vacant on the date that the Town
Board adopts this local law shall be eliminated effective January 1,
2011.
B. For the biennial town election to be held in November 2011, and
thereafter, two Councilmen shall be elected for a term of four years
each.
C. One Councilman position shall be eliminated effective January 1, 2014.
In the event that a Councilman position that was elected at the biennial
town election on November 3, 2009 becomes vacant, at any time prior
to January 1, 2014 that position shall be immediately eliminated and no
additional position will be eliminated.
§ 56-6 AMHERST CODE § 56A-3
1:108
§ 56A-4. Authority.
This Local Law is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to towns by
Section 10(1)(ii)(a)(1) and (d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law to adopt
legislation concerning the number of its officers and its property, affairs and
government. To the extent that this Local Law is inconsistent with Sections
20, 24, 24-a, 64 and 81 of the Town Law of the State of New York, these
Sections are superseded by this Local Law.
§ 56A-5. Effective Date.
This Local Law shall take effect upon the affirmative vote of a majority
of qualified electors voting thereon at the General Election to be held on
November 2, 2010, and upon filing in the Office of the Secretary of State of
New York in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Law and the Code
of the Town of Amherst.
Chapter 57
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 57-1. Authorization to establish.
The Justice Court of the Town of Amherst is hereby authorized to establish
a Traffic Violations Bureau in accordance with Article 14-B of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 57-2. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 10 days after publication and posting,
as required by law.
D. For the biennial town election to be held in November 2013, and
thereafter, two Councilmen shall be elected for terms of four years
each.
§ 56A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:109
Chapter 58
ADJUDICATORY PROCEEDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Defense and indemnification of
employees — See Ch. 14.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 19.
§ 58-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be called entitled "Town of Amherst Adjudicatory
Proceedings."
§ 58-2. Intent.
The purpose of this Local Law is to establish rules and procedures to be
utilized in all disciplinary proceedings brought against members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board and the Amherst Traffic Safety
Board (ATSB).
§ 58-3. Purpose.
This Chapter is enacted to provide for a procedure consistent with due
process to remove members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning
Board or the ATSB for cause.
§ 58-4. Hearings.
1. Any action taken to discipline or remove members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals, the Planning Department or the ATSB shall be prosecuted
by the Town Attorney and his/her designee.
2. In an adjudicatory proceeding, all parties shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within a reasonable time of the charges being
lodged against them.
3. All parties shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing. The notice
shall include: (a) a statement of the time, place and nature of the
hearing; (b) a statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under
which the hearing is to be held; (c) a reference to the particular
sections of the statutes, ordinances, local laws and rules involved,
where possible; and (d) a short and plain statement of matters asserted
will constitute just cause for the proceeding.
4. All parties should be afforded an opportunity to present written
argument on issues of law and an opportunity to present evidence and
argument on issues of fact. Nothing contained herein shall be
§ 57-2 AMHERST CODE § 58-4
1:110
§ 58-5. Record of Proceedings.
constructed to prohibit the Town Board from allowing parties to present
oral argument within a reasonable time. In fixing the time and place
for the hearings and oral argument, due regard shall be had for the
convenience of the parties.
5. Unless precluded by a statute, disposition may be made of any
adjudicatory proceeding by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent
order, default or other informal method.
1. The record in an adjudicatory proceeding shall include:
(a) all notices, pleadings, motions, intermediate rulings;
(b) a transcript of all proceedings which shall reflect the following:
(i) evidence presented;
(ii) a statement of matters officially noticed except matters so
obvious that a statement of them would serve no purpose;
(iii) questions and offers of proof, objections thereto, and rulings
thereon;
(c) proposed findings and exceptions, if any;
(d) any findings of fact, conclusions of law or other recommendations
made by the presiding officer; and
(e) any decision, determination, opinion, order or report rendered.
2. The Town Board shall make a complete record of all the adjudicatory
proceedings conducted before it. For this purpose, unless otherwise
required by statute, the Town Board may use whatever means it deems
appropriate, including to but not limited to the use of stenographic
transcriptions or electronic recording devices. Upon request made by
any party upon the Town Board, within a reasonable time, but prior to
the time for commencement of judicial review, of its giving notice of its
decisions, determination, opinion or order, shall prepare the record
together with any transcript of proceedings within a reasonable time
and shall furnish a copy of the record and transcript or any part thereof
to any party who requests the same. Except when any statute provides
otherwise, the Town Board is authorized to charge not more than its
cost for the preparation and furnishing of such record or transcript or
any part thereof or at the rate specified in the contract between the
Town Board and a contractor if prepared by a private contractor.
3. Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on
matters officially noticed.
§ 58-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-6
1:111
§ 58-6. Presiding Officers.
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the Town Board members shall be
presiding officers. Hearings shall be conducted in an impartial manner and
shall be chaired by the Town Supervisor, or if he/she is unable to act, the
Deputy Town Supervisor. Upon the filing in good faith by a party of a timely
and sufficient affidavit of personal bias or disqualification of a presiding
officer, the Town Board shall determine the matter as part of the record of
the case and its determination shall be a matter subject to judicial review at
the conclusion of the adjudicatory proceeding. Whenever a board member
is disqualified or it becomes impractical for him or her to continue the
hearing, another presiding officer may be assigned to continue with the
case unless it is shown that substantial prejudice to the party will result
therefrom.
§ 58-7. Powers of Chairperson.
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the chairperson is authorized to:
§ 58-8. Evidence.
1. Administer oaths and affirmations.
2. Sign and issue subpoenas in the name of the Town Board at the request
of any party requiring attendance and giving of testimony between
witnesses and the production of books, papers, documents and other
evidence and said subpoenas shall be regulated by the Civil Practice
Law and Rules. Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of an
attorney for the party to issue such subpoenas under the provisions of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
3. Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition.
4. Regulate the course of the hearings, set the time and place for the
continued hearings and fix the time for filing of briefs and other
documents.
5. Direct the parties to appear and confer to consider the simplification of
the issues by consent of the parties.
1. No decision, determination, or order shall be made except upon
consideration of the record as a whole or such portion thereof as may
be cited by any party to the proceeding and as supported by and in
accordance with substantial evidence. Unless otherwise provided by
any statute, the Board of Ethics need not observe the rules of evidence
observed by courts, but shall give effect to the rules of privilege
recognized by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and
shall be noted in the record. Subject to these requirements, the Town
Board may, for the purpose of expediting hearings, and when the
interests of the parties will not be substantially prejudiced thereby,
adopt procedures for the submission of all or part of the evidence in
written form.
§ 58-6 AMHERST CODE § 58-8
1:112
§ 58-9. Decisions, Determinations and Orders.
2. All evidence, including records and documents in the possession of the
Town Board of which it desires to avail itself, shall be offered and made
part of the record, and all such documentary evidence may be received
in the form of copies or excerpts, or by the incorporation by reference.
In case of incorporation by reference, the materials so incorporated
shall be available for examination by the parties before being received
in evidence.
3. A party shall have the right of cross examination of witnesses.
4. Official notice may be taken of all facts of which judicial notice could be
taken and of other facts within the specialized knowledge of the Town
Board. When official notice is taken of a material fact not appearing in
evidence in the record and of which judicial notice could not be taken,
every party shall be given notice thereof and shall on timely request be
afforded an opportunity prior to the decision to dispute the fact or its
materiality.
1. A final decision, determination, or order in the adjudicatory
proceedings shall be made by majority vote of the Town Board and shall
in writing or stated in the record and shall include findings of fact and
conclusions of law or reasons for the decision, determination, or order.
Findings of fact, if set forth in statutory language, shall be accompanied
by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting
the findings. If, in accordance with these rules, a party submitted
proposed findings of fact, the decision, determination or order shall
include a ruling upon each proposed finding. A copy of the decision,
determination, or order shall be delivered or mailed to each party and
to his attorney of record within five (5) days of its issuance.
2. Unless required for the disposition of ex parte matters authorized by
law, members of the Town Board assigned to render a decision or to
make findings of fact and conclusions of law in an adjudicatory
proceeding shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, in connection
with any issue of fact, with any person or party, or in connection with
any issue of law, with any party or his representative, except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. Any such Town
Board member (a) may communicate with other members of the Board
and (b) may have the aid and advice of the Town Attorney and staff
other than staff which has been or is engaged in the investigative or
prosecuting functions in connection with the case under consideration
or factually related case.
3. (a) The Town Board shall maintain an index by name and subject of all
written final decisions, determinations, and orders rendered by the
Town Board in adjudicatory proceedings. For purposes of this
subdivision, such index shall include by name and subject all written
final decisions, determinations and orders rendered by the Town Board
pursuant to a statute providing any party an opportunity to be heard,
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-9
1:113
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 65
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
§ 65-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Amherst Alarm Code."
§ 65-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the Town of Amherst by reducing the
number of avoidable alarms of fire, intrusion, holdup or other emergencies
which contribute to ineffective utilization of police and fire emergency
agencies, require emergency responses which are susceptible to high
accident rates, interfere with genuine emergencies (responses) and
produce unnecessary alarm noise to the surrounding community.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which is
designed to detect smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, fire, medical
emergency or an entry into or exit from a building, structure or facility
and by reason thereof emits an audible response intended to alert persons
other than a rule making statute. Such index and the text of any such
written final decision, determination or order shall be available for
public inspection and copying. Each decision, determination and order
shall be indexed within sixty (60) days after having been rendered.
(b) The Town Board may delete from any such index, decision,
determination or order any information that, if disclosed, would
constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy under the
provisions of subdivision two of section eighty-nine of the public officers
law and may also delete at the request of any person all references
to trade secrets that if disclosed, could cause substantial injury to the
competitive position of such person. Information which would reveal
confidential material protected by federal or state statute, shall be
deleted from any such index, decision, determination, or order.
§ 58-9 AMHERST CODE § 65-3
1:114
outside of the premises and/or transmit a signal or message to an
emergency agency either directly or through a private answering point.
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to an emergency agency.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — The Police Department or Fire Company, central
fire dispatch or other emergency dispatch center.
§ 65-4. Compliance required.
The owners and lessees of premises having alarm systems shall comply with
all provisions of this chapter on or before the January 1, 1993.
§ 65-5. Automatic cutoff system required.
§ 65-6. Connection to enhanced 911 or 911 emergency service
restricted.
§ 65-7. Avoidable alarms.
A. No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm device
which does not contain an operational automatic cutoff system which
turns off the external audible alarm after a period not to exceed 10
minutes.
B. An automatic dialer connected directly to an emergency agency shall
automatically disconnect and/or terminate its message after the
message has been transmitted a maximum of two times.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total transmission time of
all messages shall not exceed five minutes.
A. No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of
alarm alert which connects automatically to enhanced 911 or the 911
emergency telephone system.
B. There shall be no automatic alarm system with direct communication of
any type to an emergency agency without prior written authorization
from the emergency agency where the alarms terminate.
A. General provisions.
(1) The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner
of the premises, user, custodian or the negligence or carelessness
of the lessee of the premises where the alarm system is located or
the negligence or carelessness of any employees at the premises
requiring an emergency response when in fact an emergency does
not exist constitutes an avoidable alarm. An avoidable alarm also
includes intentional activation of an alarm system when the
activator knows an emergency situation does not exist.
§ 65-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:115
(2) An avoidable alarm does not include alarms activated by violent
conditions of nature or similar causes beyond the control of the
user, owner or operator of the alarm system. The activation of an
alarm system under any circumstances in which the activator
reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists shall not be
deemed to be an avoidable alarm.
(3) Where the reason for the alarm is due to a finding by the
responding fire company that burnt food or cooking activities
triggered the alarm that conduct is deemed to be an avoidable
alarm.
B. Charges. An owner or lessee of real property to which an emergency
agency responds as a result of avoidable alarm shall pay a fee for each
such response in each calendar year as follows:
(1) Police Department response:
Avoidable Alarm
Responses Fee - Residential Fee-Commercial
1 through 4 No charge No charge
5 $50 each $100 each
6 to 9 $100 each $100 each
10 or more $200/each $500 each
(2) Fire Department response (except for medical emergencies):
Avoidable Alarm Responses Fee
First No charge
Second $100
Third $250
Fourth $500
Fifth and subsequent $1,000/each
(3) Fire Department response for medical emergencies:
Number of Avoidable Alarm
Responses Fee
1 through 5 No charge
6 or 7 $25/each
8 or more $50/each
C. Notice of excessive use. The owner and/or lessee of real property which
received an emergency response by reason of an avoidable alarm shall
be notified, in writing, by means of first-class mail of all avoidable
alarms up to five four police alarms and/or one fire alarm in a calendar
§ 65-7 AMHERST CODE § 65-7
1:116
year. The notice shall be sent in writing, by means of first class mail, to
the owner at the address maintained by the Town of Amherst Assessor
or a duly authorized representative who has been designed by the
owner to receive such notice, said designation required to be filed with
the Building Commissioner. If notice to the lessee is sent, it shall be
sent to the property c/o lessee of premises unless a different name and
address are provided by the lessee.
D. Contents of Notice of Violation. The notice to the owner and/or lessee of
the real property which received an emergency response by reason of
an avoidable alarm shall be provided with the following information:
(1) Time and date of avoidable alarm;
(2) Address of the real property. If the real property has more than one
unit, the unit/apartment/suite number;
(3) For fire alarms, the name of the volunteer fire department which
responded together with the name of the officer in charge. For
other alarms, the name and rank of the police officer(s) who
responded;
(4) An incident reference number assigned by fire dispatch/police
department;
(5) A copy of the incident detail report police incident report for the
alarm at issue;
(6) The fine being imposed as per Town Code § 65-7(B); and
(7) A copy of a letter which states as follows:
Please remit the penalty fee of $ (insert fee amount) to the Town Clerk,
Town of Amherst, 5583 Main Street, Williamsville NY 14221, no later than
thirty (30) days from the date of this notice in order to avoid further
enforcement action and possible additional penalties.
Your attention is directed to Section 65-7(D) of the Code of the Town of
Amherst (a copy is enclosed) under which you may appeal the classification
of the alarm as "avoidable." If you wish to appeal this classification as
an avoidable alarm as to fire alarms, please notify the Town of Amherst
Commissioner of Building or Chief of Police as to other alarms no later than
twenty (20) days after the receipt of this notice. You will then be notified of
the date, time and place where your appeal will be heard.
Failure of a real property owner or lessee of property on which an alarm
system is installed to pay the avoidable alarm charge within thirty (30) days
following notice of the amount due is a violation of Chapter 65 of the Code
of the Town of Amherst.
Attachment: Chapter 65 of the Code of the Town of Amherst
E. Administrative review.
§ 65-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:117
(1) The Chief of Police and the Commissioner of Building shall each
establish procedures whereby an owner of real property or lessee
thereof on which an alarm system has been installed and who has
been notified of an avoidable alarm may present evidence as to why
any such alarm should not be classified as an avoidable alarm.
(2) The Chief of Police shall designate up to three (3) members of the
Police Department to receive evidence of alarm responses and
make recommendations and findings of fact concerning said
classification.
(3) The Commissioner of Building shall designate members of his/her
department, not to exceed five (5) in total, to receive such evidence
of avoidable alarms make recommendations and findings of fact
concerning such classification.
(4) The Chief of Police and the Commissioner of Building shall make
the final determination concerning a classification, which
determination shall be reviewable only pursuant to procedures
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules and said
proceeding to be commenced within thirty-five (35) days after the
mailing of the determination by the Building Commissioner or
Police Chief to the owner/lessee.
(5) To challenge a classification of an alarm as an avoidable alarm, the
real property owner or lessee shall notify the Building
Commissioner for fire alarms or the Chief of Police for all other
alarms, in writing (an e mail is acceptable), within twenty (20) days
after receipt of notice of the avoidable alarm that he/she wishes to
appeal such determination. The failure to give such notice shall be
deemed a waiver of right to review that determination.
(6) Upon ten (10) days of receipt of the appeal, the Chief of Police for
other alarms or the Building Commissioner for fire alarms shall:
a.) Designate one (1) representative of the relevant department
(Building Department representative shall be a fire inspector),
to receive evidence from the property owner or lessee thereof.
The representative shall be selected from a list established by
the relevant department of the same on a random basis;
b.) Notify the property owner/lessee thereof of the designation of
the specified fire inspector as Hearing Officer for fire alarms or
the police department representative for all other alarms;
c.) Provide property owner/lessee with time, place and date of
hearing at which time the designated hearing officer shall hear
said evidence; and
d.) Advise the property owner/lessee of his/her right to be
represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 65-7 AMHERST CODE § 65-7
1:118
(7) The duly designated representative of the relevant department
shall afford the owner/lessee to present evidence in support of the
claim that the alarm was not avoidable.
(8) Evidence.
a. At said hearing, the burden of proof shall be upon the Town to
establish that the alarm was avoidable by substantial evidence.
This burden shall be met by the submission to the Hearing
Officer of the Notice of Avoidable Alarm and the Fire Dispatch
Report for fire alarms or the police incident report for other
alarms if the same indicates, in the judgment of the Hearing
Officer, that:
1. For Fire Alarms, the reason for the activation of the alarm
was a finding by the responding fire company that burnt
food or cooking activities triggered the alarm in the
absence of a fire, or
2. For all alarms that the alarm was triggered through the
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or
the negligence of the owner of the premises, user,
custodian or the negligence or carelessness of the lessee
of the premises where the alarm system is located or the
negligence or carelessness of any employees at the
premises requiring an emergency response when in fact
an emergency does not exist. An avoidable alarm also
includes intentional activation of an alarm system when
the activator knows an emergency situation does not exist.
b. At the hearing conducted pursuant to these provisions, the
technical rules of evidence shall not apply except the rules of
evidence regarding hearsay with respect to the submission of
the Fire Dispatch Report or the Police Incident Report, shall
apply.
(9) Within ten (10) days of the hearing, the designated fire inspector
shall prepare a report of the hearing and transmit the same to the
Commissioner of Building for fire alarms or the designated
representative of the Police Department shall prepare a report of
the hearing and transmit the same to the Chief of Police for all
other alarms. The report shall include findings of fact and
recommendations.
(10)Within ten (10) days of receipt of the report and recommendation,
the Commissioner of Building for fire alarms or the Chief of Police
for all other alarms shall issue a final determination concerning a
classification of the alarm as avoidable or non-avoidable.
F. Payment of charges. Avoidable alarm charges shall be paid to the Town
Clerk of the Town of Amherst at 5583 Main Street, Williamsville, New
York 14221.
§ 65-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:119
§ 65-8. Enforcement.
§ 65-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity who is found in violation of any other provisions of this code shall be
subject to a civil penalty, not to exceed $1,000 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation
occurs, continues or is permitted.
§ 65-10. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not effect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 68
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 77.
Dance halls and dances — See Ch. 96.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
G. Failure to remit fee. Failure of a real property owner or lessee of
property on which an alarm system is installed to pay the avoidable
alarm charge within thirty (30) days following notice of the amount due
is a violation of this code and is punishable by an additional fine of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day if the prior fine was not paid.
A. The Chief of Police shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems which
detect medical emergencies and entry or exit from a building, structure
or facility. The Commissioner of Building shall enforce this chapter for
alarm systems which detect smoke, fire or abnormal rise in
temperature. For that purpose, the Commissioner of Building and the
inspectors employed in the Building Department are authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets.
B. The Chief of Police shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems that
require a police response.
§ 65-7 AMHERST CODE § 65-10
1:120
ARTICLE I
Entertainments, Shows and Amusements
[Adopted 8-2-1934; amended in its entirety 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
§ 68-1. Classification of amusements.
For the purpose of providing for the regulation and licensing of the theatric,
dramatic and operatic entertainment, shows, amusements, field games and
public exhibitions of every kind intended to amuse, instruct or entertain,
where such entertainments, shows, amusements, games and exhibitions
are given for gain or for admission to which a fee is charged, such
entertainments, shows, amusements, games and exhibitions are divided into
nine classes, as follows:
A. First Class. All entertainments of theatrical, dramatic or operatic
character, all lectures, reading or recitation, exhibitions of paintings or
statuary or other exhibitions of art, all musical entertainments,
consisting of vocal and instrumental music, or either, shall belong to
and be known as entertainments of the First Class.
B. Second Class. All circuses, menageries or combined circuses and
menageries, all caravans, sideshows, concerts, minstrel or musical
entertainments given under a covering or canvas or within any
structure or enclosure intended for temporary use and capable of easy
travel and removal, all swings and itinerary shows such as a lifting
machine, blowing and striking machines, all other exhibitions and
devices, all merry-go-rounds, revolving wheels or other machines or
apparatus carrying passengers, slides and all similar amusements,
given, operated or performed in any given place or places in the Town,
shall belong to and be known as entertainments of the Second Class.
C. Third Class. All poultry shows, stock shows, flower shows, dog shows,
cat shows and all other shows or exhibitions of like character, all
automobile shows or exhibitions of automobiles, locomobiles and
horseless carriages or like nature shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the Third Class.
D. Fourth Class. Exhibitions of fireworks shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the Fourth Class.
E. Fifth Class. All rinks or places where roller skating or ice skating is
conducted or carried on as an amusement or where instruction is given
in roller skating or ice skating shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the Fifth Class.
F. Sixth Class. When several amusement enterprises, such as shootingthe-
chutes, revolving wheels, merry-go-rounds, shooting galleries,
giant swings, panoramas, musical and theatrical entertainments and
various other devices or entertainments are carried on or conducted in
any garden, park or other enclosure, whether carried on or conducted
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-1
1:121
§ 68-2. License required; fee.
as one enterprise or by several concessionaires and whether one
admission fee is charged for all such entertainment or a separate fee is
charged, such entertainments, enterprises and various entertainments
offered and conducted shall be considered one enterprise and shall
belong to and be known as entertainments of the Sixth Class.
G. Seventh Class. All exhibitions of moving pictures known as
"mutoscope," "kinetoscope," "cinematograph" or other like articles of
moving-picture devices and all so-called penny arcades or similar
entertainments, all museums of anatomy and exhibitions of monsters
and freaks of nature shall belong to and be known as entertainments of
the Seventh Class.
H. Eighth Class. All so-called public pool, billiard and bowling places,
alleys and rooms shall belong to and be known as entertainments of the
Eighth Class.
I. Ninth Class. All baseball, basketball and football games and other
devices not included in any of the foregoing classes shall belong to and
be known as entertainments of the Ninth Class.
A. Entertainments within the Town of Amherst, County of Erie, State of
New York hereinbefore referred to shall be given only after the issuance
by the Town Clerk, with the approval of the Board of the Town of
Amherst, of a license therefor upon payment of the following license
fees applicable to the respective classes mentioned:
Class of Amusement
License Fee
(as fixed by the Town Board)
First $5 to $50 per day, or fraction thereof
Second $25 to $100 per day, or fraction thereof
Third $1 to $100 per day, or fraction thereof
Fourth $1 to $50 per day, or fraction thereof
Fifth $10 to $50 per month, or fraction thereof
Sixth $50 to $150 per annum, or fraction thereof
Seventh $10 to $50 per month, or fraction thereof
Eighth $5 to $100 per annum, or fraction thereof
Determined in each case by the Town
Ninth Board in its discretion
B. Where any entertainment, show, exhibition, performance, amusement
or enterprise embraces two or more of the classes above numerated,
such entertainment, show, exhibition, performance or other amusement
shall be classified and charged for as belonging wholly to that class for
which the highest fee may be charged.
§ 68-1 AMHERST CODE § 68-3
1:122
§ 68-3. Licensing of entertainments, exhibitions or performances
required; exceptions.
No entertainment, exhibition or performance mentioned or included in any
of the nine classes specified and defined in this chapter shall be conducted,
produced or presented for gain or profit other than from a duly licensed
theater, opera house, hall, enclosure or place without first procuring from
the Town Clerk a license for that purpose, except that no license fee shall
be charged for amateur athletic games.
§ 68-4. Display of license.
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times,
for the term for which it is issued, be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the principal entrance of the premises described in such license so that
same may be easily seen and read by any person passing in and out of such
premises.
§ 68-5. Licensees subject to other legislation.
Every license granted under the provisions of this chapter and all privileges
pertaining thereto shall at all times be subject to the ordinances of the Town
of Amherst in effect when such license shall be issued or which shall be
thereafter adopted so far as same shall be applicable thereto.
§ 68-6. Conditions of license.
All licenses for entertainments where a license is required shall contain a
provision that no gaming, lottery or chance, gift, distribution of money or
articles of chance shall be connected therewith or allowed by the persons
operating such place, or in any wise permitted or held out as an inducement
to visitors; such license shall also state the number of persons such licensed
theater, hall, building or place has accommodation for, and no more than
that number shall be allowed to occupy such theater, hall, building or place
at any one time.
§ 68-7. Consent of surrounding property owners required.
Before any license shall be issued to any person, firm, association or
corporation to give, operate or conduct in any building, hall or enclosure
or on or in any other place any amusement or entertainment of the classes
heretofore enumerated, the Town Board may require the applicant for such
license to present to the Town Board the written consent, signed by the
owners owning 51% of the property, determined on a front-footage basis,
according to the last assessor's roll of the Town, located within 1,000
feet of the lot or lots whereon the building or buildings wherein said
entertainments or amusements are to be conducted.
§ 68-8. Issuance, Expiration, Suspension and Revocation of
Licenses. [Amended 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 18-2018]
§ 68-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-8
1:123
§ 68-9. Restrictions on operation of certain devices which create
noise.
No carousel or merry-go-round or similar device shall be operated with
music accompaniment from 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.; no skating rink, machine
having sound-producing medium or shooting gallery shall be operated at
any time unless the noise therefrom shall be so muffled that same shall
not be carried a distance of more than 500 feet away. Loudspeakers,
announcing devices, horns or other noise-producing devices shall be
operated at all times in such a manner so as not to disturb the occupants
of the premises in the vicinity of the device and shall be so toned down,
muffled or subdued so that the sound therefrom shall not carry more than
500 feet outside of the buildings or grounds on which the device is operated.
§ 68-10. Restrictions on loudspeakers, announcing devices or
horns.
It shall be unlawful to operate a loudspeaker, announcing device or horn
for the purpose of advertising merchandise for sale or attracting patrons to
a store or place of business by causing or permitting the sound therefrom
to be transmitted outside of said store or place of business into the public
streets of the Town.
§ 68-11. Permitted hours of operation.
All carousels, shows, exhibitions, entertainments, pool and billiard rooms
licensed pursuant to this article, except bowling alleys, shall be closed
during the period from 12:00 midnight until 9:00 a.m.
§ 68-12. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include picnics, bazaars,
fairs and kindred amusements wherein the profit ensuing therefrom shall
be for the benefit of charity, a religious, social or benevolent society or
for public benefit, churches, organizations of churches, organized fire
A. All licenses herein provided for shall be processed by the Town Clerk
and are issued at the discretion of the Town Board.
B. All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on the 31st day of
December next succeeding the date of issuance.
C. Each applicant shall, prior to the issuance of any license under this
Chapter, file with the Town Clerk a signed, written application and pay
the required fee set forth under § 68-2. The application shall give such
information required by the Town Board.
D. Any licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Town Board upon just cause and only after the Town
Board first holds a public hearing pursuant to § 68-24.
§ 68-8 AMHERST CODE § 68-12
1:124
departments or United States veterans of any and all former wars, including
auxiliaries of such organizations.
§ 68-13. Penalties for offenses.
Every violation by any person, firm, association or corporation of any of
the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be an offense against
this article, and upon conviction therefor, such person, firm, association or
corporation shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50. Every day or part
thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate
and distinct violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 68-14. Severability.
The declaration of any portion of this article by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid shall not invalidate the entire article, but only that
part thereof so declared to be invalid, and the remainder of said article shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 68-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-14
1:125

ARTICLE II
Game Rooms
[Adopted 8-17-1981 by L.L. No. 2-1981; amended in its entirety
3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 68-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any mechanical, electric or electronic device used
or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion
of a piece of money, coin, token or other article or by paying money to have
it activated. This definition does not include:
GAME ROOM — A building or place containing four or more amusement
games.
OWNER — A record owner, contract purchaser, lessee, assignee, bailee,
receiver or trustee.
PERSON — One or more individuals, a corporation, partnership,
association, trust or firm and any trustee, receiver or assignee.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst outside of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 68-16. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate a game room in the Town unless it is
licensed under this article.
§ 68-17. Application for license; location and other restrictions.
A. A jukebox.
B. Rides.
C. Bowling alleys.
Any device maintained within a residence for the use of the occupants
thereof and their guests.
D.
E. Any device the possession or use of which is prohibited by law.
A. An application for a game room license shall be made to the Town Clerk
on forms and containing information prescribed by him.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a game room license, the Town Clerk
shall refer it to:
(1) The Commissioner of Building, to determine whether the premises
comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
For that purpose, the Commissioner and employees of his
department shall have the right to enter upon and inspect the
premises during normal business hours.
§ 68-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-17
1:127
§ 68-18. Review and approval of application; issuance of license;
hearing.
§ 68-19. Operation of game rooms.
(2) The Chief of Police, to cause an investigation to be made of the
background of the owner and the operator of the game room.
C. Licenses for game rooms may be issued for premises classified as either
"Shopping Center" or "General Business" under Chapter 203, Zoning.
D. Except as provided in New York Correction Law Article 23-A, no game
room license shall be issued to or held by any person who has been
convicted of a crime or by any corporation, partnership or association, a
member, officer, director or holder of 10% or more of the stock of which
has been convicted of any crime.
A. After review of the application has been completed, the Town Clerk
shall forward it, with his report and recommendations of the
Commissioner of Building and Chief of Police, if any, to the Town Board
for its review and approval.
B. In approving a license, the Town Board may establish conditions to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the Town
and its inhabitants.
C. After approval by the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall issue a game
room license upon payment of the license fee established in § 68-21.
The license shall state:
(1) The number of amusement games permitted in the game room.
(2) The maximum number of persons permitted in the game room at
any time.
(3) Any other conditions or restrictions imposed by the Town Board.
(4) The class thereof according to the premises licensed.
D. Upon receipt by the applicant, the Town Clerk shall schedule a hearing
for the first Town Board meeting for which five days' notice published in
the official newspaper can be given if the Town Board denies the
application or approves it with limits or conditions not satisfactory to
the applicant.
A. The owner and operator of any game room shall comply with all
provisions of law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the conduct
of business and the use and maintenance of the premises.
B. The owner and operator of any game room shall cause the game room
license to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 68-17 AMHERST CODE § 68-19
1:128
§ 68-20. Operation of amusement games and premises.
C. The owner and operator of any game room shall not permit a greater
number of persons on the premises at any time than the capacity
approved by the Town Board as set forth in the license.
D. The owner and operator of any game room, and the members, officers,
directors and holders of 10% or more of the stock of any corporation,
partnership or association owning or operating a game room shall be of
good moral character.
E. The owner and operator of any game room shall maintain good order on
the premises at all times. The lack of good order on the premises of a
game room shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Fighting and rowdy behavior.
(2) Possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverages, except on
premises licensed by the state for on-premises consumption.
(3) Gambling.
(4) Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled substance
possession of which is prohibited by the New York Penal Law.
F. The owner or operator of any game room shall not permit an
amusement game therein to be played or operated after 10:00 p.m. by a
person under the age of 16 unless accompanied by and under the
supervision of a parent or other guardian over the age of 21.
G. The owner or operator of a game room shall not allow it to be open or
used unless it is under the control of and supervision by a person at
least 18 years of age who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance
with this article.
H. The owner and operator of a game room containing more than 30
amusement games shall provide additional supervisory personnel, all of
whom shall be at least 18 years of age, adequate to assure orderly
operation of the game room at all times.
I. The owner and operator of a game room shall not allow it to be open or
the amusement games therein played on any day between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
J. The owner and operator of a game room shall not allow more
amusement games than the number permitted in the license to be
located therein at any time.
A. The owner of any amusement game within the Town shall comply with
all provisions of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable
thereto and relating to the conduct of the business in connection with
which the game is used and the use and maintenance of the premises
where it is located.
§ 68-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-20
1:129
§ 68-21. Fees.
B. The owner of the game shall maintain good order on the premises at all
times. The lack of good order on the premises shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(1) Fighting and rowdy behavior.
(2) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except upon
premises licensed for on-premises consumption thereof.
(3) Gambling.
(4) Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled substance
possession of which is prohibited by the New York Penal Law.
C. The owner of an amusement game shall not permit it to be played or
operated after 10:00 p.m. by a person under the age of 16 unless
accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent or other
guardian over the age of 21.
D. The owner of an amusement game shall not allow it to be available for
use or used unless it is under the control of and supervision by a person
at least 18 years of age, who shall ensure that it is operated in
compliance with this article.
E. No cash awards shall be offered or given in any contest, tournament,
league or individual play on any amusement game, and no such game
shall be permitted to operate if said game delivers or may readily be
converted to deliver to the player any piece of money, coin, slug or
token.
F. No credit, allowance, check, slug, token or anything of value shall be
offered or given to any player of any amusement game as a result of
plays made thereon.
A. An application for a game room license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of $100.
B. The annual fee for a game room license shall be $200, plus $40 for each
machine over five. Such annual fee shall be pro-rated and paid as
follows:
Payment of annual fee made on or after January 1st and prior to April
1st=100% of annual fee
Payment of annual fee made on or after April 1st and prior to July
1st=75% of annual fee
Payment of annual fee made on or after July 1st and prior to October
1st=50% of annual fee
Payment of annual fee made on or after October 1st and prior to
January 1st=25% of annual fee
§ 68-20 AMHERST CODE § 68-21
1:130
§ 68-22. Inspection of premises.
§ 68-23. Expiration of licenses; renewals.
Game room licenses shall expire as set forth in § 68-8 of this Chapter.
Applications for renewal of game room licenses shall be submitted at least
30 days before the expiration of the existing license.
§ 68-24. Suspension or Revocation of a license. [Amended 9-4-2018
by L.L. No. 18-2018]
C. The fees fixed herein may be modified from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board.
A. The premises of all game rooms in the Town, when open for the
transaction of business, shall be subject to inspection by any peace
officer, acting pursuant to his special duties, or police officer.
B. Any other premises in the Town containing amusement games, when
open for the transaction of business, shall be subject to inspection by
any peace officer, acting pursuant to his special duties, or police officer.
A. The Town Board may revoke or suspend a game room license for just
cause after first conducting a public hearing pursuant to these
provisions.
B. "Just cause" shall include a failure of the operator of the premises to
comply with the provisions set forth in §§ 68-19 and/or 68-20.
C. Notice.
(1) Notice of a failure of the of the owner/operator of any game room,
amusement game or amusement of possible suspension/revocation
by First Class Mail addressed to the persons named on the
application as owner/operator.
(2) The notice shall provide a date not less than ten (10) days from the
date of mailing of any opportunity of the owner to show cause
before the Town Board of why the applicable license shall be
suspended or revoked.
(3) The owner/operator shall have the following rights at the hearing
before the Town Board:
(a) The right to have the matter heard at a public hearing by
impartial members of the Town Board.
(b) The right to be notified of the complaints against him/her/it. In
this regard, the notice shall be sent in compliance with
provisions set forth in § 68-24(c)(1), in reasonable details, the
time place and nature of the allegations lodged.
(c) The right to compel attendance of witnesses.
§ 68-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-24
1:131
§ 68-25. Penalties for offenses.
§ 68-26. Supersession of provisions.
This article supersedes the provisions of the Amusement Ordinance8 as to
the regulation and licensing of game rooms and amusement games.
§ 68-27. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this article or application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or
part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 68-28. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
(d) The right to cross-examine and confront any witness against
him/her/it.
(e) The right to present witnesses on his/her/its behalf.
(f) The right to request copies of documents which support the
charges lodged.
(g) The right to have the charges lodged be proved by substantive
evidence.
(4) At any public hearing held under this Chapter the technical rules of
evidence shall not apply.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for 15
days, or both.
B. Each day that a violation exists, occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
8. Editor's Note: See Art. I, Entertainments, Shows and Amusements, of this chapter.
§ 68-24 AMHERST CODE § 68-28
1:132
Chapter 74
(RESERVED)
Chapter 77
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 68. Games of chance — See Ch. 114.
§ 77-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bingo Licensing Law."
§ 77-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes only bona fide religious,
charitable or nonprofit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen and
similar nonprofit organizations.
BINGO or GAME — Includes a specific game of chance, commonly known
as "bingo" or "lotto," in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated
numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected
at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION — The State Lottery Control Commission.
LICENSE — A license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — Includes the entire Town of Amherst.
§ 77-3. Purpose. [Amended 2-11-1963, effective 3-30-1963]
The purpose of this chapter is to amend an ordinance adopted by the Town
Board of the Town of Amherst, Erie County, New York, dated April 7, 1958,
authorizing the conduct of bingo in such Town, to change the reference in
such ordinance from Article 14-G of the General Municipal Law to Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law, as so renumbered by Chapter 438 of the
Laws of 1962, and to set forth therein the following additional amended and
renumbered restrictions concerning the conduct of the game of bingo by an
authorized organization in such Town, as required by § 479 of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York as amended by Chapter 438 of the
Laws of 1962.
§ 68-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:133
§ 77-4. Restrictions on bingo games.
The following restrictions upon the conduct of bingo games herein
authorized are hereby imposed.
§ 77-5. License application procedure.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect. [Added 2-11-1963, effective
3-30-1963]
(1) No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly
or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits
derived from the operation of such game.
(2) No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in
the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed
under the Bingo Control Law or from another authorized
organization.
(3) The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
B. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250.
C. No series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than
$1,000.
D. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
E. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
F. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Clerk of the Town of
Amherst a written application therefor in the form prescribed in the
rules and regulations of the Control Commission, duly executed and
verified, in which shall be stated the name and address of the applicant,
together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and
organization to enable the Town Board of the Town of Amherst to
determine whether or not it is a bona fide authorized organization; the
names and addresses of its officers; the specific kinds of games of
§ 77-4 AMHERST CODE § 77-5
1:134
§ 77-6. Investigation of applicant; fee; disposition of fees; term of
license.
chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant
and the place or places where, the date or dates and the time or times
when such games of chance are intended to be held, operated and
conducted by the applicant under the license applied for; the items of
expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding,
operating and conducting of such games of chance and the names and
addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are
to be paid; the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of
such games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner; that no
commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid
to any person for holding, operating or conducting such game or games
of chance or for assisting therein except as in this chapter otherwise
provided; and that no prize or aggregate of prizes will be offered or
given under such license of a value in excess of the sum or value
authorized to be offered or given by this chapter, and a description of
all prizes to be offered and given in all such games of chance to be held,
operated and conducted under such license and such other information
as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations.
B. In each application there shall be designated an active member or
members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games
of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and
conducted and to the application shall be appended a statement
executed by the applicant and by the member or members so
designated, that he or they will be responsible for the holding,
operation and conduct of such games of chance in accordance with the
terms of the license and the provisions of the rules and regulations
governing the holding, operation and conduct of such games of chance
and of this chapter, if such license is granted.
C. In the event that any premises upon which any such game of chance is
to be held, operated or conducted or which is to be used for any other
purpose in connection with the holding, operating or conducting
thereof is to be leased from any person, persons or corporation, a
written statement shall accompany the application, signed and verified
under oath on behalf of such corporation, stating his or its address and
the amount of rent which will be paid for such premises and that such
lessor or lessors or, if a corporation, all of its officers and each of its
stockholders who hold 10% or more of its stock issued and outstanding,
are of good moral character and have not been convicted of a crime.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst shall make an investigation of
the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each application,
with due expedition after the filing of the application, and if it shall
determine that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed under this
chapter to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations governing the
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:135
§ 77-7. Hearings on applications; amendments to licenses.
§ 77-8. Form and content of license; display of license.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Control Commission and shall contain a
holding, operation and conduct thereof in the Town of Amherst; that
the member or members of the applicant designated in the application
to hold, operate or conduct the games of chance which the license
was applied for are bona fide active members of the applicant and
are persons of good moral character and have never been convicted
of a crime; that such games of chance are to be held, operated and
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in
accordance with the rules and regulations governing the holding,
operation and conduct thereof and that the proceeds thereof are to
be disposed of as provided by this chapter; and if the Town Board
is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense whatever will be paid or given to any person holding,
operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation and
conduct of any such games of chance except as in this chapter
otherwise provided; and that no prize will be offered and given in
excess of the sum or value of $250 in any single game of chance and
that the aggregate of all prizes offered and given in all of such games
of chance held, operated and conducted on a single occasion under
said license shall not exceed the sum or value of $1,000, it shall issue
a license to the applicant for the holding, operation and conduct of
the specific kinds of games of chance applied for, accordingly, upon
payment of a license fee or fees of $10 for each occasion upon which
any games of chance are to be conducted under such license.
B. On or before the 30th day of each month, the Supervisor of the Town of
Amherst shall transmit to the State Comptroller a sum equal to 50% of
all license fees collected by such Town of Amherst pursuant to this
section during the preceding calendar month.
C. No license for the holding, operation and conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one year.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the Town
Board until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the
applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this chapter may be amended, upon
application made to the Town Board of the Town of Amherst, if the
subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly
have been included in the original license and upon payment of such
additional license fee, if any, as would have been payable if it had been
so included.
§ 77-6 AMHERST CODE § 77-8
1:136
description of the kind of games of chance authorized to be held, operated
and conducted thereunder, a statement of the name and address of the
licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the
licensee under whom such games of chance will be held, operated and
conducted of the number of times or the hours during which such games
of chance are authorized to be conducted and the place or places where
and the date or dates and time or times when such games of chance are to
be conducted and of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds
of such games of chance are to be devoted; if any prize or prizes are to
be offered and given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes
authorized so to be offered and given; and any other information which
may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein,
and each license for the conduct of any game or games of chance shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where same is to be conducted at all
times during the conduct thereof.
§ 77-9. Control and supervision; suspension of license; inspections.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst, issuing any license under this
chapter, shall have and exercise control and supervision over all games
of chance held, operated or conducted under such license, to the end
that same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance with
the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated by
the Control Commission and the provisions of this chapter governing the
holding, operation and conduct of same; and such Town Board and the
Control Commission shall have the power and the authority to suspend any
license issued by such Town Board and to revoke same after notice and
hearing for violation of any such provision and shall have the right of entry,
by the respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises where
any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted or where
it is intended that any such game of chance shall be held, operated and
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the
conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
§ 77-10. Conduct of games of Sunday.
The Town of Amherst does hereby permit the operation and conduct of
games of chance under this chapter on Sunday. However, no such games
shall be conducted under this chapter on Sunday unless it shall be so
provided in the license issued for the holding, operating and conducting
thereof.
§ 77-11. Participation by minors prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated and conducted pursuant to any
license issued under this chapter unless accompanied by an adult.
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-12
1:137
§ 77-12. Frequency of games; prohibition where alcoholic beverages
are sold.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter more often than on six days in any one
calendar month or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 77-13. Persons who may operate games; equipment; expenses;
compensation.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of
the authorized organization to which the license is issued; and no person
shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of
chance under such license except such an active member or a member of an
organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a member
of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or
a member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the
licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association
and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided; and no
such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such
as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation
therefor by the licensee; and no item of expense shall be incurred or paid
in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of
chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount
for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which
are reasonably necessary to be purchased for the holding, operating or
conducting thereof under any circumstances whatever; no rental shall be
paid for the use of any premises for holding, operating or conducting any
such game of chance thereon or for any other purpose in connection with
the holding, operating or conducting thereof unless the amount of such
rental is stated in a statement annexed to the application for the license as
provided in § 77-5 of this chapter or which is in excess of the sum stated
as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement; and no commission,
salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall be paid or
given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating or conducting
or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of any game of chance so
held, operated or conducted, except that reasonable compensation may be
paid to bookkeepers or accountants for bookkeeping or accounting services
rendered according to a schedule of compensation prescribed by the rules
of the Control Commission.
§ 77-14. Maximum charge for admission; limitations on prizes.
Not more than $1 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any game or games of chance are to be held,
operated and conducted under any license issued under this chapter, which
admission fee, upon payment thereof, shall entitle the person paying same
§ 77-12 AMHERST CODE § 77-14
1:138
to a card entitling him to participate without additional charge in all regular
games of chance to be played under such license on such occasion, and no
charge in excess of $1 shall be made for a single opportunity to participate
in all special games to be played under such license on such occasion.
No prize greater in amount or value than $250 shall be offered or given
in any single game conducted under any such license, and the aggregate
amount or value of all prizes offered or given in all games played on a single
occasion shall not exceed $1,000, and all winners shall be determined and
all prizes shall be awarded in any game played on any occasion within the
same calendar day as that upon which the game was played. No alcoholic
beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any such game.
§ 77-15. Restrictions on advertisements.
No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be
or has been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded by means of
newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards,
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public,
except that one sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area may be displayed
on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be played, and an
additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the
prize or prizes are displayed, and additional signs may be displayed upon
any fire-fighting equipment belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer
fire company or upon any first-aid or rescue squad equipment belonging
to any licensee which is a first-aid or rescue squad, in and throughout the
community or communities served by such volunteer fire company or such
first-aid or rescue squad, as the case may be.
§ 77-16. Required filings.
Within 15 days after the conclusion of the holding, operating and
conducting of any such game of chance, the authorized organization which
held, operated or conducted same and its members who are in charge
thereof shall furnish to the Clerk of the Town of Amherst a duly verified
statement showing the amount of the gross receipts derived from each
game of chance, which shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets
or rights in any manner connected with participation in said game or the
right to participate therein, each item of expense incurred or paid and each
item of expenditure made or to be made, the name and address of each
person to whom each such item has been paid or is to be paid, with a
detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered
therefor, the net profit derived from each such game of chance and the use
to which such net profit has been or is to be applied and a list of prizes
offered and given, with the respective value thereof, and it shall be the duty
of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be
necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report.
§ 77-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-17
1:139
§ 77-17. Authority to examine records.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst and the Control Commission shall
have power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of
any authorized organization to which any such license is issued so far as
they may relate to any transactions connected with the holding, operating
and conducting of any game of chance thereunder and to examine any
manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in
relation to the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license,
but any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may
be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 77-18. Appeals of Town Board actions.
Any applicant for, or holder of, any license issued or to be issued under this
chapter, aggrieved by any action of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst,
to which such application has been made or by which such license has
been issued, may appeal to the Control Commission from the determination
of said Town Board by filing with the Town Board a written notice of
appeal within 30 days after the determination or action appealed from, and
upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before the
Town Board and any additional evidence may be produced and shall be
considered in arriving at a determination of the matters in issue, and the
action of the Control Commission upon said appeal shall be binding upon
said Town Board and all parties to said appeal.
§ 77-19. Immunity from statute; exceptions.
No person or corporation lawfully conducting or participating in the
conduct of, possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares,
tickets or rights to participate in or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it of any game of chance, conducted or to be
conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter, shall
be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of Article
130 of the Penal Law9 or any other law or ordinance to the extent that
such conduct is specifically authorized by this chapter, but this immunity
shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or
participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any license
obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application for
such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it of any game of chance conducted under any
license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense
or statement.
9. Editor's Note: Article 130 of the Penal Law of 1909 was incorporated into Article 225,
Gambling Offenses, of the Penal Law of 1965, and parts were included as §§ 5-415, 5-417
and 5-423 of the General Obligations Law.
§ 77-17 AMHERST CODE § 77-20
1:140
§ 77-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof, unless the amount of such rental is stated in a
statement annexed to the application for the license as provided in § 77-5 of
this chapter, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess of the
sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement executed
by him or on his behalf or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall
fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating
and conducting of games of chance under any such license or shall falsify
or make any false entry in any book or record so far as they relate to
any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of any
game of chance under such license or shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or of any term of such license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall forfeit any license issued to it under this chapter and be ineligible
to apply for a license under this chapter for one year thereafter.
§ 77-21. Referendum required.
The provisions of this chapter shall remain inoperative in the Town of
Amherst unless and until a proposition therefor submitted at a general or
special election in such Town shall be approved by a vote of the majority
of the qualified electors in such Town voting thereon.10 This chapter shall
become effective immediately upon certification of the results of said
election.
§ 77-22. Repeal or amendment.
This chapter may be amended, from time to time, or repealed by the Town
Board of the Town of Amherst, and such amendment or repeal, as the case
may be, may be made effective and operative not earlier than 30 days
following the date of enactment of the ordinance effecting such amendment
or repeal, as the case may be; and the approval of a majority of the electors
of such Town shall not be a condition prerequisite to the taking effect of
such amendment or repeal.
§ 77-23. Delegation of authority.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst may delegate by a resolution to
an officer or officers of said Town, designated by said Town Board for that
purpose, any of the authority granted to the Town Board hereby in relation
to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses; the conduct of
investigations and hearings, the supervision of the operation of the games
and the collection and transmission of fees.
10.Editor's Note: Said referendum was held 5-10-1958.
§ 77-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-24
1:141
§ 77-24. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional or beyond the powers
granted to the Town of Amherst by the legislature by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter or the application thereof to
persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby, and the Town
Board hereby declares that it would have enacted this chapter without the
invalid provision or application, as the case may be, had such invalidity been
apparent.
Chapter 78
BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 78-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVITY — Any action generating vibrations or noise that may cause
damage and includes, without limitation, blasting, pile driving and the use
of vibratory equipment.
CARBON MONOXIDE — A colorless, odorless, tasteless, toxic gas that has
the molecular formula CO. The molecule consists of a carbon atom that is
triply bonded to an oxygen atom.
CONSULTING ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer retained by
a developer to supervise development, including blasting operations.
CONTRACTOR — A person conducting or involved in conducting blasting
operations and includes prime or general contractors as well as
subcontractors.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DEVELOPER — A property owner or other person developing land where
blasting operations will take place.
DOT — The New York State Department of Transportation.
EC — Erie County.
LAW — Includes a law, statute, ordinance, code and regulation.
LCC — Loss control consultant.
§ 77-24 AMHERST CODE § 78-1
1:142
MIGRATION — The movement of carbon monoxide or other hazardous
gases by any means and along any path.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership and/or corporation.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, New York.
UTILITY — A railroad or pipeline or other facility for the transmission of
petroleum products, electricity, steam or water or telephone, optical, cable
or telegraph service or brine.
§ 78-2. Town responsibilities and requirements.
§ 78-3. Blasting operation requirements, procedures and
restrictions.
A. Town functions under this chapter shall be carried out by the Town
Engineer as to public works projects and by the Building Commissioner
as to private projects.
B. The Town may require a developer to retain the services of a consulting
engineer for any development project involving blasting.
A. Explosives for blasting shall be stored, handled and used in accordance
with this chapter and applicable state or federal laws, rules or
regulations.
B. Blasting for public and private projects shall not commence until a fire
prevention permit is obtained from the Building Department.
C. Blasting shall be conducted so as not to endanger persons or property,
and unless otherwise permitted, the specific location of the blasting site
shall be covered or otherwise confined.
D. The contractor shall control blasting operations to avoid damage to
existing structures from ground or air vibrations. The blasting
operation shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent the
migration and hazardous accumulation of carbon monoxide or other
hazardous gases in nearby structures.
E. The contractor shall be responsible for all claims resulting from its
blasting operations and any related unacceptable carbon monoxide or
toxic gas levels and shall save harmless the Town and its officers,
agents and employees from any and all such claims. Contractors shall
provide $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate bodily
injury, property damage and indemnification insurance coverage,
naming the Town as an additional named insured.
F. No person shall discharge explosives, nor shall any person excavate in
any then-existing street, highway or public place for blasting purposes
or in connection with blasting, unless notice thereof, in writing, shall
have been given at least 72 hours in advance to any person, corporation
or municipality owning or operating a utility facility in the area. The
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-3
1:143
person having direction or control of such excavation shall ascertain
whether there is a street, highway, utility facility, habitable or occupied
structure, or public place within 600 feet of any point of discharge
of explosives and give notice to the occupant of the structure and
to the person, corporation or municipality owning or operating the
same; provided, however, that in any emergency, it shall be lawful to
discharge explosives to protect a person or persons from an immediate
and substantial danger of death or serious personal injury or to avoid
substantial damage to property.
G. If, during the course of any blasting, direct or indirect damage or the
potential thereof is occasioned to any utility facility, the person having
direction or control of such work shall promptly take the measures
necessary to protect individuals and the public from loss and shall
immediately notify the person or municipality owning or operating a
utility of such damage or potential damage to its facilities. Neglect on
the part of the person having direction or control of such works to take
necessary safety precautionary measures or to immediately notify the
owner or operator of a utility of damage or potential damage to its
facilities, occasioned by such person or under his or its direction or
control, shall be a violation of this chapter.
H. Nothing herein contained shall preclude or prevent the recovery of
monetary damages by the owner or operator of the utility or by any
other person suffering damage from the disruption of utility services
occasioned by blasting.
I. The contractor shall obtain and pay for all permits and licenses
required for work regulated by this chapter.
J. The contractor shall obtain the Town's and the consulting engineer's
written permission before commencing blasting operations. All work in
connection with blasting shall comply with this chapter and other laws
relative to the handling, storage, transporting and use of explosives and
the protection of life and property. In the case of conflict between the
provisions of this chapter, other laws related to the handling, storage,
transporting and use of explosives and the protection of life and
property and contract specifications or requirements, the contractor
shall comply with the strictest of such requirements.
K. When the consulting engineer or the Town determines that excavation
by blasting may injure or damage adjacent rock, masonry, utility
facilities, dwellings or other structures or the blasting operation may
create the migration or hazardous accumulation of carbon monoxide or
other toxic gas, and gives the contractor notice thereof, the contractor
shall discontinue blasting operations. The failure of the consulting
engineer or the Town to provide such notice shall not limit the liability
of the contractor to third parties, including the Town, for any damages
caused by blasting. Rock that is not permitted to be blasted shall be
removed by pneumatic hammers or other means approved by the Town
and the consulting engineer. Where damage occurs because of the
§ 78-3 AMHERST CODE § 78-3
1:144
§ 78-4. Loss control consultant.
contractor's operation, the contractor shall bear all costs of repair and
take precautions and safeguards to prevent any further damage.
L. Blasting shall not be done within 300 feet of any radio transmitter or
radio-frequency emission equipment such as high-frequency welders,
and blasting caps shall be kept in tightly closed, non-sparking, all-metal
cans when in the vicinity of such equipment, unless blasting caps
immune to radio-frequency emission are used. The intensity and extent
of blasting in the vicinity of any pipe conveying combustible or
flammable gas or liquids shall be subject to restrictions reasonably
imposed by the owner or operator of the line. Should a utility facility or
street intersect a blast area, rock shall be removed without blasting for
a distance required by the Town, unless alternate crossings and
methods are approved by the Town.
M. The Town may establish other conditions to provide for the safety of life,
prevent the migration or hazardous accumulation of carbon monoxide
or toxic gases in structures and protect existing facilities and public and
private property from damage from blasting.
N. Signs pertaining to two-way radios and warning lights are to be erected
and flagmen provided by the contractor as required by the Town, the
consulting engineer or law.
O. Any damage to bridges, foundations, conduits, buildings, homes, utility
facilities or appurtenances shall be repaired or replaced by the
contractor and the developer.
P. Test shots may be required and, if required, shall be documented in
writing, in the presence of a representative prior to commencement of
blasting on property involving excavations of 50 or more linear feet or
charge weights of 3.5 pounds or greater. The contractor's consulting
engineer and LCC shall be present, and permission to proceed with the
blasting will be contingent upon issuance of approvals (written or
telephoned) by the consulting engineer and LCC. Modifications must be
made on the job if seismograph readings indicate values exceeding two
inches per second peak particle velocity.
Q. Blasting procedures and explosive quantities shall be adjusted so that
ground vibrations in the vicinity of existing structures and utility
structures are no higher than the levels set by this chapter or other
applicable, more restrictive standards. These procedures should
include but are not limited to blast pattern design, spacing, delay times,
smaller-diameter holes, lower bench heights, etc.
R. Photographic equipment and materials shall be acceptable to the
consulting engineer, the LCC and the contractor's insurance company.
A. The contractor shall employ a loss control consultant (LCC) who or
which shall be a person or company with a minimum of five years'
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-4
1:145
experience in vibration and carbon monoxide monitoring, precondition
surveys and loss control for construction in urban areas. The designee
shall provide proof of professional errors and omissions insurance with
a minimum limit of $1,000,000 from an insurer authorized to do
business in this state and submit sufficient data to satisfy the consulting
engineer of his or its competence in this field and be prequalified with
the Town in the tendering stage.
B. Responsibilities.
(1) The loss control consultant shall be responsible for the following
activities:
(a) Reviewing the contractor's blasting plan and ensuring that the
work can proceed in a manner considered safe by accepted
industry standards.
(b) Performing a precondition survey of adjacent structures, the
findings of which shall be available to the contractor's insurers.
(c) Performing the seismic monitoring.
(d) Performing elevation monitoring and setting up existing crack
monitoring devices where deemed necessary to identify
changes.
(e) Investigating and reporting on all claims or complaints before,
during and after construction. All reports shall be submitted to
the Town in writing, with copies to the contractor and the
complainant.
(f) Monitoring all work generating vibrations.
(g) Performing continuous monitoring of carbon monoxide levels
in all habitable or occupiable structures within 600 feet of the
blasting location. The monitoring shall begin at least 12 hours
prior to the blast and shall continue until at least seven days
after the occurrence of the blast.
(2) Responsibilities of the LCC during the construction process are:
(a) A precondition damage analysis of those structures in the area
of influence of the construction project that might be affected
by the construction activities.
(b) The transcribing and preparation of detailed reports of the
structure(s) surveyed.
(c) A post-construction damage analysis of properties of owners
who have filed damage claims.
(3) If damage claims result from construction, the LCC will prepare a
formal report of the precondition survey on the structure.
§ 78-4 AMHERST CODE § 78-5
1:146
§ 78-5. Precondition survey; blast plan; notification.
A. Precondition surveys and damage analyses shall be carried out and
detailed reports prepared on all structures within 600 feet of any
blasting operations and/or the nearest perimeter property, whichever is
greater. The reports shall be furnished to the consulting engineer and
the Town. The Town reserves the right to modify the perimeter
distance.
B. In addition to carrying out a precondition survey, the owners of all
properties within a six-hundred-foot radius, as appear in the records of
the Town Assessor or otherwise known to the contractor, shall be
notified at least seven days prior to the commencement of any blasting
and provided with an informational pamphlet (similar in content to
Blasting Is a Science) and educational information regarding carbon
monoxide and the potential for carbon monoxide migration. The form of
these pamphlets and introductory letters shall be approved by the
Town. The letter shall identify the nature of the work, the contractor(s)
involved and the contact person for the contractor(s) involved.
C. The LCC shall prepare a blast plan on the precondition survey to
include:
(1) The contractor(s) name(s).
(2) The contract number and description.
(3) The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).
(4) The date and time of report.
(5) The name of the individual contacted.
(6) Photographs, exterior and interior (with description, date, etc.).
(7) Sketches with dimensions.
(8) Descriptions.
(a) Detailed descriptions of existing foundations, structures,
superstructures, walls and ceilings, including:
[1] Visible cracks.
[2] Detectable weakness.
[3] Detectable deterioration.
[4] Photographs and drawings to document this information.
(b) Interior inspection may be waived if the property owner does
not permit access.
(9) Existing carbon monoxide level(s) within a structure prior to
blasting.
§ 78-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-5
1:147
§ 78-6. Monitoring reports.
§ 78-7. Particle velocity.
(10) Identification of openings within a structure for the potential
migration of carbon monoxide or other hazardous gases.
D. Neither review by the Town of the blast plan and techniques nor
adherence to the limits of vibration specified herein shall relieve the
contractor of any responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the
blasting, exercising proper supervision and field judgment and
otherwise satisfying the requirements and objectives of these
regulations.
A. All blasting operations shall be monitored by the LCC. He shall conduct
vibration monitoring of every activity during blasting, utilizing the
monitoring procedures and equipment specified.
B. The contractor shall use a blasting method satisfactory to the DOT, the
DEC, EC and the Town.
C. A monitoring report, in writing, shall be submitted to the Town within
24 hours of an event, or immediately on site, if the recommended limits
are exceeded. The report shall contain seismographic printouts,
climatic data, operator data and all other information applicable to the
event.
D. The contractor shall, in any event, submit weekly reports of daily
blasting operations satisfactory to the consulting engineer and the
Town.
E. The contractor shall continuously monitor the carbon monoxide levels
in all habitable or occupied structures for the period starting 12 hours
before the blasting event to seven days after the blasting event. Within
a habitable or occupied structure, an audible alarm shall be activated if
the carbon monoxide level meets or exceeds 10 parts per million (ppm).
For carbon monoxide action levels, refer to Appendix A of this chapter.11
Carbon monoxide levels of 10 ppm or higher shall be reported within
one hour to the Town of Amherst Fire Control Office at 689-1212
(primary alternative), or 911 shall be called (secondary alternative). In
addition, all carbon monoxide levels above 35 ppm shall be reported to
the Commissioner of Building within 24 hours.
A. The contractor shall conduct all work in such a manner that the
resulting peak particle velocity does not exceed the following limits at
the line adjacent to existing aboveground structures in the vicinity of
the project:
11.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 78-5 AMHERST CODE § 78-7
1:148
§ 78-8. Instrumentation.
Distance Versus Peak Particle Velocity Method
Distance
(feet)
Peak Particle Velocity of Any
Components*
(inches per second)
0 to 100 2.0
100 to 200 1.75
200 to 500 1.5
500 to 1,000 1.0
Over 1,000 0.75
NOTES:
* The instrument's transducer shall be firmly coupled to the ground.
B. The blasting shall be conducted so that the low-frequency ground or air
vibration does not exceed the limits in Figure 7.26(f).12
A. All instrumentation proposed for use on the project shall have been
calibrated within the previous six months to a standard which is
traceable to the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Characteristics of required instrumentation are listed below; the
instrumentation shall:
(1) Measure, display and furnish a permanent record on a strip chart of
particle velocity components and airblast over pressure. It is
acceptable for the vibration record to be stored on a magnetic tape
for subsequent display and analysis, but the analysis of vibration
velocity and frequency content must be completed and reported
within 24 hours of the event. It is not acceptable for particle
velocity to be calculated after the event from displacement or
acceleration versus time waveforms.
(2) Measure the three mutually perpendicular components of particle
velocity in directions vertical, radial and perpendicular to the
vibration source.
(3) Have a flat velocity frequency response with a minimum broadband
of six hertz to 150 hertz, with a tolerance equal to or better than
+10%.
B. The contractor shall be completely responsible for all damages
resulting from the operations and shall, as a minimum, take whatever
measures are necessary to maintain peak particle velocities within the
specified limits. Modifications to blasting methods required to meet
12.Editor's Note: Figure 7.26(f) is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 78-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-8
1:149
§ 78-9. Responsibilities of contractor and developer; restrictive use
of explosives.
these requirements shall be undertaken at no additional cost to the
Town.
C. Sensor mounting. The ground vibration sensor (particle velocity sensor)
shall be buried in the ground or mounted on a large, hard surface where
possible, such as a concrete sidewalk, an asphalt roadway or firmly
packed soil. Mounting ground vibration sensors on loose soil, gravel or
any other loose surface is not acceptable. The sensor must be bolted
down or strapped down to the ground with an apparatus capable of
resisting a force equal to at least twice the weight of the sensor. This
will require devices such as metal shields to anchor the sensor to the
ground. Sandbags placed on the sensor for restraining in lieu of
anchoring devices are not acceptable.
D. Particle velocity sensor location. The particle velocity sensors shall be
located at the building with the closest slant ranges to the event
approximately 1.5 meters or five feet from the foundation wall closest to
the event location or at other locations acceptable to the LCC.
E. Elevation monitoring points shall be established in such a way so that
the property is not defaced and shall take into account vegetation and
snow cover.
F. Carbon monoxide test instruments must meet the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Have a digital display capable of measuring increments of one ppm
to two ppm at an accuracy of 5% to 10%.
(2) Have a scale to read at least up to 500 ppm.
(3) Reach 90% of the final reading within one minute.
(4) Have the ability for continuous sampling.
A. Extreme care shall be exercised in blasting. No blasting shall be done
adjacent to any part of a structure until proper precautions, approved
by the consulting engineer, are taken to ensure against damage. Such
approval shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for damage. In
case blasting damage occurs to any portion of a structure, to the
material supporting or surrounding it or to adjacent properties or utility
facilities, the contractor and developer, at their own expense, shall
rebuild or repair such structures, foundations and utility facilities to the
satisfaction of the owner or the Town (in the case of a Town-owned
project) or pay the cost thereof. No blasting shall be performed at any
time except by experienced persons certified to perform such activities
and approved by the consulting engineer or the Town.
§ 78-8 AMHERST CODE § 78-9
1:150
B. Before the firing of any explosives, access to the blasting area shall be
effectively guarded to exclude all unauthorized persons. The contractor
shall then sound a warning distinctly audible to all persons within the
blasting area. All such persons shall retire to a safe distance or to a safe
shelter. Such safe locations shall be designated by the contractor. The
contractor shall than examine the blasting area to make certain that all
persons have retired therefrom to the designated place of safety. No
blast shall be fired while any person is in the blasting area. Subsequent
to firing, no person shall be in such area until permitted to be so by the
contractor, as announced by an audible sound.
C. Blasting shall be conducted so as not to endanger persons and property.
Material being blasted shall be covered on all exposed sides with a
strong woven matting or wire rope not less than 1/2 inch in diameter or
other equivalent cover, approved by the consulting engineer, which will
be effective in preventing particles from being projected into the air by
the blast.
D. Blasting operations and the storage and handling of explosives shall be
performed in strict accordance with this chapter, other applicable laws
and New York State Department of Labor Industrial Code Rule 39; Part
1176, New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code;
Chapter 83, Article II, § 83-8, of the Building Construction
Administration Code of the Town of Amherst; NFPA 495: Explosive
Materials Code; NFPA 498, regarding explosives in motor vehicle
terminals; and the latest edition of the Blaster's Handbook by E.I.
duPont DeNemours and Company.
E. Blasting shall be started only after written authorization by the
consulting engineer and the Town.
F. After each blast is fired, the contractor shall thoroughly scale the
excavation, and all dangerous loose material shall be removed and the
excavation shall be made safe before work proceeds. If removal of loose
or shattered rock or other material enlarges the excavation beyond the
required limits, this shall not relieve the contractor of his obligation to
make such removal, and he shall not be entitled to additional
compensation for the removal of this material.
G. The charges used shall not make the excavation unduly large or
irregular, nor shall they shatter the rock upon or against which masonry
is to be built, nor shall they be allowed to damage existing structures at
the site or in the vicinity thereof.
H. Blasting is permitted only from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
I. Dust control is required as outlined in Industrial Code Rule 33 while
blowing the drill hole before loading, after the blast and during
excavation. Dust control shall be approved by the consulting engineer
before blasting commences.
§ 78-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-9
1:151
§ 78-10. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, handle or use explosives in
the Town of Amherst outside the Village of Williamsville in violation of this
chapter or commence blasting before obtaining a fire prevention permit.
Any person who violates this chapter or commences blasting without first
obtaining such a permit shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days,
or both. Each day's continued violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 78-11. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof that can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 78-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 79
BOATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 138. Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 145.
§ 79-1. Speed limit.
No person shall operate or drive a boat upon any waters or waterways
within the Town of Amherst at a rate of speed in excess of five miles per
hour.
§ 79-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to waters or waterways within the corporate
limits of the Village of Williamsville or to such waters or waterways with
respect to which the regulation of speed may be regulated or prohibited by
the laws of the United States and the State of New York.
J. The use of ammonium nitrate-fuel oil-prill (ANFO) is not permitted
within 600 feet of a residence or occupied structure.
§ 78-9 AMHERST CODE § 79-3
1:152
§ 79-3. Boat defined.
The term "boat" shall include every vessel propelled in any manner other
than by hand.
§ 79-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-31-1966]
Every violation by any person, firm, association or corporation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an offense against
this chapter, and upon conviction therefor, such person, firm, association or
corporation shall be subject for the first offense to a fine not exceeding $10,
and for a second or subsequent offense by a fine not less than $10 nor more
than $25, or to imprisonment for not less than two days nor more than 15
days.
Chapter 83
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 85.
Curb cuts — See Ch. 95.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Reimbursement of expert fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-4
1:153

PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 83-1-1. Designation of building officials and their powers.
The Commissioner of Building shall administer and enforce the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, which shall apply to all areas of the
Town of Amherst outside of the Village of Williamsville, and shall perform
such other duties assigned to him hereunder. He shall be assisted by the
Assistant Commissioner of Building and other code enforcement personnel
assigned to the Building Department. The Assistant Commissioner of
Building shall have the power to act generally for and in place of the
Commissioner of Building during his absence or inability to act for any
reason. The Supervisor shall have the power to designate a person to act
in behalf of the Commissioner of Building and to exercise all the powers
conferred upon him by this chapter during his absence and that of the
Assistant Commissioner of Building or the inability of both to act for any
reason.
§ 83-1-2. Restrictions on employees.
No building official, employee or Code Enforcement Officer assigned to
the Building Department shall engage in any activity inconsistent with
his duties or those of the Building Department, nor shall he be engaged
directly or indirectly in any occupation regulated by this chapter in the
furnishing of labor, materials, supplies or appliances for, or the supervision
of, the construction, alteration, demolition or maintenance of any building
or other structure regulated hereunder, or the preparation of plans or
specifications for any such structures or buildings or the furnishing of
any hazardous substances, materials or devices within the area regulated
hereunder; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit any
official or employee from engaging in any such activities in connection
with the construction of a building or structure owned by him for his own
personal use and occupancy or for the use and occupancy of members of his
immediate family and not constructed for sale.
§ 83-1-3. Duties and powers of Commissioner of Building.
3-1. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided, the Commissioner
of Building shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the plans, specifications
or permits for the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
structures regulated hereunder, the installation and use of materials
and equipment therein, the location, use, occupancy, conditions and
maintenance thereof and the handling, storage or use of hazardous
substances, materials or devices.
3-2. He shall promulgate rules and regulations subject to the approval of the
Town Board to secure the intent and purpose of this chapter and a
§ 83-1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1-3
1:155
proper administration and enforcement of the laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations governing plans, specifications, construction,
alteration, repairs, conditions or maintenance pertaining to buildings,
equipment and other structures regulated hereunder and the storage,
handling or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices.
3-3. He shall receive applications, approve plans and specifications and
issue permits for the erection, alteration and repairs of buildings, other
structures and equipment regulated hereunder and the storage,
handling or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices
regulated hereunder and shall examine the premises for which such
applications have been received, plans approved or such permits have
been issued for the purpose of insuring compliance with laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations governing same.
3-4. He shall issue in writing all appropriate notices or orders to remove
illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during
construction and to insure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the approved plans and specifications, the conditions
of the building permit and the requirements of all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. The notices or orders may be served
upon the property owner, contractor or agent thereof, or by sending by
certified mail a copy of such order to the owner, contractor or agent
thereof at the address set forth in the application for permission for the
construction or alteration of such building, other structure or
equipment and by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the
premises to which the notice applies. He shall make all inspections
which are necessary or proper for the carrying out of his duties, except
that he may accept written reports of inspection from code enforcement
officers, building inspectors, plumbing inspectors, fire inspectors,
housing inspectors, electrical inspectors or other employees of the
Building Department, from generally recognized and authoritative
service and inspection bureaus or agencies, provided that the same are
certified by a responsible official thereof, and from professional
engineers and registered architects licensed in New York State.
3-5. Whenever the same may be appropriate to determine compliance with
the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
covering construction, alteration, repair or occupancy or the storage,
handling or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices, he may,
in his discretion, accept and rely upon written reports of tests in the
field by experienced, professional persons or by accredited and
authoritative testing laboratories or service and inspection bureaus or
agencies.
3-6. He shall issue a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
where appropriate for a building or structure constructed, altered or
occupied in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code or
Energy Code, which certificate shall certify that the building conforms
to the requirements of those codes and, where appropriate, to other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 83-1-3 AMHERST CODE § 83-1-4
1:156
§ 83-1-4. Department records and reports.
§ 83-1-5. Violations; penalties for offenses.
4-1. The Commissioner of Building shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
A. All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied.
B. All plans, specifications and construction documents approved.
C. All building permits, certificates of occupancy, certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued.
D. All inspections and tests performed.
E. All statements and reports issued.
F. All complaints received.
G. All investigations conducted.
H. All fees charged and collected.
I. All rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of
Building.
J. All orders and notices issued.
4-2. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
5-1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, equip, use, or occupy any building or other structure
regulated hereunder, or portion thereof, or to store, handle, or use
hazardous substances, materials or devices in violation of the Uniform
Code or Energy Code, this chapter or other applicable law or ordinance
or any regulation or rule promulgated by the Commissioner of Building
in accordance with applicable laws, or to fail in any manner to comply
with a notice, directive or compliance order of the Commissioner of
Building or his representative issued pursuant to the New York
Executive Law, the New York Energy Code or this chapter, or to
construct, alter, use or occupy any building, structure, or premises
regulated hereunder, or part thereof, or to store, handle or use
hazardous substances, materials or devices in a manner not permitted
by an approved building permit, fire prevention permit, operating
permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance or in strict
accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
§ 83-1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1-5
1:157
5-2. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, or
cause to be installed, or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light,
cooling, heat or power in a manner not permitted by an approved
electrical permit.
5-3. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect, or
cause to be connected, electrical wiring in or on properties for light,
cooling, heat or power to any source of electrical supply prior to
authorization of the Commissioner of Building.
5-4. Any person having been served with a compliance order pursuant to the
provisions of 19 NYCRR Chapter XXXIII, Subchapter A or B, or this
chapter who shall fail to comply with it within 30 days after such service
or within the time frame fixed by the Commissioner of Building for
compliance, and any owner, builder, engineer, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or other
agencies or any other person taking part or assisting in the
construction, repair, alteration or use of any building, other structure or
equipment regulated by 19 NYCRR Chapter XXXIII, Subchapter A or B,
or this chapter, or any person storing, handling or using hazardous
substances, materials or devices, in violation of 19 NYCRR Chapter
XXXIII, Subchapter A or B, or this chapter or any lawful compliance
order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Commissioner of
Building or his representative made thereunder, shall be punishable:
A. By a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of violation or
imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, for a violation of 19
NYCRR Chapter XXXIII, Subchapter A, Part 1225, or any order
made pursuant thereto. Each day that such violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense punishable as such.
B. By a fine of not more than $250 per day of violation or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or both, for all
other violations of 19 NYCRR Chapter XXXIII, Subchapter A or B,
or this chapter. Each day that such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense punishable as such.
C. Except as otherwise provided for by this Chapter or State Law, any
violation by a person, firm, corporation, or other entity of Section
83-9-5, as amended from time to time, shall be deemed a violation
punishable by the following penalties: [Added 4-11-2011 by L.L.
No. 8-2011]
(1) For Property in Residential Districts:
(a) First violation $25;
(b) Second violation within 12 months of the first violation,
$50;
(c) Each subsequent violation within 12 months of the first
violation, $100.00, and
§ 83-1-5 AMHERST CODE § 83-1-5
1:158
§ 83-1-6. Abatement of violation.
Appropriate action and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction, to restrain, correct or abate a violation,
to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to
prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any premises; and these
remedies shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 83-1-7. Definitions.
(2) For Property in Nonresidential Districts:
(a) First violation $75;
(b) Second violation within 12 months of the first violation,
$150;
(c) Each subsequent violation within 12 months of the first
violation, $250.00.
5-5. Any person who, without a valid license or registration, engages in any
occupation or activity which under this chapter requires a license or
registration shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or
both. [Amended 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
5-6. Whenever a person, firm or corporation shall be convicted for a second
time of a violation of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or this chapter,
any license or registration then held by such person, firm or corporation
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed revoked. [Amended
4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
7-1.Words in this chapter and the codes are used in their ordinary English
usage except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or
where a specific definition is set forth.
7-2. In this chapter, words of the masculine gender will include the feminine
and vice versa. The neuter gender will refer to any gender as required,
unless the context plainly indicates the contrary.
7-3. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The designated representative of an owner, lessor, operator,
occupant or person, as filed with the Building Department of the Town
of Amherst, New York.
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — The Assistant
Commissioner of Building of the Town of Amherst, New York.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Article V of this
chapter. The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of
§ 83-1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1-7
1:159
this chapter. The term "building permit" shall also include electrical,
plumbing, and fire prevention permits.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY or CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE —
A certificate issued pursuant to Article VI of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the
Commissioner of Building, the Assistant Commissioner of Building and
all inspectors.
COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — The Commissioner of Building of
the Town of Amherst, New York.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Commissioner of
Building pursuant to Article I of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code,
as currently in effect in New York State and as hereafter amended from
time to time.
FLOOR AREA — The habitable or occupied floor area, using exterior
building dimensions plus the floor area of any accessory structure such
as a garage, shed, etc.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — Any work requiring a permit performed
on an existing dwelling unit and/or the premises that it is located
upon for the repairing, remodeling, altering, converting, improving
or modernizing of, or adding to the dwelling unit or associated
premises.[Added 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTOR — A person, partnership, firm
or corporation which owns or operates a home improvement business
or who undertakes, offers to undertake or agrees to perform any home
improvement for a fee. "Home improvement contractor" does not
include a person, partnership, firm, corporation, landlord, cooperative
corporation, condominium board of managers, joint tenant or co-tenant
that owns, in whole or in part, the property to be improved.[Added
4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
INSPECTOR — A code enforcement officer appointed by the Town
Board. This term shall include but not be limited to the following job
titles: Senior Building Inspector, Building Inspector, Assistant Building
Inspector, Senior Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Officer,
Assistant Code Enforcement Officer, Senior Plumbing Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Assistant Plumbing Inspector, Senior Electrical
Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Assistant Electrical Inspector, Senior
Fire Inspector, Fire Inspector and Assistant Fire Inspector.
LESSOR — The grantor of a lease interest in premises.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, in possession or in control of
premises, or using premises.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Article VII of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating
§ 83-1-7 AMHERST CODE § 83-1-7
1:160
permit which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any
provision of this chapter.
OPERATOR — The person engaged in the activity of renting or
providing space or premises for occupancy or use by others.
OWNER — The person exercising dominion or control over or vested
with title in premises, a proprietor (legal owner, joint owner, part owner,
record owner, equitable owner, reputed owner or their successor in
interest) or the respective agent of any of them.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been
issued.
PERSON — Shall include an individual, corporation, limited-liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust,
association, or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or
description.
PLUMBING, GENERAL — The practice, materials and fixtures used
in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of piping,
fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the
following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage systems, the attendant
vent systems, and the water supply systems, within or adjacent to any
building or structure, to their connections with public systems or other
approved terminals.
PREMISES — Land (improved or unimproved), place, property,
buildings, structures, equipment, facilities and improvements, if any.
SITE PLAN — The site development plan as defined in Chapter 203,
Zoning, and Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town
of Amherst, New York.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to Article V of this
chapter.
STRUCTURE — A building, gas or liquid storage tank, or anything other
than a fence, dumpster enclosure, parking lot or driveway constructed
or erected which requires permanent location in or on the ground or
attachment to something having such location.
SUPERVISOR — The Supervisor of the Town Amherst, New York.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to Article
VI of this chapter.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, New York outside of the Village of
Williamsville, New York.
TOWN ATTORNEY — The Town Attorney of the Town of Amherst, New
York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Amherst, New York.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst, New York.
§ 83-1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1-7
1:161
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from
time to time.
VOLUME — The covered volume of any building or structure having one
or more of its sides enclosed.
§ 83-1-7 AMHERST CODE § 83-1-7
1:162
PART II
DESIGNATION OF CODES
§ 83-2-1. Designation of code.
The Uniform Code is designated as an official code of the Town.
§ 83-2-2. (Reserved)
§ 83-2-3. Designation of Energy Conservation Construction Code.
The Energy Code is designated as the official code for efficient use of energy
in new and renovated building construction for the Town of Amherst and
shall apply wherever the term "Energy Code" appears in this chapter.
§ 83-2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2-3
1:163

PART III
BOARD OF PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE EXAMINERS AND BOARD
OF ELECTRICIAN EXAMINERS
§ 83-3-1. Establishment.
§ 83-3-2. Powers.
1-1. Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners, heretofore established and
herein called the "Plumbing and Drainage Board," shall consist of six
members: the Town Engineer, Commissioner of Building, Senior
Plumbing Inspector, one member of the Town Board and two persons
who have actively engaged in the plumbing business for at least 10
years next preceding their membership in such Board. The last three
members shall be appointed by the Supervisor. The last two members
shall be residents of the Town of Amherst and shall have terms of office
of two years. The term of office of the first four members shall be the
term to which each has been appointed or elected, as the case may be,
as Town Engineer, Commissioner of Building, Senior Plumbing
Inspector or Town Board member. The last two members shall receive
as compensation an amount as the majority of said Plumbing and
Drainage Board shall determine, but in no event more than $70 per
person per year. The other members of the Plumbing and Drainage
Board shall receive their normal compensation but shall not receive
additional compensation for their duties as members of the Plumbing
and Drainage Board.
1-2. The Board of Electrician Examiners, heretofore established and herein
called the "Electricians Board," shall consist of five members: the
Commissioner of Building, the Senior Electrical Inspector of the Town,
the Electrical Inspector of the Town with the most seniority and two
persons who have been actively engaged in the electrical business for
at least 10 years next preceding their membership in such Electricians
Board. The last two members shall be appointed by the Supervisor. The
last two members shall be residents of the Town of Amherst and shall
have terms of office of two years. The term of office of the first three
members shall be permanent while they are employed by the Town. The
last two members shall serve as volunteers and shall receive no
compensation as Electricians Board members.
2-1. The Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners shall have jurisdiction
and examination authority over all persons desiring or intending to
engage in the trade, business or calling of plumbing or drainage or
sewer contracting in the Town of Amherst, outside of the Village of
Williamsville, with the power to examine and certify persons applying
for certificates of competency as master or employing plumbers,
journeyman plumbers, sewer contractors, journeyman sewermen to
determine their fitness and qualification for acting as such and to issue
certificates of competency to all such persons who shall have
§ 83-3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-3-2
1:165
§ 83-3-3. License restrictions.
satisfactorily passed examinations before such Board and shall be by it
deemed qualified for such certificate.
2-2. The Board of Electrician Examiners shall have jurisdiction and
examination authority over all persons desiring or intending to engage
in the trade, business or calling of electrical contracting or construction
in the Town, with the power to examine and certify persons applying for
certificates of competency as a master electrician or a residential
electrician to determine their fitness and qualification for acting as
such and to issue certificates of competency to all such persons who
shall have satisfactorily passed examinations before such Board and
shall be by it deemed qualified for such certificate.
2-3. Examinations; fees.
A. Each Board shall hold examinations at least two times per year to
examine persons applying for such certificates of competency. The
entrance fee for such examination shall be $100 for applicants to
be certified as master or employing plumbers or sewer contractors
and $75 for applicants to be certified as journeyman plumbers or
journeyman sewermen. The entrance fee for applicants to be
certified as a master electrician or residential electrician shall be
$125. A double fee shall be charged if there is only one applicant
for any given examination.
B. Before an applicant shall be admitted to a regular scheduled
examination, he shall file his application therefor, in writing, with
the Town Clerk at least 30 days before the examination date and
shall pay to the Clerk the required examination fee. All applications
shall be made upon oath. The names and addresses of applicants
shall be forwarded by the Clerk to the Secretary of the Board.
C. The Town, for at least two consecutive weeks, shall publish in the
Town newspaper a notice of the date and place where each regular
scheduled examination shall be held, with the last notice to be
published at least 40 days before the examination date.
3-1. No person, firm or corporation holding a license provided for in this
part shall allow the use of his, her or its name or license by any
unlicensed person, firm or corporation.
3-2. Any person, firm or corporation doing work regulated under this part
shall exhibit his, her or its license upon request to any peace officer,
Town Board member, member of the Board of Plumbing and Drainage
Examiners, member of the Board of Electrician Examiners, Code
Enforcement Officer, Plumbing or Building Inspector or their
representative and shall, while opening any highway for purposes
incidental to such work and while such highway is so opened, exhibit in
§ 83-3-2 AMHERST CODE § 83-3-3
1:166
a conspicuous place adjacent to such opening a sign, at least one foot
square, plainly marked showing the number of such license.
3-3. The dissolution of a firm or corporation shall operate as a cancellation
of the license of such firm or corporation.
3-4. Licenses shall not be transferable.
3-5. The Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners or the Board of
Electrician Examiners may revoke any license issued pursuant to this
part or suspend it for such term as it may deem proper if it finds that
the holder thereof, if a person, or a member, officer, agent or employee,
if the holder is a firm or corporation, has violated any provision of this
chapter or has made a false statement in connection with a material
fact in an application for any license required under this chapter. The
Board having jurisdiction may further revoke any such license if it finds
that the holder is an undesirable person or is incapable of conducting
the trade licensed. The Board having jurisdiction may take the
foregoing action at any regular meeting thereof or at a special meeting
called for that purpose. The holder of the license shall be given notice,
in writing, setting forth the charge and the date, time and place of the
hearing. The notice shall either be served personally upon the holder
not less than five days prior to the meeting or hearing at which the
charge is to be heard or shall be mailed by either registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the holder of the license at the last
known address thereof at least 10 days prior thereto. Refusal to accept
or inability to deliver the mailed notice shall not prevent the Board from
proceeding to hear and determine the charge. The Board having
jurisdiction may adopt such general rules and regulations for the
conduct of such hearings as it shall deem appropriate. The rules and
regulations and amendments thereto shall be published once in the
official newspaper designated by the Town Board and shall be effective
10 days following publication. The holder of the license shall in all cases
be entitled to counsel if he desires. A majority vote of the Board having
jurisdiction shall be required to either revoke or suspend a license.
Action taken by the Board having jurisdiction either to revoke or
suspend a license shall be in addition to any other punishment
authorized by this chapter or other provision of law.
§ 83-3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-3-3
1:167

PART IV
LICENSES AND REGISTRATIONS
§ 83-4-1. License required; bond.
No person, firm or corporation shall do any general plumbing or electrical
work on any premises in the Town of Amherst unless first duly licensed in
a manner required by this part. This section shall not apply to a person
or a member of his household doing plumbing or electrical work on a oneor
two-family residence owned and occupied by him, provided that he has
permission from the Commissioner of Building to do such work, has filed the
proper plans and paid the regular fees. If such work necessitates trenches
or street cuts within a street right-of-way or public easement, said owner
shall furnish to the Town of Amherst a surety bond in the amount of $2,000
or more, as may be required, to indemnify the Town of Amherst.
§ 83-4-2. Licensing of sewer contractors.
No person, firm or corporation shall do any sewer contracting work unless
first licensed as a master plumber, journeyman plumber, sewer contractor
or journeyman sewerman. Sewer contracting work shall consist of the
practice, materials and fixtures used in connection with plumbing and
plumbing systems, other than the water or gas supply systems, beyond
the building drain connection point. It shall, without limitation, include the
installation, alteration and repair of such materials, fixtures and systems. It
shall also include the maintenance of the systems when the maintenance is
in conjunction with the installation, alteration and repair of said systems.
§ 83-4-3. Master or employing plumber's license; fee.
3-1. No person, firm or corporation shall do any general plumbing work on
any premises in the Town of Amherst, outside of the Village of
Williamsville, as a contractor, subcontractor or employing plumber
unless licensed as a master or employing plumber in the manner
provided by this part. The master or employing plumber's license shall
be issued by the Town Clerk to any person, firm or corporation upon
receipt of a certificate from the Board of Plumbing and Drainage
Examiners showing that such person, a member of such firm or the
superintendent of construction of such corporation has satisfactorily
passed the examination held by such Board for such license and upon
receipt of the license fee.
3-2. The applicant for examination for qualification as a master or
employing plumber shall have a minimum of two years of practical
experience in the trade or business of plumbing and drainage as a
licensed journeyman plumber and shall be at least 25 years of age. The
Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners may accept, at its
discretion, an equivalent combination of training, education and
experience in lieu of the requirements of two years of practical
experience as a licensed journeyman plumber. Proof of age and
§ 83-4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4-3
1:169
§ 83-4-4. Journeyman plumber's license; fee.
§ 83-4-5. Sewer contractor's or employing sewer contractor's
license; fee.
practical experience or satisfactory equivalent training, education and
experience shall be submitted to the examiners before the applicant is
admitted to the examination.
3-3. (Reserved)
3-4. The fee for a master or employing plumber's license shall be $125 per
year, prorated for a part thereof, each license expiring December 31
next after issuance.
3-5. Each person, firm or corporation holding a valid certificate of
competency or license as master or employing plumber shall register
with the Town Clerk each year prior to January 31 by securing a master
or employing plumber's license. All annual license fees payable after
January 1, 1974, shall be paid in full before issuance of any subsequent
renewal license. The fee for a renewal shall be increased by $25 if
renewed subsequent to January 31.
4-1. A journeyman plumber, master or employing plumber shall be present
at all times when work is being performed on any premises within the
Town of Amherst, outside the Village of Williamsville, involving the
original installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of general
plumbing.
4-2. A journeyman plumber's license shall be issued by the Town Clerk to
any person upon receipt of a certificate from the Board of Plumbing and
Drainage Examiners showing that such person has satisfactorily passed
the examination held by said Board and upon receipt of the license fee
therefor. The applicants for examination for qualification as a
journeyman plumber shall have a minimum of four years of practical
experience in the trade or business of plumbing and drainage under the
supervision of a master or employing plumber and shall be at least 20
years of age. Proof of practical experience and age shall be submitted to
the examiners before being admitted to the examination.
4-3. The fee for a journeyman plumber's license shall be $30 per year,
prorated for a part thereof, each license expiring on December 31 next
after issuance.
4-4. Each person, firm or corporation holding a valid certificate of
competency or license as a journeyman plumber shall register with the
Town Clerk each year prior to January 31 by securing a journeyman
plumber's license. All annual license fees payable after January 1, 1974,
shall be paid in full before issuance of any subsequent renewal license.
The fee for a renewal shall be increased by $25 if renewed subsequent
to January 31.
§ 83-4-3 AMHERST CODE § 83-4-5
1:170
§ 83-4-6. Journeyman sewerman's license; fee.
5-1. No person, firm or corporation shall do any sewer contracting work on
any premises in the Town of Amherst, outside the Village of
Williamsville, as a contractor, subcontractor or employing sewer
contractor unless licensed as a master or employing plumber or sewer
contractor in the manner provided by this chapter. A sewer contractor's
or employing sewer contractor's license shall be issued by the Town
Clerk to any person, firm or corporation upon receipt of a certificate
from the Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners showing that such
person, a member of such firm or the superintendent of construction of
such corporation has satisfactorily passed the examination held by said
Board for such license and upon receipt of the license fee.
5-2. The applicant for examination for qualification as a sewer contractor or
employing sewer contractor shall have a minimum of five years
experience of active engagement in the trade or business of sewer
contracting work and shall be at least 23 years of age. Proof of practical
experience and age shall be submitted to the examiner before being
admitted to the examination.
5-3. (Reserved)
5-4. The fee for a sewer contractor's or employing sewer contractor's
license shall be $125 per year, prorated for a part thereof, each license
expiring December 31 next after issuance.
5-5. Each person, firm or corporation holding a valid certificate of
competency or license as a sewer contractor or employing sewer
contractor shall register with the Town Clerk each year prior to January
31 by securing a sewer contractor's or employing sewer contractor's
license. All annual license fees payable after January 1, 1977, shall be
paid in turn before issuance of any subsequent renewal license. The fee
for a renewal shall be increased by $25 if renewed subsequent to
January 31.
6-1. A journeyman sewerman, sewer contractor, master or employing
plumber or journeyman plumber shall be present at all times when
work is being performed on any premises within the Town of Amherst,
outside the Village of Williamsville, involving the original installation,
alteration, maintenance or repair of sewers or sewer contracting work.
6-2. A journeyman sewerman's license shall be issued by the Town Clerk to
any person upon receipt of a certificate from the Board of Plumbing and
Drainage Examiners showing that such person has satisfactorily passed
the examination held by such Board and upon receipt of the license fee
therefor.
6-3. The applicant for examination for qualification as a journeyman
sewerman shall have a minimum of two years' practical experience in
the trade or business of sewer installations under the supervision of a
§ 83-4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4-6
1:171
§ 83-4-7. Electrician licensing and exemptions; fees. [Amended
1-4-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016; 2-4-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
licensed sewer contractor and shall be at least 18 years of age. Proof
of practical experience and age shall be submitted to the examiners
before being admitted to the examination.
6-4. The fee for a journeyman sewerman's license shall be $30 per year,
prorated for a part thereof, each license expiring on December 31 next
after issuance.
6-5. Each person, firm or corporation holding a valid certificate of
competency or license as a journeyman sewerman shall register with
the Town Clerk each year prior to January 31 by securing a journeyman
sewerman's license. All annual license fees payable after January 1,
1977, shall be paid in full before issuance of any subsequent renewal
license. The fee for a renewal shall be increased by $25 if renewed
subsequent to January 31.
7-1. No person, firm or corporation shall do any electrical work on any
premises in the Town as a contractor or subcontractor unless licensed
as a master electrician or residential electrician in the manner provided
by this chapter. A licensed master electrician shall be authorized to
perform electrical work subject to the Uniform Code. A licensed
residential electrician shall be authorized to perform electrical work
subject to the Residential Code of New York State. A master electrician
or residential electrician license shall be issued by the Town Clerk to
any person upon receipt of a certificate from the Board of Electrician
Examiners showing that such person has either (1), satisfactorily
passed the examination held by said Board for such license or (2) has
provided a valid electrician's license from another municipality within
New York State. Licenses from other municipalities shall be considered
acceptable only if the license is based upon a written examination
administered by the same examination provider that is used by the
Town of Amherst or by another examination provider that is acceptable
to the Board of Electrician Examiners. The examination must have been
taken within the last five (5) calendar years. An electrician who
qualifies for a license as allowed in item 2 of this paragraph shall be
issued a license as either a master electrician or a residential
electrician as determined by the Commissioner of Building and the
Senior Electrical Inspector of the Town of Amherst. Any appeal of this
determination shall be made in writing to the Board of Electrician
Examiners. The determination of the Board of Electrical Examiners
shall be final. A master electrician or residential electrician license shall
not be valid until the applicable license fee has been paid.
7-2. The applicant for examination for qualification as a master electrician
shall have a minimum of five years' experience of active engagement in
the trade or business of electrical work. The applicant for examination
for qualification as a residential electrician shall have a minimum of five
years' experience of active engagement in the trade or business of
§ 83-4-6 AMHERST CODE § 83-4-7
1:172
§ 83-4-8. Renewal of license.
residential electrical work. Proof of satisfactory experience shall be
submitted to the Board of Electrician Examiners before being admitted
to the examination.
7-3. The fee for a master electrician or residential electrician license shall
be $100 per year, prorated for a part thereof. Each license shall expire
on December 31 of the year of issuance.
7-4. Each person holding a valid certificate of competency or license as a
master electrician or residential electrician shall register with the Town
Clerk each year prior to January 31 by securing a master electrician or
residential electrician license. The fee for a renewal shall be increased
by $25 if renewed subsequent to January 31.
7-5. The requirements for licensing of a master electrician or a residential
electrician shall not be applicable to electrical work in the following
exempt categories:
A. Work being performed by the owner-occupant of a single- or twofamily
dwelling unit or a townhouse regulated by the Residential
Code of New York State.
B. Heating, ventilating or air-conditioning (HVAC) systems limited to
branch circuit wiring only.
C. Smoke or carbon-monoxide detection equipment or systems
installed in association with a valid building or plumbing permit.
D. Low voltage wiring associated with:
(1) Circuits operating at 50 volts or less.
(2) Fire alarm systems.
(3) Fiber optic systems.
(4) Communication circuits.
(5) Class 1, 2, and 3 remote control, signaling and power-limited
circuits as regulated by Section 725 of the National Electrical
Code (NEC).
8-1. A renewal license for a master or employing plumber, journeyman
plumber, sewer contractor, journeyman sewerman, master electrician
or residential electrician shall be issued by the Town Clerk each year to
any person, firm or corporation holding the same license at the
expiration of the preceding year, without examination, upon payment of
the license fee provided for such license.
8-2. All license fees, examination and inspection fees received by the Town
Clerk shall be deposited in the part-Town fund.
§ 83-4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4-9
1:173
§ 83-4-9. Home improvement contractor registrations. [Added
4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
9-1. No Home Improvement Contractor shall do any work that requires a
building, plumbing, electrical or fire prevention permit on any premises
being used in whole or in part for residential purposes in the Town of
Amherst unless first duly registered in a manner required by this Part. A
license issued in accordance with this Part IV shall also constitute the
registration required in this section. For purposes of this § 83-4-9, the
registration requirements of this Part shall not apply to a property
owner doing work on residential premises owned by him, provided that
he has obtained the required permits and paid all required fees. The
licensing requirements contained in Sections §§ 83-4-1 through 83-4-8
are not superseded by these registration regulations. All licensing
regulations remain in effect.
Registrations shall be valid for a one (1) year period and can be issued
at any time throughout a year.
9-2. Application for Registration. The application for a Home Improvement
Contractor shall be prepared by the Commissioner of Building and at a
minimum shall contain the following information:
If a person: The name, residence and business address of the
applicant.
If a partnership: The name, residence and business address of each
partner.
If a domestic corporation: The name and business address of the
corporation; the names and residential addresses of the principal
officers of the corporation.
If a foreign corporation: The date that the corporation was authorized
to do business in the State of New York, the names of the officers and
local agents and their residence and business addresses.
Whenever a residential address is required, the residential address
shall be associated with real property. A Post Office Box address shall
not be allowed.
A description of the specific type of business or work performed by the
applicant.
The number of years the applicant has been engaged in the business
for which the applicant is seeking registration.
Satisfactory evidence that the applicant has current coverage or an
acceptable exemption certificate for Workers’ Compensation.
Satisfactory evidence that the applicant has current coverage for New
York State Disability Insurance.
A current and valid telephone number for the applicant.
The approximate number of persons to be employed by the applicant.
§ 83-4-9 AMHERST CODE § 83-4-9
1:174
9-3. The fee for a Home Improvement Contractor registration is twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
§ 83-4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4-9
1:175

PART V
PERMITS
§ 83-5-1. Building permits.
1-1. Requirement for building permits.
1-1.1. Permits required prior to commencement of work.
1-1.1.1. No person, firm or corporation shall commence the
relocation, replacement, demolition, erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal or change of
any required means of egress, rearrangement of parts of a
structure in a manner that affects egress, the removal from
service of all or part of a fire protection system for any period
of time, or conversion of any building, structure or parking lot,
or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a
separate building permit or quick permit from the
Commissioner of Building for each such building, structure or
parking lot, except that no permit shall be required for work in
any of the following exempt categories:
(a) The installation of swings, playhouses under 144 square
feet in floor area and other playground equipment
associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(b) The installation of swimming pools associated with a oneor
two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) where such pools are designed for a water
depth of less than 24 inches and are installed entirely
above ground;
(c) The installation of fences which are not part of an
enclosure surrounding a swimming pool;
(d) The construction of retaining walls unless such walls
support a surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(e) The construction of temporary motion-picture, television
and theater stage sets and scenery;
(f) The installation of window awnings supported by an
exterior wall of a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(g) The installation of partitions or movable cases less than
five feet nine inches in height;
(h) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar
finish work;
§ 83-5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-1
1:177
(i) The installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing,
heating, ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(j) The replacement of components of any equipment,
provided that the replacement does not alter the
equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications;
(k) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve (i) the
removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or loadbearing
component; (ii) the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or the rearrangement of parts of
a structure in a manner which affects egress; (iii) the
enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or (iv) the removal from service of all or
part of a fire protection system for any period of time.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building
permit for work in any category set forth in this section
shall not be deemed an authorization for work to be
performed in violation of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or other applicable laws, rules, ordinances or
regulations.
New construction will be deemed to have commenced
upon the commencement of the excavation for any
foundation or part thereof or the grading of any land in
preparation for authorized work or as determined by the
Commissioner of Building.
When authorized by the Commissioner of Building, a
quick permit application may be filed in the Building
Department in accordance with procedures established
by the Commissioner of Building.
1-1.1.2. No person, firm or corporation shall commence the
installation, enlargement, relocation, replacement or
alteration of any mechanical equipment, system or component
or solid-fuel-burning appliance and related chimneys, flues,
vents and connectors without first obtaining a separate
building permit or quick permit from the Commissioner of
Building for each such equipment, system, system component,
solid-fuel-burning appliance and related chimney, flue, vent or
connector.
1-1.2. Unless actual construction work is begun within six months of the
date of any permit, or in the case of any demolition within two
months, then such permit shall expire by limitation, except that the
Commissioner of Building may postpone such expiration date not
more than six months at his discretion.
§ 83-5-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-1
1:178
1-1.2.1. Unless work, commenced pursuant to a valid permit, is
completed within two years of the commencement of such
work, either the permit shall expire and all work completed
shall be removed and the premises returned to its original
condition, or the permit shall expire and a new permit shall be
obtained upon submittal of a new permit application and fees
subject to the codes in effect at the time of submittal of the new
application. If a new permit is issued for the purpose of
completing work under a prior permit, all work associated with
the new permit must be completed within six months of the
date of issuance of the new permit. Failure to comply with
either of these alternatives shall be deemed to be a violation of
this chapter and subject to the penalties contained in § 83-1-5.
The Commissioner of Building may extend the completion time
period for any permit for just cause. Construction shall be
deemed to be complete upon the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance by the Commissioner of
Building or his authorized representative.
1-1.3. A permit may be revoked or suspended because of any false
statement or misrepresentation of material fact in the application
or because of failure to supply additional information required
within a reasonable time or because the work is not being executed
in accordance with the codes, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the Town of Amherst, the state and county laws and
regulations applicable, or in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. Notice of the revocation or suspension of the
permit shall be deemed to be duly given by service upon a
responsible individual in charge at the premises or by mailing to
the post office address of the party to whom the permit was issued.
It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work, except what may be
authorized by the Commissioner of Building, after revocation or
suspension of the permit, and no permit may be reissued after
revocation or suspension while any violation of any code,
ordinance, law, rule or regulation or state and county law or
regulation exists.
1-2. Procedures.
1-2.1. An application for a building permit shall be made to the Building
Department and shall contain the following information and
documents:
1-2.1.1. A completed "Information for Filing Building Applications"
form.
1-2.1.2. Three copies of a dimensioned site plan to an appropriate
scale showing all structures, parking areas, roads and access
points, including all setbacks, yard separations and building
separations. The plot plan shall include details as to
§ 83-5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-1
1:179
landscaping, drainage, sewage disposal, utilities and signs,
where applicable, and other conditions affecting the parcel.
1-2.1.3. Three complete sets of construction documents complying
with the New York State Education Law provisions governing
seal and signatures of licensed engineers and architects. The
construction documents (drawings and/or specifications) shall
(1) define the scope of the proposed work; (2) indicate with
sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of the work
proposed; and (3) substantiate that the proposed work will
comply with the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
(a) All plans for in-ground or partly in the ground swimming
pools of capacity in excess of 2,000 cubic feet shall be
designed by a licensed New York State professional
engineer or architect.
(b) All plans for new or major changes in commercial and/or
industrial buildings, structures or uses or mechanical
equipment must contain a certification by a New York
State licensed engineer or architect that the mechanical
plans meet all the provisions of the Uniform Code.
(c) All plans for buildings, structures, alterations or
equipment subject to the Energy Code must be certified by
a licensed professional that the plans were prepared by
him and are in compliance with the Energy Code.
1-2.1.4. A description of the proposed work and a statement of the
use or occupancy of all parts of the land and the proposed
buildings or structures.
1-2.1.5. A curb cut permit with an approved first inspection from
the Amherst Highway Superintendent, if on a Town highway;
otherwise, a highway work permit from the Erie County
Highway Department or the New York State Department of
Transportation, whichever is applicable, shall be submitted.
1-2.1.6. Approval from the Erie County Health Department if
sanitary waste disposal will be by means of a private disposal
system.
1-2.1.7. Sewer load analysis under seal and signature of a New York
State licensed engineer or architect, except for residential
occupancies.
1-2.1.8. A permit to build from the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or the United States Army Corps
of Engineers, as appropriate, if the parcel contains a
designated wetland.
§ 83-5-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-1
1:180
1-2.1.9. Designation of a New York State licensed engineer or
architect to oversee construction and provide certain
certifications to the Commissioner of Building prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy on complex or
specialized buildings, structures or equipment installations.
1-2.1.10. Any additional information or document required by the
Commissioner of Building as a result of new codes, ordinances,
laws, rules or regulations, variance granted, site plan
approvals, rezonings or conditions peculiar to the given parcel
or lot.
1-2.1.11. The Tax Map number and the street address of the
premises where the work is to be performed;
1-2.1.12. The occupancy classification of any affected building or
structure;
1-2.1.13. Where applicable, a statement of special inspections
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Code.
1-2.2. Any one or more of the above steps may be modified or waived by
the Commissioner of Building if he finds that they are impractical
or unnecessary due to change in existing applicable codes,
ordinances or other laws.
1-2.3. Any application may be amended or corrected and must be
amended if any change is made in plans or specifications, and no
modification in the actual work may be made until after such
amendment of application and the permit shall have been amended
or a new permit issued.
1-2.4. An application for a building permit shall be examined to
ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Commissioner of Building shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements
of local laws, the Uniform Code and the Energy Code. Upon
completion of the processing of an application for a building permit
by the Building Department, the owner or his authorized agent
shall sign the application and pay to the Town Clerk the fees
prescribed by this chapter and other applicable ordinances, laws,
rules, resolutions and regulations. Unless an owner, or an
authorized representative of the owner, for a building permit
resolves all outstanding items, signs the building permit and pays
the prescribed fees within six months of the completed processing
date, the application shall expire, all application fees paid shall be
forfeited and the application and all materials submitted with the
application may be destroyed. However, the Commissioner of
Building may extend the application, if in his determination there
§ 83-5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-1
1:181
are extenuating circumstances that prevented the petitioner from
securing the permit.
(a) Construction documents which are accepted as part of the
application for a building permit shall be marked as accepted
by the Commissioner of Building in writing or by stamp.
(b) Upon the issuance of a building permit, one set of the accepted
construction documents shall be retained by the Commissioner
of Building, and one set of the accepted construction
documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the
work site so as to be available for use by the code enforcement
personnel. The third set of construction documents may be
provided to the Code Enforcement Official who performs onsite
inspections.
(c) All work shall be performed in accordance with the
construction documents which were submitted with and
accepted as part of the application for the building permit. The
building permit shall contain such a directive. The permit
holder shall immediately notify the Commissioner of Building
of any change occurring during the course of the work. The
building permit shall contain such a directive. If the
Commissioner of Building determines that such change
warrants a new or amended building permit, such change shall
not be made until and unless a new or amended building
permit reflecting such change is issued.
(d) A quick permit application shall be accompanied with the fees
prescribed by this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. The Commissioner of Building shall transmit the
fees to the Town Clerk for payment prior to issuance of the
permit.
(e) No fees shall be required for work undertaken by the United
States of America, State of New York, County of Erie, Town of
Amherst or other governmental entity.
(f) In the event that work requiring a permit is commenced prior
to the issuance of the permit, the fee for the permit shall be
double the regular rate or $50, whichever is greater. This
charge shall be in addition to any other penalty provided for
commencement of work without a permit.
1-2.5. The Commissioner of Building shall issue a building permit or
quick permit to the owner or his authorized agent upon filing of a
completed application for permit and payment of the prescribed
fees.
1-2.6. When a permit has expired by limitation or abandonment, such
permit may be returned to the Commissioner of Building for
cancellation. The Commissioner of Building shall be authorized to
§ 83-5-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-1
1:182
issue a refund to the applicant in an amount equal to 50% of the
fees paid with a minimum to be retained of $10, except that no fee
shall be refunded if work has commenced and said permit expired
pursuant to Subsection A(2)(a).
1-2.7. During the progress of this construction, a set of plans and
specifications bearing the certification, stamp or signature of
approval of the Commissioner of Building shall be kept on the
premises involved at all times, and all work shall be carried out in
strict accordance with such plans and specifications.
1-2.8. The Commissioner of Building shall establish a registry of
persons, acting as individuals or representatives of firms or
corporations, who are authorized to apply and sign for quick
permits. The registry shall contain the names of individual persons
authorized to apply for quick permits and shall include for each
person a home or business address, business telephone number,
photograph, proof of current workers' compensation and New York
State disability coverage and a notarized signature. An application
for quick permit registration shall be filed with the Commissioner
of Building and a registration fee of $50 shall be paid to the Town
Clerk. A person registered in the quick permit program may file a
quick permit application through the mail or by any other method
authorized by the Commissioner of Building. A registration shall be
valid for a period of four years from the date of issuance. It shall be
the responsibility of the registrant to notify the Building
Department of any changes to the required registration
information.
1-2.9. Upon receiving an application for a demolition permit for a
structure with a blue color code as identified in Appendices 1 and 2
of the Updated Reconnaissance Level Survey of Historic Resources,
dated August 2011 and prepared by KTA Preservation Specialists/
Archaeological Survey, the application shall be referred to the
Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) of the Town of Amherst.
The HPC shall have a maximum of sixty (60) days to review the
demolition permit application, conduct a public hearing if deemed
necessary and render a decision concerning the issuance of the
demolition permit. [Added 5-16-2011 by L.L. No. 13-2011;
amended 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 2-25-2013 by L.L. No.
4-2013; 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
a. The HPC decision can (1) allow the issuance of the demolition
permit without condition, (2) allow the issuance of the
demolition permit with condition(s), or (3) deny the approval of
the issuance of the demolition permit.
b. If the HPC imposes a condition(s) before demolition can be
granted, such condition(s) should be clearly noted in the file. In
such case, a signature from the Building Commissioner and a
§ 83-5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-1
1:183
§ 83-5-2. Plumbing permits.
signature from the HPC Chair will be required before a final
demolition permit can be issued.
c. If the HPC denies the approval of the demolition permit, the
HPC, in accordance with Chapter 121 (Historic Preservation)
of the Code of the Town of Amherst, shall prepare and submit a
Notice of Proposed Designation to the Town Clerk within thirty
(30) days of their decision date to deny the demolition permit.
Any decision of the HPC for a demolition permit may be
appealed to the Town Board in accordance with § 121-15 of the
Code of the Town of Amherst.
2-1. No person, firm or corporation shall commence any plumbing, drainage
or sewer contracting work in any building, structure or parking lot or
on any premises, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a
separate plumbing permit or quick permit from the Commissioner of
Building for each such occurrence. When authorized by the
Commissioner of Building, a quick permit application may be filed in the
Building Department in accordance with procedures established by the
Commissioner of Building.
2-2. Commencement and completion of work time limits.
2-2.1. Unless actual construction work is begun within six months of the
date of any permit, then such permit shall expire by limitation,
except that the Commissioner of Building may postpone such
expiration if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant
delayed the commencement of work.
2-2.2. Unless work, commenced pursuant to a valid permit, is completed
within two years of the commencement of such work, either the
permit shall expire and all work completed shall be removed and
the premises returned to its original condition, or the permit shall
expire and a new permit shall be obtained upon submittal of a new
permit application and fees subject to the codes in effect at the time
of submittal of the new application. If a new permit is issued for the
purpose of completing work under a prior permit, all work
associated with the new permit must be completed within six
months of the date of issuance of the new permit. Failure to comply
with either of these alternatives shall be deemed to be a violation of
this chapter and subject to the penalties contained in § 83-1-5. The
Commissioner of Building may extend the completion time period
for any permit for just cause. Construction shall be deemed to be
complete upon approval of the final plumbing inspection or upon
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
by the Commissioner of Building or his authorized representative.
2-3. Procedures.
§ 83-5-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-2
1:184
2-3.1. Applications for a plumbing permit or quick permit shall be made
to the Commissioner of Building by a licensed master or employing
plumber, a licensed sewer contractor or the homeowner, if
approved by the Commissioner of Building, and shall contain the
information and documents required by him.
2-3.2. Upon completion of the application for a permit, the master
plumber, sewer contractor or homeowner shall file the application
with the Commissioner of Building and shall pay the fees
prescribed by this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
(a) A quick permit application shall be accompanied by the fees
prescribed by this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. The Commissioner of Building shall transmit the
fees to the Town Clerk for payment prior to the issuance of the
permit.
(b) No fees shall be required to be paid pursuant to the provisions
of Article XI of this chapter for work done to eliminate
infiltration or inflow of storm- or surface waters into sanitary
sewers pursuant to the order of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. This exemption
shall apply to such work undertaken on and after July 1, 1973.
All fees for such work collected on and after July 1, 1973, shall
be refunded.
(c) In the event that work requiring a permit is commenced prior
to the issuance of the permit, the fee for the permit shall be
double the regular rate or $50, whichever is greater. This
charge shall be in addition to any other penalty provided for
commencement of work without a permit.
2-3.3. The Commissioner of Building shall issue a plumbing permit or
quick permit to the master plumber, sewer contractor or
homeowner upon filing of a completed application for a permit and
payment of the prescribed fee.
2-3.4. When a permit has expired by limitation or abandonment, such
permit may be returned to the Commissioner of Building for
cancellation. The Commissioner of Building shall be authorized to
issue a refund to the applicant in the amount equal to 50% of the
fees paid, with a minimum to be retained of $10, except that no fees
shall be refunded if work has commenced and said permit has
expired pursuant to Subsection B(1).
2-3.5. A plumbing permit may be revoked or suspended because of any
false statement or misrepresentation of material fact in the
application or because of failure to supply additional information
required within a reasonable time or because the work is not being
executed in accordance with the codes, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the Town of Amherst, the state and county laws and
§ 83-5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-2
1:185
§ 83-5-3. Fire prevention permits.
regulations applicable, or in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. Notice of the revocation or suspension of the
permit shall be deemed to be duly given by service upon a
responsible individual in charge at the premises or by mailing to
the post office address of the party to whom the permit was issued.
It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work, except what may
be authorized by the Commissioner of Building, after revocation
or suspension of the permit, and no permit may be reissued after
revocation or suspension while any violation of any code,
ordinance, law, rules or regulation or state and county law or
regulation exists.
2-3.6. The Commissioner of Building shall establish a registry of
persons, acting as individuals or representatives of firms or
corporations, who are authorized to apply and sign for quick
permits. The registry shall contain the names of individual persons
authorized to apply for quick permits and shall include for each
person a home or business address, business telephone number,
photograph, proof of current workers' compensation and New York
State disability coverage and a notarized signature. An application
for quick permit registration shall be filed with the Commissioner
of Building and a registration fee of $50 shall be paid to the Town
Clerk. A person registered in the quick permit program may file a
quick permit application through the mail or by any other method
authorized by the Commissioner of Building. A registration shall be
valid for a period of four years from the date of issuance. It shall be
the responsibility of the registrant to notify the Building
Department of any changes to the required registration
information.
3-1. A fire prevention permit specifying the specific activity or operation
shall be obtained for the following:
ACETYLENE GENERATORS: to operate an acetylene generator having
a calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
AREA OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: See Article VII for operating permit.
AUTOMOBILE TIRE REBUILDING PLANTS: to operate an automobile
tire rebuilding plant.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARDS: to operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS: for bowling pin refinishing and
bowling lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application
of flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
CELLULOSE NITRATE MOTION-PICTURE FILM: to store, keep or
have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture
film.
§ 83-5-2 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-3
1:186
CELLULOSE NITRATE PLASTICS:
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose
nitrate plastics.
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics, which shall
include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics in the manufacture or
assembling of other articles.
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS: to store, handle or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products on
a farm.
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: to store combustible materials,
including but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes,
barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork
or other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
COMPRESSED GASES, NONFLAMMABLE: to store, handle or use
more than 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas at normal
temperatures and pressures.
CRYOGENICS: to store, handle, produce, sell or use cryogenic fluids,
except cryogens used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle
tanks.
DISABLING OF FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT: to temporarily
disable any fire protection equipment in accordance with Section
311.2 of the Fire Code of New York State.
DRY-CLEANING PLANTS: to use in excess of four gallons of solvents
or cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
DUST-PRODUCING PLANTS: to operate any grain elevator, flour,
starch or feed mill, woodworking plant, or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
EXPLOSIVE, AMMUNITION AND BLASTING AGENTS:
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose
nitrate plastics.
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
FIREWORKS DISPLAY (OUTDOORS): for display not given for gain or
for admission when a fee is charged. (See Chapter 68, Amusements,
for additional fireworks display requirements.)
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS:
§ 83-5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-3
1:187
(a) To store, handle or use flammable liquids in excess of 6.5 gallons
inside dwellings or in excess of 10 gallons inside any other
building or other occupancy or in excess of 60 gallons outside of
any building. This provision shall not apply to:
(1) Liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, portable
or stationary engine, boat or portable heating plant.
(2) Paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures, when
such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar
purposes.
(b) To store, handle or use combustible liquids in excess of 25 gallons
inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building.
This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in connection with
oil-burning equipment.
(c) A permit shall be obtained for the initial installation of an oil
burner and a fuel-oil tank used in connection therewith. A permit
shall be required for the replacement of a fuel-oil tank connection
to an oil burner.
(d) For processing, blending or refining of flammable or combustible
liquids.
FLAMMABLE FINISHING: for spraying, coating or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
FRUIT-RIPENING PROCESS: to conduct a fruit-ripening process using
ethylene gas.
FUMIGATION AND THERMAL INSECTICIDAL FOGGING: to conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: See Article VII for operating permit.
HAZARDOUS PROCESSES: See Article VII for operating permit.
JUNKYARDS: to operate a junkyard.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS: for each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of
interconnected containers of over 1,000 gallons' water capacity, and
for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of containers.
LUMBERYARDS: to operate a lumberyard.
MAGNESIUM: for melting, casting, heat treating, machining or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
MATCHES:
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. Note: One case equals one
matchman's gross of 14,000 matches.
ORGANIC COATINGS: to perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
§ 83-5-3 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-3
1:188
OVENS AND FURNACES: to operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F., which ovens are heated with oil
or gas fuel or which, during operation, contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
POTENTIAL HAZARD TO PUBLIC SAFETY: See Article VII for
operating permit.
PYROTECHNIC INDOOR DISPLAYS: See Article VII for operating
permit.
SERVICE STATIONS AND REPAIR GARAGES: to operate a service
station or repair garage.
TENTS: to erect a temporary tent in excess of 200 square feet on any
parcel being used for nonresidential purposes.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK (UST) REMOVAL: to remove any
underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank(s).
WELDING AND CUTTING: to operate a welding and cutting business.
A record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are
performed shall be maintained and kept available for inspection by the
permit holder.
3-2. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation,
location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
3-3. Revocation or suspension of permit.
3-3.1. A fire prevention permit may be revoked or suspended because of
any false statement or misrepresentation of material fact in the
application or because of failure to supply additional information
required within a reasonable time or because the work is not being
executed in accordance with the codes, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the Town of Amherst, the state and county laws and
regulations applicable, or in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. Notice of the revocation or suspension of the
permit shall be deemed to be duly given by service upon a
responsible individual in charge at the premises or by mailing to
the post office address of the party to whom the permit was issued.
It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work, except what may be
authorized by the Commissioner of Building, after revocation or
suspension of the permit, and no permit may be reissued after
revocation or suspension while any violation of any code,
ordinance, law, rules or regulation or state and county law or
regulation exists.
3-4. Procedures.
3-4.1. An application for a fire prevention permit shall be made to the
Commissioner of Building on forms provided or prescribed by him
and shall contain the following information:
§ 83-5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-3
1:189
§ 83-5-4. Electrical permits.
(a) The activity or operation for which a permit is requested,
including location, quantities and methods of storage of any
hazardous materials, substances or devices.
(b) The address or location where activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(c) The name and address of the applicant.
(d) The period of time for which the permit is requested.
(e) Any additional information or documents required by the
Commissioner of Building because of conditions or
circumstances peculiar to the location, parcel or premises or to
the hazardous substances, materials or devices involved.
3-4.2. The application for a fire prevention permit shall be upon oath as
to the facts stated therein. The application shall be filed with the
Town Clerk. The fee prescribed by this chapter shall be paid at the
time of filing.
3-5. A certificate of occupancy issued for a building or structure shall
constitute the fire prevention permit if the activity or operation
requiring a permit is specifically certified as part thereof.
3-6. The Commissioner of Building shall conduct periodic inspections of all
occupancies for compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Code
and for compliance with the provisions of any fire prevention permit
issued and shall issue appropriate notices or orders citing all violations
and setting time limits for compliance or ordering such activity or
operation to cease until violations are corrected.
4-1. No person, firm or corporation shall commence any electrical work
involving electrical installation, alterations or repairs of wiring or
fixtures for electrical light, heat, cooling, power and control on any
premises or within or on any building or structure, or cause the same to
be done, without first obtaining a separate electrical permit or quick
permit from the Commissioner of Building for each such occurrence.
When authorized by the Commissioner of Building, a quick permit
application may be filed in the Building Department in accordance with
procedures established by the Commissioner of Building.
4-2. Commencement and completion of work time limits.
4-2.1. Unless actual work is begun within six months of the date of any
permit, then such permit shall expire by limitation, except that the
Commissioner of Building may postpone such expiration if
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant delayed the
commencement of work.
§ 83-5-3 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-4
1:190
4-2.2. Unless work, commenced pursuant to a valid permit, is completed
within two years of the commencement of such work, either the
permit shall expire and all work completed shall be removed and
the premises returned to its original condition, or the permit shall
expire and a new permit shall be obtained upon submittal of a new
permit application and fees subject to the codes in effect at the time
of submittal of the new application. If a new permit is issued for the
purpose of completing work under a prior permit, all work
associated with the new permit must be completed within six
months of the date of issuance of the new permit. Failure to comply
with either of these alternatives shall be deemed to be a violation of
this chapter and subject to the penalties contained in § 83-1-5. The
Commissioner of Building may extend the completion time period
for any permit for just cause. Construction shall be deemed to be
complete upon the approval of the final electrical inspection or
upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance by the Commissioner of Building or his authorized
representative.
4-3. Procedures.
4-3.1. Applications for an electrical permit or quick permit shall be
made to the Commissioner of Building by a licensed master
electrician, residential electrician or the homeowner as specified in
the licensing section of this chapter, and shall contain the
information and documents required by him.
4-3.2. Upon the completion of the application for an electrical permit,
the licensed master electrician, residential electrician or
homeowner shall file the application with the Commissioner of
Building and shall pay the fees prescribed by this chapter and other
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
(a) A quick permit application shall be accompanied with the fees
prescribed by this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. The Commissioner of Building shall transmit the
fees to the Town Clerk for payment prior to the issuance of the
permit.
(b) In the event that the work requiring a permit is commenced
prior to the issuance of the permit, the fee for the permit shall
be double the regular rate or $50, whichever is greater. This
charge shall be in addition to any other penalty provided for
commencement of work without a permit.
4-3.3. The Commissioner of Building shall issue an electrical permit or
quick permit upon filing of a completed application for a permit and
payment of the prescribed fees.
4-3.4. When a permit has expired by limitation or abandonment, such
permit may be returned to the Commissioner of Building for
cancellation. The Commissioner of Building shall be authorized to
§ 83-5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-4
1:191
§ 83-5-5. Inspections.
issue a refund to the applicant in an amount equal to 1/2 of the total
permit fee, with a minimum to be retained of $10.
4-3.5. An electrical permit may be revoked or suspended because of any
false statement or misrepresentation of material fact in the
application or because of failure to supply additional information
required within a reasonable time or because the work is not being
executed in accordance with the codes, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the Town of Amherst, state and county laws and
regulations applicable or in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. Notice of the revocation or suspension of the
permit shall be deemed to be duly given by service upon a
responsible individual in charge at the premises or by mailing to
the post office address of the person to whom the permit was
issued. It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work, except what
may be authorized by the Commissioner of Building, after
revocation or suspension of the permit, and no permit may be
reissued after revocation or suspension while any violation of any
code, ordinance, law, rule or regulation or state or county law or
regulation exists.
4-3.6. The Commissioner of Building shall establish a registry of
persons, acting as individuals or representatives of firms or
corporations, who are authorized to apply and sign for quick
permits. The registry shall contain the names of individual persons
authorized to apply for quick permits and shall include for each
person a home or business address, business telephone number,
photograph, proof of current workers' compensation and New York
State disability coverage and a notarized signature. An application
for quick permit registration shall be filed with the Commissioner
of Building and the registration fee of $50 shall be paid to the Town
Clerk. A person registered in the quick permit program may file a
quick permit application through the mail or by any other method
authorized by the Commissioner of Building. A registration shall be
valid for a period of four years from the date of issuance. It shall be
the responsibility of the registrant to notify the Building
Department of any changes to the required registration
information.
5-1. All work authorized under a valid building permit, electrical permit,
plumbing permit, or fire prevention permit shall be executed in strict
accordance with plans and specifications previously approved by the
Commissioner of Building. No part of any building, structure, electrical
wiring, parking lot, plumbing and drainage or sewer work shall be
covered or concealed in any way until it has been examined and
approved by the assigned inspector nor shall electrical power be
connected to any building, structure or premises until authorized by the
Commissioner of Building. The permit holder shall notify the
§ 83-5-4 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-5
1:192
Commissioner of Building when any element of work described in this
part is ready for inspection.
5-1.1. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(a) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(b) Footing and foundation;
(c) Preparation for concrete slab;
(d) Framing;
(e) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(f) Fire-resistant construction;
(g) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(h) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas
vents;
(i) Accessible and usable buildings and facilities;
(j) Energy Code compliance;
(k) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building
permit has been completed; and
(l) Any other inspection required by the Commissioner of Building
for the purpose of determining compliance with all applicable
laws, codes, rules, ordinances and regulations.
5-2. When the Commissioner of Building or his designated representative
finds that the licensed plumber, journeyman plumber, licensed master
electrician, residential electrician or occupant-owner as allowed in
§ 83-4-1 is not at work at any electrical, plumbing or drainage job or
that the licensed sewer contractor, journeyman sewerman, master
electrician, residential electrician or owner-occupant is not at work on
the project subject to the issued permit, he shall not be obliged to call
again until another application for inspection is made.
5-3. In cases that are dangerous from liability of a cave-in or where there is
no room to leave the earth, an application may be made for a special
inspector who will remain upon the job and watch the work until
finished. Special inspectors shall be approved by the Commissioner of
Building and shall be paid by the owner at the prevailing scale of wages
for inspectors in the County of Erie.
5-4. Notice of each inspection made shall be left by the inspector in a
conspicuous place on the jobsite. After inspection, the work or a portion
thereof shall be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder
shall be notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform
§ 83-5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-5
1:193
Code, Energy Code or this chapter. Work not in compliance with any
applicable provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or this chapter
shall remain exposed until such work has been brought into compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code
and this chapter, has been reinspected, and has been found satisfactory
as completed.
5-5. Whenever an inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that work on
any building, structure, parking lot or premises or in the handling,
storage or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices is being
performed in violation of the provisions of the applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules or regulations or not in conformity with the provisions
of an approved plan or specification on the basis of which a building,
plumbing, electrical or fire prevention permit was issued or in an
unsafe or dangerous manner, he shall place a stop order on all work
being performed, or he shall order the handling, storage or use of
hazardous substances, materials or devices to cease, which order may
be served on the owner, or his agent or the responsible party on the
site, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work and suspend
all prohibited activities until the order has been rescinded. The order
shall be in writing, shall state the condition under which the work may
be resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed
either by handing it personally to him or by posting same upon a
conspicuous portion of the building, structure, parking lot or premises
where the work is being performed.
5-6. The Commissioner of Building, Assistant Commissioner of Building or
an inspector, upon the showing of proper credentials and in the
discharge of his duties, shall be permitted to enter upon any building,
structure, parking lot or premises without interference during
reasonable working hours.
5-7. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
5-7.1. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of buildings and structures shall be performed by the
Commissioner of Building or an inspector designated by the
Commissioner of Building at the following intervals:
A. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings
or structures which contain an area of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
B. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings
or structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed
at least once every 12 months.
C. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all
multiple dwellings not included in Subsection G(1)(a) or (b) of
this subsection, and all nonresidential buildings, structures,
uses and occupancies not included in Subsection G(1)(a) or (b)
§ 83-5-5 AMHERST CODE § 83-5-5
1:194
of this subsection, shall be performed at least once every 36
months.
5-8. Failure to make required corrections to work upon the second
inspection shall result in additional inspection fees as required by the
appropriate permit fee schedule.
§ 83-5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5-5
1:195

PART VI
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
§ 83-6-1. Requirements.
1-1. Certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be required
for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all
structures, buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued, shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance.
1-1.1. No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole
or in part until a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance shall have been issued by the Commissioner of
Building.
1-1.2. No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered shall be
occupied unless a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance shall have been issued by the Commissioner of
Building.
1-1.3. No change shall be made in the nature of the occupancy or use of
an existing building unless a certificate of occupancy or certificate
of compliance authorizing such a change shall have been issued.
1-1.4. A certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be
obtained within 90 days of completion of all work associated with
an issued building permit. At the discretion of the Commissioner of
Building, the final inspection report shall constitute a certificate of
compliance but the Commissioner of Building may issue a separate
certificate of compliance if requested or if he deems appropriate.
1-2. Issuance of certificates of occupancy or certificates of compliance. The
Commissioner of Building shall issue a certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy Code and other applicable local
laws, and, if applicable, the structure, building or portion thereof that
was converted from one use or occupancy classification or
subclassification to another complies with all applicable provisions of
the Uniform Code, Energy Code and other applicable local laws. The
Commissioner of Building or an inspector authorized by the
Commissioner of Building shall inspect the building, structure or work
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance. If it is found that the work has not been properly
completed, the Commissioner of Building shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance and shall order the work to be
completed in conformity with the building permit, this chapter, the
§ 83-6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6-1
1:197
Uniform Code, Energy Code, ordinances, rules and regulations and the
approved plans.
A. The Commissioner of Building shall act to issue or deny an
application for a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance within 30 days after all work has been completed, final
inspections have been made and acceptable reports have been
received from appropriate agencies.
B. The following documents, prepared by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Commissioner
of Building, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the
Commissioner of Building prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final
report of special inspections.
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
(3) A survey of the land and buildings under the seal and signature
of a surveyor authorized to practice in New York State.
(4) A highway work permit and final approval from the appropriate
highway department that controls the street on which the
building is located.
(5) As-built drawings of the building or structure if there have
been any deviations from the original approved plan.
(6) Certification by a New York State licensed engineer or
architect that the building, structure, alterations and
equipment, if subject to the Energy Code, meet all the
provisions of such code.
(7) Any additional documents that may be required by the
Commissioner of Building because of a particular situation or
circumstance.
(8) Any one or more of the above steps may be modified or waived
by the Commissioner of Building if he finds that they are
impractical or unnecessary or are due to a change in any
applicable code, ordinance, rule or regulation.
1-3. Contents of certificates of occupancy or certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
A. The building permit number, if any;
B. The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
C. The name, address and tax map number of the property;
§ 83-6-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-6-1
1:198
D. If the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance is issued;
E. The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
F. The type of construction of the structure;
G. The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
H. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
I. Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
J. The signature of the Commissioner of Building issuing the
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
1-4. Temporary certificate. The Commissioner of Building shall be permitted
to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a
building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of the
work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no event
shall the Commissioner of Building issue a temporary certificate unless
the Commissioner of Building determines (1) that the building or
structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate,
may be occupied safely, (2) that any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire
protection equipment which has been installed is operational, and (3)
that all required means of egress from the building or structure have
been provided. The Commissioner of Building may include in a
temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems
necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes
and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, which shall be determined by the
Commissioner of Building and specified in the temporary certificate.
During the specified period of effectiveness of the temporary
certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or
structure into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code. The expiration date of a temporary
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance may be extended
by the Commissioner of Building for good cause.
1-5. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Commissioner of
Building determines that a certificate of occupancy, certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued through error of law
or because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if
the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner of Building within such period of time as shall be
specified by the Commissioner of Building, the Commissioner of
Building shall revoke or suspend such certificate. Except as otherwise
§ 83-6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6-1
1:199
provided by law, a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
issued through error of fact or law shall not be valid.
1-6. Fees. The fees specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article XI, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at
the time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy,
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
§ 83-6-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-6-1
1:200
PART VII
OPERATING PERMITS
§ 83-7-1. Requirements.
1-1. Operating permits required.
A. Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
the Commissioner of Building.
B. Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
1-2. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Commissioner of Building. Such application shall
include such information as the Commissioner of Building deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Commissioner of Building
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Commissioner of Building determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Commissioner of
Building, at the expense of the applicant.
1-3. Inspections. The Commissioner of Building or an inspector authorized
by the Commissioner of Building shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
1-4. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
§ 83-7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-7-1
1:201
Commissioner of Building may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Commissioner of Building may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
1-5. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, expired, revoked, or suspended. The
Commissioner of Building may allow the certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance to serve as the operating permit if the
permitted operation is noted on the certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance.
1-6. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Commissioner of
Building determines that any activity or building for which an operating
permit was issued does not comply with any applicable provision of the
Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended.
1-7. Fees. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article XI, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at
the time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
§ 83-7-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-7-1
1:202
PART VIII
PARKING LOTS
§ 83-8-1. Applications and plans.
§ 83-8-2. Paving.
1-1. All applications for a building permit shall show the required off-street
parking, pursuant to the area requirements of Chapter 203, Zoning, of
the Code of the Town of Amherst. If off-street parking is not required, a
statement to that effect shall be endorsed on said application by the
Commissioner of Building.
1-2. Parking areas and parking lots not included in an application for a
building permit require an application to be filed accompanied by plans
for a permit to construct same and shall show the layout and location of
off-street parking and loading areas, layout of the individual parking
spaces, type and thickness of pavement, landscaping, drainage details,
fences, barricades, drives, aprons, sidewalks, signs and public lighting.
No part of any highway right-of-way shall be included in a parking lot.
1-3. Individual parking spaces shall be marked on the pavement when the
lot is complete.
1-4. At all times parking lots shall be clean and orderly and free of rubbish
and weeds.
1-5. The provisions of this part will not apply to single-family dwellings in
the S-A zoned district, unless there exists an accessory use which
requires more than a normal residential parking area.
2-1. Every parking lot shall be paved with the type of material and thickness
sufficient to support the loads to be imposed and with a surface not
subject to excessive dusting.
2-2. Paving may be of concrete of a minimum thickness of five inches, three
courses of asphaltic concrete of a minimum total thickness of nine
inches or other materials complying with the above subsection and
approved by the Commissioner of Building.
2-3. Concrete pavement shall comply with the requirements of Article IX
governing the construction of sidewalks.
2-4. Asphaltic concrete pavement shall be in three courses. The base course
shall consist of good quality crush stone, gravel or other acceptable
local material, uniformly spread and compacted with a power roller
weighing not less than 10 tons. The coarse aggregate shall range in size
from 2 1/2 inches to one inch and shall be filled with a fine aggregate
ranging in size from 1/2 inch down. As rolling proceeds, additional fine
aggregate shall be added until the voids are filled. The minimum
finished thickness shall be at least six inches. The surface courses shall
consist of a mixture of coarse and finer mineral aggregate and asphalt
§ 83-8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-8-2
1:203
§ 83-8-3. Drainage.
§ 83-8-4. Barricades.
cement incorporated together in accordance with New York State
Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) standards and specifications.
If one or more NYSDOT material specifications contained in this
chapter become obsolete, renumbered or are found to be unacceptable
by the Commissioner of Building, the Commissioner of Building shall
designate one or more acceptable replacements for the material
specifications. The asphaltic concrete shall be spread and finished with
mechanical self-powered pavers or by acceptable hand methods. All
joints such as occur between working days shall be set up so that when
rolled they shall be thoroughly filled and level with adjacent areas. It
shall be rolled at the proper temperature to prevent undue shoving with
tandem rollers weighing five tons to 10 tons. The minimum thickness
shall be at least three inches (two inches of binder and one inch of top).
After completion of the surface course, no vehicle shall be permitted on
the pavement until it has cooled to a surface temperature of 75° F. or at
least four hours, whichever is greater.
3-1. All parking lots shall be so graded that stormwater will flow away from
any building and will not drain upon abutting properties, sidewalks and
pavements.
3-2. Drainage for all parking lots shall be designed in accord with standards
and recommendations in the Storm Drainage Design Manual, published
by the Erie and Niagara Counties Regional Planning Board, using the
rational method and a minimum recurrent storm of 10 years, and shall
lead to an approved public outfall.
3-3. All drainage pipes and appurtenances shall be installed by a licensed
master plumber or licensed sewer contractor and shall be done only
after receiving a permit from the Commissioner of Building and paying
the prescribed fee.
4-1. Every parking space that abuts a property line shall be provided with a
barricade to prevent the encroachment of vehicles over the property
line.
4-2. The following barricades are approved for use in parking lots in the
Town of Amherst:
A. The following, provided that they are located four feet from any
property line and installed in accord with Drawing No. 1:
(1) Town of Amherst standard concrete curb.
(2) Reinforced concrete bumper.
(3) Reinforced timber bumper.
§ 83-8-2 AMHERST CODE § 83-8-4
1:204
§ 83-8-5. Aprons.
B. The following, provided that they are located two feet from any
property line and installed in accord with Drawing No. 1:
(1) Guardrail bumper.
(2) Welded four-inch pipe bumper.
(3) Pole and timber bumper.
4-3. The color of all barricades shall be such that they contrast with the
pavement and are readily discernible at all times of the day or night.
4-4. Barricades other than the typical barricades listed above may be
installed upon the approval of the Commissioner of Building.
5-1. All aprons installed on driveways connecting to a Town highway shall
conform to Town of Amherst Curb Cut Specifications, published by the
Town of Amherst Highway Department.13
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Curb Cuts.
§ 83-8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-8-5
1:205
5-2. All apron widths and ditch culverts connecting to state and county
highways shall be installed in accordance with the highway work permit
issued and with all state and county laws, rules and regulations.
§ 83-8-5 AMHERST CODE § 83-8-5
1:206
PART IX
SIDEWALKS
§ 83-9-1. Requirements. [Amended 12-7-2009 by L.L. No. 21-2009;
12-7-2009 by L.L. No. 14-2010; 8-19-2019 by L.L. No. 17-2019]
1-1. Locations.
1-1.1. Sidewalks shall be required along the entire street frontage of a
lot or parcel that abuts an arterial or collector street when the lot
or parcel is developed and along the entire frontage of such other
lots or parcels as the Planning or Town Boards shall direct. Walks
along Town streets shall be located in accord with Chapter 204,
Subdivision of Land, § 3-2-4. If the highway is a state or county
highway, the walks shall be located in accord with the work permit
issued therefor. The Planning Board, as a part of the site plan or
subdivision approval, or the Town Board may waive the
requirement for a sidewalk on a given parcel or development.
1-1.2. Sidewalks are not required on the following segments of ruralcharacter
arterials or collector streets:
Name of Street Location
Campbell Boulevard West side from Burgundy
Terrace to Tonawanda Creek;
and east side from North
Rockingham Way to Tonawanda
Creek
Hopkins Road Millersport Highway to
Tonawanda Creek Road
Millersport Highway New Road to Transit Road
New Road Millersport Highway to
Tonawanda Creek
North Ellicott Creek Road
Schoelles Road
South Ellicott Creek Road North side and south side from
Denrose Drive to Kaymar Drive
Sweet Home Road Christine Drive/Sweethaven
Court to Tonawanda Creek
Road
Tonawanda Creek Road Sweet Home Road to Transit
Road
Youngs Road West side from Turnberry Court
to Maple Road; and east side
from The Common to Maple
Road
§ 83-9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-9-1
1:207
1-1.3. Sidewalks shall be installed on new local collector and local
streets as required by the Planning Board, as a part of an approved
site plan or subdivision, or by the Town Board, in which event they
shall be located in accord with Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land,
§ 3-2-4.
1-1.3A. Sidewalks shall be installed at the time of development along
the entire street frontage of any lot or parcel abutting a local
collector or local street existing on the effective date of this section,
unless waived by resolution of the Planning Board as a part of the
approved site plan, subdivision, or by the Town Board.
1-1.3B. The determination of whether a particular street is a local
street, local collector, collector, or arterial shall be made by the
Planning Board either as a part of the site plan or subdivision
review, or as a separate determination.
1-2. Installation of sidewalks more than 25 feet in length.
1-2.1. The owner or occupant of a residential lot or parcel that has been
ordered by the Town Board to install sidewalks which are 25 or
more contiguous feet in total length shall:
A. Privately cause the sidewalk to be installed, according to the
specifications set forth in this part and within the time stated in
the Town Board order; or
B. Advise in writing the Commissioner of Building of the desire to
have the Town of Amherst install the sidewalk and have the
expense thereof assessed against the property benefited
pursuant to New York State Town Law § 200-a.
1-2.2. The failure of the owner or occupant to take action as set forth in
Subsection 1-2.1A or B will result in the Town enforcing New York
State Town Law § 200-a.
1-2.3. The option to have the expense of sidewalk installation assessed
against the benefited property in multiple annual installments shall
not be available to the owner or occupant of a premises where a
certificate of occupancy has not yet been issued or, if issued, a
sidewalk installation waiver had previously been granted.
1-2.4. This subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
towns by § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law to adopt local laws
relating to their property, affairs or government. To the extent this
subsection is inconsistent, New York State Town Law § 200-a is
hereby superseded.
1-3. "Site plan," as used in this section, shall mean the document and/or
procedure as defined in Chapter 203, Zoning. "Subdivision," as used in
this section, shall mean the document and/or procedure as defined in
Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land.
§ 83-9-1 AMHERST CODE § 83-9-2
1:208
§ 83-9-2. Construction.
§ 83-9-3. Concrete sidewalk specifications.
Sidewalks shall be of concrete and constructed to the following
specifications:
2-1. Sidewalks shall be five feet wide on streets designated arterials and
shall be four feet wide on all other streets.
2-2. The elevation of the sidewalk shall be the curb elevation plus 1/4 inch to
one foot for the distance measured from the curbline to the outer line of
the sidewalk.
2-2.1. Where no curb exists, the elevation of the crown of the roadway
shall be used in place of the curb elevation. Drives shall be so
graded that the portion occupying the space reserved for sidewalks
shall meet the requirements for sidewalks.
2-2.2. Where no grades have been established, or where local
conditions warrant a deviation from the foregoing, the
Commissioner of Building shall establish lines and elevations.
2-3.Within the street right-of-way where any sidewalk and/or drives exist in
the same block, additional sidewalks and/or drives shall conform to
those existing in such blocks or to the ruling of the Commissioner of
Building.
2-4. If one or more NYSDOT specifications contained in this chapter become
obsolete, renumbered or are found to be unacceptable by the
Commissioner of Building, the Commissioner of Building shall
designate one or more acceptable replacements for the material
specifications.
2-5. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt (bituminous
concrete), concrete pavers, or flexible material. The color of the
concrete pavers or flexible material shall be substantially similar to the
color of the public sidewalks within the same street block or to the
ruling of the Commissioner of Building. In all cases, the sidewalk shall
be installed in accordance with the more restrictive requirements of the
manufacturer's installation instructions or to the ruling of the
Commissioner of Building.
3-1. Materials. The materials used shall meet the following requirements:
Material Specifications
Type 1A portland cement NYSDOT Material Spec. Section
701-01
Curing compound NYSDOT Material Spec. Section
711-05
§ 83-9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-9-3
1:209
Material Specifications
Premolded bituminous joint
filler
NYSDOT Material Spec. Section
705-07
Base course material No. 1
stone
NYSDOT Material Spec. Section
703-01
Water Shall be clean enough to drink
Proportions of mix Proportions are to consist of 1:2:3 mix
and 6 1/2 gallons of water per sack of
cement maximum
3-2. Excavation.
3-2.1. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a width
that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms.
3-2.2. Subbase shall be thoroughly compacted and all soft spots
removed and replaced by run of crusher stone.
3-2.3. When a fill exceeding one foot in thickness is required, it shall be
thoroughly compacted by tamping in layers not exceeding six
inches. All fill shall be compacted by a minimum one-half-ton roller
before application of concrete.
3-3. Forms. Forms shall be metal or wood, straight, free from warp and of
such construction that no displacement from alignment will occur
during placement of concrete. All forms shall extend for the full depth
of the concrete and shall be rigidly held to line and grade by stakes or
braces.
3-4. Installation.
3-4.1. A four-inch bed of compacted No. 1 stone shall form the
foundation course. The foundation course shall be thoroughly
moistened immediately prior to the placing of the concrete.
Concrete shall be placed in forms in accordance with the
requirements of the New York State Department of Transportation
specification Section 601-3-04, Handling and Placing Concrete, and
shall be compacted in an approved immersion-type mechanical
vibrator. Forms shall be left in place for 24 hours or until the
concrete has set sufficiently so that they can be removed without
injury to the sidewalk.
3-4.2. Concrete shall be placed in one course to a minimum thickness of
five inches across driveways and a minimum of four inches in all
other locations, in such a manner as to prevent segregation.
3-4.3. The concrete shall be finished to produce a brushed finish.
§ 83-9-3 AMHERST CODE § 83-9-3
1:210
§ 83-9-4. Bituminous sidewalk specifications.
Where specifically authorized by resolution of the Town Board, bituminous
sidewalks conforming to the following specifications may be installed:
3-4.4. No concrete is to be laid when the temperature is lower than 45°
F. unless the concrete is protected in accordance with acceptable
standards for the cold-weather placement of concrete.
3-5. Joints.
3-5.1. Transverse contraction or control joints shall extend to the full
depth of the slab, filled with a one-half-inch premolded bituminous
joint filler and spaced not to exceed 25 feet apart. The edges of
such joints shall be finished with an edging tool having a onefourth-
inch radius.
3-5.2. The concrete surface shall be scored at intervals of five feet so
that the finished walk will be marked in squares.
3-5.3. Full-depth isolation joints shall be formed around all
appurtenances such as manholes, water valves, etc., and at all
joints between sidewalks, curbs, buildings, etc. Premolded
bituminous joint filler, one-half-inch thick, shall be installed in those
joints.
3-6. Protection.
3-6.1. When completed, the sidewalk shall be kept moist and protected
from traffic and the elements for at least three days.
3-6.2. The forms shall be removed with great care and, upon their
removal, the voids created shall be backfilled.
3-7. Backfilling. After the concrete has set, any remaining excavated areas
or voids created by the forms shall be backfilled with good quality
topsoil or other material approved by the Commissioner of Building.
3-8. Reinforcement. If the location of the sidewalk is such that upheaval is
likely or is subject to vehicular traffic as in a parking lot, steel
reinforcement in the form of wire mesh may be required by the
Commissioner of Building.
4-1. Materials.
Material Specification
Base course material No. 1
stone
NYSDOT Material Spec. Section
703-01
Bituminous material binder
Type 2A
NYSDOT Material Spec. Section 401
4-2. Construction requirements.
§ 83-9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-9-4
1:211
§ 83-9-5. Owner responsibility.
4-2.1. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and width.
4-2.2. An eight-inch-deep foundation course shall be formed of two fourinch
layers of compacted No. 1 stone.
4-2.3. Bituminous sidewalk material shall be placed on the compacted
foundation course in one course so as to give the required depth of
two inches after rolling. The requirements of the New York State
Department of Transportation Specification Section 401-3,
Construction Requirements for Plant Mix Pavements-General, shall
apply.
5-1. Owner to maintain sidewalk; exceptions.
5-1.1. The owner or occupant of any premises fronting or abutting on
any street or highway shall repair, keep safe and maintain any
sidewalk abutting the premises and keep it free and clear from
snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction. All trees, shrubs, plants and
other vegetation must be cut back to a height of eight feet directly
above the surface of any sidewalk. Any such owner or occupant
shall be liable for any injury or damage by reason of omission or
failure to repair, keep safe and maintain such sidewalk or to remove
snow, ice or other obstructions therefrom or negligence in
performing those functions.14
5-2. No person shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or other materials
in or beyond the right-of-way of any street or public highway or cause
such to be done so as to interfere with the safety and convenience of
public travel.
14.Editor's Note: Former Subsections 5-1.2, 5-1.3, 5-1.4, 5-1.5, added 4-11-2011 by L.L. No.
7-2011, and 5-1.6, added 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011, amended 6-6-2011 by L.L. No.
16-2011, which provided exemptions to certain property owners from the requirement to
keep sidewalks that are located along rear property lines adjacent to certain major
highways free from snow and ice, were repealed 5-21-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012.
§ 83-9-4 AMHERST CODE § 83-9-5
1:212
PART X
REINFORCEMENT OF RESIDENTIAL FOUNDATIONS
§ 83-10-1. Reinforcement specifications.
§ 83-10-2. Requirement for basement floor slab.
All basement floor slabs shall be installed with woven wire mesh, fiber mesh
or reinforcing steel.
§ 83-10-3. Soil for backfill.
Backfill within 24 inches around the foundation walls shall not consist of
cohesive or expansive soils. However, a clay cap of 12 inches is permitted.
§ 83-10-4. Prohibition.
Unreinforced foundation walls shall not be permitted.
1-1. All residential foundation walls subject to the Residential Code of New
York State shall be reinforced with vertical reinforcement specified in
Tables R404.1.1(2), R404.1.1(3), R404.1.1(4) of the Residential Code of
New York State. All other foundations shall be reinforced with vertical
reinforcement specified in Tables 1805.5(2), 1805.5(3), 1805.5(4) of the
Building Code of New York State.
1-2. For buildings or basements, in addition to the above, horizontal
reinforcing consisting of a minimum of two rows of No. 4 reinforcing
bar shall be installed in the foundation wall with one bar approximately
two feet above the basement floor slab, and a second bar below the
basement window, but no more than five feet above the finished
basement floor level. Further, a minimum of two No. 4 bars shall be
installed horizontally in the footing parallel to the foundation wall.
1-3. The installation of all reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with
American Concrete Institute standard ACI 318-99, Building Code
requirements for structural concrete.
§ 83-10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-10-4
1:213

PART XI
FEES
§ 83-11-1. Establishment of fee schedule and requirement for
payment of fees.
1-1. A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Town Board.
Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected
for the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits,
amended building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of
occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating
permits, firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other
actions of the Commissioner of Building described in or contemplated
by this chapter. All fees shall be payable to the Town Clerk. Building
permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits,
certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates, and operating permits shall not be valid until all fees have
been paid to the Town Clerk.
1-2. Upon application for a building permit, a filing fee equal to 1/2 of the
building permit fee shall be paid before the application will be deemed
complete. The filing fee shall not be refunded if the permit is processed.
The filing fee shall be a credit against the final permit fee.
1-3. Where fees are based upon the cost of construction, the fee shall be
calculated in accordance with the most current building valuation data
as used by the International Code Council (ICC) or any successor
organization.
1-4. By the adoption of a resolution by the Town Board, all fees contained in
this chapter may be adjusted annually commensurate with any increase
of the consumer price index (Northeast Region All Items — All Urban
Consumers). The annual adjustment shall generally become effective on
January 1 of each year based on the year-to-year change in the prior
September. All fees over $100 shall be rounded off to the nearest whole
dollar.
§ 83-11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-11-1
1:215

PART XII
FIRE LIMITS
§ 83-12-1. Designation of fire limits.
All areas of the Town shall be designated outside fire limits. However,
notwithstanding any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation to the contrary, all
conditions placed by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Amherst on
all removals from fire limits granted prior to January 1, 2003, shall remain
valid and in effect, unless the building and premises are found to be in full
compliance with all provisions of the Uniform Code.
§ 83-12-2. through § 83-12-4. (Reserved)
§ 83-12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-12-2
1:217

PART XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 83-13-1. (Reserved)
§ 83-13-2. Drainage of swimming pools.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water from a
swimming pool over a public sidewalk or into a public street.
§ 83-13-3. Natural ponds, excavations, quarries and gravel pits.
Owners of property upon which ponds, excavations, quarries and gravel
pits, excavated or formed by natural causes, exist shall be responsible for
the posting of "no trespassing" signs.
§ 83-13-4. Yard drainage.
4-1. Yards and areas must always be properly drained and connected to a
storm sewer or other approved outfall. Where stormwater or roof water
connects to a drain tile under a curb or open gutter, there must be a sixinch
"T" located adjacent to the curb or gutter and a minimum six-inch
pipe brought to finished grade, capped with a metal perforated vent cap
for overflow. The finished grade of the vent cap shall be above the curb
or gutter so that the stormwater overflow from the vent cap will drain to
the street or other approved outfall. The stormwater discharge pipe
from the roof-water collection system to the street underdrain shall be a
minimum of six inches in diameter.
4-2. The front, side and rear yards of all lots upon which a structure is to be
constructed shall be drained by:
A. Grading of the lot with a one-percent grade, pitching from the rear
lot line toward the front property line, using the curb level or the
crown of the road as the base level; or
B. An approved surface drainage system that will direct all water to an
approved outfall without spilling any on adjacent property and only
after the filing of appropriate deed restrictions or easements to
prevent the altering of the surface drainage system; or
C. A stormwater drainage system designed to drain a minimum tenyear,
six-hour event storm. This system must have appropriate
provisions for cleaning and maintenance; or
D. A stormwater drainage system approved by the Commissioner of
Building.
§ 83-13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-13-4
1:219

PART XIV
COMPLAINTS
§ 83-14-1. Requirements and procedures.
1-1. The Commissioner of Building shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as
the Commissioner of Building may deem to be appropriate:
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged
to be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the
violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the
manner described in § 83-1-5 of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been
abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting
such abatement or correction, and filing such report with the
complaint.
§ 83-14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-14-1
1:221

PART XV
PROGRAM REVIEW AND REPORTING
§ 83-15-1. Requirements.
1-1. The Commissioner of Building shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Town, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of the Town relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
1-2. The Commissioner of Building shall, upon request of the New York State
Department of State, provide to the New York State Department of
State, from the records and related materials this Town is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Town in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
§ 83-15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-15-1
1:223

PART XVI
NOTIFICATION REGARDING FIRE OR EXPLOSION
§ 83-16-1. Requirement for notification of fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this Town shall promptly notify the Commissioner of
Building of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 83-16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-16-1
1:225

PART XVII
UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 83-17-1. Identification requirements.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Town shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 151,
Property Maintenance, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time
to time.
§ 83-17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-17-1
1:227
Chapter 85
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 85-1. Compliance required.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a building in the Town of Amherst to
cause to be displayed thereon the street number of said building and at all
times to maintain such number in compliance with this chapter.
§ 85-2. Design standards. [Amended 1-18-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
A. The figure or figures comprising said number shall be placed on said
building and illuminated in such a manner as to be plainly legible from
the center of said street and able to be read during daylight and during
hours of darkness. The size of the letters shall be at least four inches
high for buildings set back 30 feet distant from the street right-of-way
and increased one inch for each 15 feet of setback greater than 30 feet,
but need not exceed a maximum height of eight inches. If a building or
group of buildings are served by a private road, the setback for
purposes of the size of the street number can be measured from the
edge of the private road.
B. If a building is set back in excess of 100 feet from the public road
fronting the property or if the building cannot be seen from the public
road, in addition to the street number on the building, the street
number(s) shall be located on a sign structure at the drive or road
serving the premises at its junction with the public road. A sign
structure with a single street number affixed shall not exceed two
square feet per face in area. For street number signs which contain
more than one street number, the size of the sign shall not exceed two
square feet per street number, per sign face or as directed by
Commissioner of Building. Such sign shall not exceed a height of four
feet above the average grade nor shall it block clear vision. If the street
number is part of an advertising sign, the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance regulating signs shall apply.15
C. The color of said street number figures shall be in sharp contrast to the
color of their background, and such figures shall be placed in a
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, § 7-8.
§ 83-17-1 AMHERST CODE § 85-2
1:228
§ 85-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — The principal building or buildings on each lot, and shall not
be deemed to include any private barn, private garage or other outbuilding.
The Town Assessor is hereby authorized to decide which building or
buildings on any particular lot shall be numbered.
§ 85-4. Designation of numbers.
conspicuous place on the front of the building in the vicinity of the front
entrance at least three feet above the adjacent finish grade.
D. Any illumination or lighting of a street number shall employ only lights
emitting a light of constant intensity. In no event shall any illuminated
street numbers or lighting device be placed so as to permit the beams
and illumination therefrom to be directed upon a public street, highway,
sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that
may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. External illumination of a
street number sign placed at the public street shall be prohibited.
A. Existing streets.
(1) If an existing street is extended, the numbering system used shall
be continued for the new section.
(2) If the numbering on an existing street hinders the prompt response
of public safety agencies, the Assessor may order the numbering of
the street or portion thereof to be changed.
B. New streets. This section shall apply to all streets established after the
effective date of this chapter and to existing streets with three or fewer
buildings.
(1) All lots fronting on any street or alley, both public and private, shall
be numbered so that one number is assigned for each 10 feet of
length, including cross streets, along the center line of said street.
(2) Numbers shall be assigned such that the even numbers are on the
left side and the odd numbers are on the right side as the numbers
increase.
(3) Within buildings containing multiple units, each unit having its own
separate entrance may be assigned an individual number for each
such separate outside entrance.
C. When, in an individual instance, it is unreasonable to comply with the
above, the Assessor shall determine the building numbering.
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:229
§ 85-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Building to see that the
provisions of this chapter are enforced; and he or any person designated
by him for such purpose shall have the authority to determine whether a
particular building is numbered in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Whenever the Town Board shall change the name or number of any
street, avenue, public building or place, the Town Clerk shall, within 10 days
thereafter, notify the Commissioner of Building, the Assessor, the Planning
Department, the Amherst Central Fire Alarm Office, the County Clerk and
the United States Postal Service thereof.
§ 85-6. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 87
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 87-1. Permit or franchise required.
For the purpose of promoting the safety, health and general welfare of
the residents and owners of property in the Town of Amherst, no person,
firm, association or corporation shall erect, construct, install, maintain or
provide cable television service within the Town of Amherst unless a permit
or franchise so to do shall first have been granted by the Town Board of said
Town as hereinafter provided.
§ 87-2. Public hearing required.
Any and all applications for such permit or franchise shall be subject
to a public hearing conducted after notice published once in the official
newspaper of said Town not less than 10 days nor more than 20 days prior
to the public hearing thereon.
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to report to the
Commissioner of Building from time to time the location of all buildings
in the Town of Amherst which are not numbered in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any other person or agency that finds
buildings in the Town of Amherst which are not numbered in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall report the locations
to the Commissioner of Building.
B. Any person, firm or corporation owning a building within the Town of
Amherst, refusing or neglecting for 10 days after notice from the
Commissioner of Building to place a number on said building, shall be
liable to a fine or penalty of not more than $100. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notice may be given by
personal service or by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address
of said owner.
§ 85-5 AMHERST CODE § 87-3
1:230
§ 87-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter as hereinbefore stated shall be subject to a penalty of $100 for each
and every day that such violation continues.
§ 87-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after its adoption and publication as
provided by law.
Chapter 89
(RESERVED)
Chapter 92
CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Recreation and open space — See Ch. 155.
Trespassing — See Ch. 181.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 92-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Conservation
Easement Law of the Town of Amherst."
§ 92-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the acquisition of interests or
rights in real property for the preservation of open space and areas which
shall constitute a public purpose for which public funds may be expended
or advanced after due notice and a public hearing, by which the Town
of Amherst may acquire by purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise, lease
or otherwise the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement,
covenant or other contractual right necessary to acquire "open space" or
"open area" as the same is defined in § 92-5 herein.
§ 92-3. Legislative authority.
In accordance with § 247 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, the Town Board of the Town of Amherst has the authority to acquire
§ 87-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-3
1:231
such interests or rights in land. Pursuant to the above authority, the Town
Board has prepared and adopted this chapter setting forth standards to be
followed in the acquisition of such interest.
§ 92-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the entire area of the Town of Amherst, excluding
those areas within the corporate limits of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 92-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
CONSERVATION ADVISORY COUNCIL — The Conservation Advisory
Council of the Town of Amherst.
OPEN SPACE or OPEN AREA — Any space or area characterized by natural
scenic beauty or whose existing openness, natural condition or present
state of use, if retained, would enhance the present or potential value of
abutting or surrounding urban development or would maintain or enhance
the conservation of natural, aesthetic or scenic resources. For the purposes
of this section, natural resources shall include but not be limited to
agricultural lands defined as open lands actually used in bona fide
agricultural production.
§ 92-6. Procedure.
A. Proposal by owner. Any owner or owners of land may submit a proposal
to the Town Board for the granting of interests or rights in real property
for the preservation of open spaces or areas. Such proposal shall be
submitted in such manner and form as may be prescribed by the Town
Board and shall include a survey map and metes and bounds
description of the proposed area. The owner shall pay to the Town a fee
of $50, which shall be deemed a reasonable sum to cover the costs of
administration, no part of which shall be returnable to the applicant.
B. Review by the Conservation Advisory Council. Upon receipt of such
proposal, the Town Board shall first refer it to the Commissioner of
Building, the Planning Director, the Town Engineer, the Highway
Superintendent, the Assessor, the Town Attorney and the Conservation
Advisory Council for their review and consideration and their
recommendation to the Town Board.
C. Public hearing by Town Board. After receiving any such
recommendations, and after due investigation, if the Town Board
determines that it is in the public interest to accept such a proposal,
then the Town Board shall conduct a public hearing on the issue of
whether or not the Town should accept such proposal. At least 10 days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
paper of general circulation in such Town, and a written notice of such
proposal shall be given to all adjacent property owners and to any
§ 92-3 AMHERST CODE § 92-6
1:232
§ 92-7. Valuation.
After acquisition of an easement pursuant to this chapter, the assessed
valuation placed upon such land area shall take into consideration the
limitation on the use of the land.
§ 92-8. Penalty for offenses.
If there is a substantial violation of the terms and conditions of the
conservation easement agreement, or if said agreement is canceled by the
Town Board upon petition, the then owner or owners of said property must
pay to the Town of Amherst the difference in reduced taxes for all the prior
years resulting from the reduction in assessment due to the conservation
easement.
Chapter 95
CURB CUTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Parking for handicapped — See Ch. 143.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 144.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 95-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Curb Cut Procedures and Standards
Act."
municipality whose boundaries are within 500 feet of the boundaries of
said proposed area, and to the school district in which it is located.
D. Determinations. The Town Board, after such public hearing, may adopt
the proposal, or any modification thereof, it deems appropriate, or may
reject it in its entirety.
E. Recording agreement. If such proposal is adopted by the Town Board, it
shall be executed by the owner or owners in written form and in a form
suitable for recording in the Erie County Clerk's office.
F. Cancellation. Said agreement may not be canceled by either party.
However, the owner or owners thereof may petition the Town Board for
cancellation upon good cause shown, and such cancellation may be
granted only upon payment of the penalties provided in § 92-8 herein.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-2
1:233
§ 95-2. Findings and intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that the regulation of
driveway access to Town highways is necessary to provide safe access
and to protect the health and safety of users of such highways and to
protect the property of the Town and others in the right-of-way. The Town
Board further finds that an excessive number of driveways or misplaced
driveways increase the risk of accidents as well and interfere with safe
traffic movement, along with the performance of maintenance, including
snow removal, and that the passage of such regulations is consistent with
Town Law § 130, Subdivision 7(a), which provides that the Town Board may
by ordinance regulate the location and manner in which driveways and
exits may be constructed by owners and occupants on Town highways, and
Highway Law § 213, which provides that the construction and repair of
approaches to private lands adjoining Town highways is under the direction
of the Town Superintendent of Highways.
§ 95-3. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to construct a driveway approach or recessed parking
area across any curbing, sidewalk or shoulder on a Town highway shall first
make application for a permit to the Town Superintendent of Highways.
The application shall be in writing upon a form to be provided for the
Superintendent of Highways for that purpose and available at the office
of the Superintendent. Such application shall show the type and estimated
cost of construction; the section, lot, and block number and the street name
and number of the property that is the subject of the application, together
with a small plot plan showing the proposed location and dimensions of the
proposed driveway or private parking area; and such other information as
may be required by the Superintendent of Highways. The application shall
be filed with the Highway Superintendent by the property owner or by the
property owner's duly authorized agent.
§ 95-4. Standards for issuance of permit.
A permit required by this chapter shall be issued by the Superintendent
of Highways only when the work conforms to the following standards,
unless the Superintendent of Highways for good cause waives any such
requirements:
A. There shall be no more than four driveways giving access to any lot and
no more than two driveways on any single frontage of any lot.
B. Where there is only one driveway giving access to a lot, the curb may
not be lowered for a distance greater than 30 feet; where more than one
driveway gives access to a lot, no curb may be lowered for a continuous
distance greater than 24 feet.
C. Between driveways on the same lot, there must be at least 20 feet of full
curb.
§ 95-2 AMHERST CODE § 95-4
1:234
D. On a corner lot, no curb shall be lowered within six feet of the corner of
the lot, or in case the lot line is curved at the corner, no curb shall be
lowered on the curve or within 10 feet of the center of such curve.
E. The grade of the ramp to the sidewalk shall be subject to the approval of
the Superintendent of Highways and in general should be within the
park strip, if there is one, and where there is no park strip, the ramp
should not exceed 1/4 of the width of the sidewalk.
F. The curb shall not be cut lower than a point one inch above the gutter.
G. Where the driveway is intended for a gasoline filling station, there shall
be on the street line of the lot, opposite the full curb, a curb of at least
six inches high. Such curb shall begin three feet from the driveway.
H. No driveway shall be permitted at the end portion of a dead-end street
or off of any turnaround located at the end of the street. If the subject
parcel does not have sufficient space to install the driveway on the side
of the street, the applicant owner, at the owner's own expense, must
extend the street so that there is at least 20 feet of street past the
furthest edge of the driveway. Such additional street must meet the
street construction requirements of the Town of Amherst. All such
improvements are at the expense of the permit applicant. Ownership of
any such street extension must then be transferred to the Town.
I. No curb may be lowered or driveway constructed which may be in any
way dangerous or hazardous to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
J. All damage that occurs during the construction process, within the
Town's right-of-way, shall be repaired in accordance with the
specifications and standards of the Town of Amherst. These additional
costs shall be incurred at the applicant's expense. All repairs must be
made within 24 hours.
K. Specifications and standards not addressed in this section must meet
the current New York State Department of Transportation standards
and specifications for construction and materials as well as the Town
Engineer's standards for streets and curbs.
L. The work authorized by this permit shall be performed in a manner
satisfactory to the Superintendent of Highways.
M. The applicant is to keep in good repair all pipes, hydrants or
appurtenances that may be placed within the bounds of the highway
under terms of this permit and is to save the Town harmless from all
claims and damages that may accrue by reason of their location in the
highway and upon written notice by the Town Superintendent is to
make any repairs required for the protection and preservation of the
highway. Upon the failure of the owner to make such repairs, the
Superintendent of Highways shall make such repairs at the expense of
the applicant, and such expense shall be a prior lien upon the land
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:235
§ 95-5. Abandonment of curb cut use.
Where private property use has been modified so that the existing curb cut
is no longer needed or where the provisions do not permit curb cuts at
existing locations, the Town Superintendent of Highways, for the promotion
of traffic safety and public convenience, may require the abutting owner to
replace the curb at his expense as follows:
benefited by the use of the highway for such pipes, hydrants or
appurtenances.
N. If the work performed is on a road that has been improved by state aid,
in no case shall the pavement be disturbed. Upon completion of the
work, the highway shall be left in as good a condition as before the work
was performed and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Town
Superintendent of Highways.
O. The applicant, by virtue of the grant of the permit application, shall hold
the Town of Amherst harmless on account of any damages that may
arise during the progress of the work authorized by this permit or by
reason thereof. The applicant shall certify that all persons concerned
with the actual work under the curb cut permit are duly covered by
workers' compensation insurance and that the Town of Amherst shall be
held harmless on account thereof.
P. Failure to comply with the above requirements will be considered a
violation of this chapter and the curb cut permit, and the Town Highway
Superintendent may revoke the curb cut permit upon the failure of the
applicant or the applicant's agents to comply with any of the within
requirements or other conditions contained in the permit.
Q. A permit and an inspection is required for all types of curb: "A," "B," or
"C" as defined by the Town Engineer's specifications for streets and
curbs.
R. The applicant or builder shall notify the Superintendent of Highways at
least 24 hours before installing a driveway apron in the right-of-way.
A. The Town Superintendent of Highways shall order the abutting
property owner to replace the curb, stating the reason.
B. The owner shall either protest and show cause in writing why the curb
should not be replaced within 30 days or commence the work within 60
days.
C. The protest shall be reviewed by the Town Board, which may uphold the
Superintendent of Highways or revoke or modify his order.
D. If the abutting owner fails to comply with the order, the Town may do
the work and bill the owner the total charges of the work. The Town
may place a lien on the subject property for the total of the charges,
§ 95-4 AMHERST CODE § 95-5
1:236
§ 95-6. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the rest of
this chapter.
§ 95-7. Inconsistencies with other provisions.
To the extent that Chapter 83, Building Construction Administration,
Chapter 203, Zoning, Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, other Town code
or the Town Law of the State of New York may contain any provisions
inconsistent with this chapter, such other provisions shall prevail.
Chapter 96
(RESERVED)
Chapter 99
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 138. Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 145.
including permit fees, inspection fees, attorney fees and court costs, for
any bill that remains unpaid for a period of 30 days.
§ 95-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-7
1:237

ARTICLE I
Dogs and Harboring of Animals
[Adopted 5-20-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974; amended in its entirety
8-19-2019 by L.L. No. 16-2019]
§ 99-1. Purpose.
This article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the Town of Amherst, New York, including the protection of the
property of the Town and its inhabitants, to preserve peace and good order
by imposing restrictions upon the keeping and running of dogs within the
Town and to set license fees.
§ 99-2. Prohibited acts.
In the Town of Amherst, New York, outside the Village of Williamsville:
A. No person, firm or corporation shall, except where permitted by the
applicable zoning ordinance, own, keep, harbor, or maintain the care,
custody or control of livestock except for chickens regulated by Chapter
203, § 6-8-9(B).
B. No person, firm or corporation owning, keeping, harboring or having
the care, custody or control of any dog shall allow or permit such dog to
be off the premises of such person, firm or corporation in the Town of
Amherst, New York, outside the Village of Williamsville, unless
restrained by a chain or leash, including retractable leashes, not
exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a responsible
person, except as designated by the Town of Amherst in duly authorized
and posted dog parks. Whenever a dog is found off the premises of the
person, firm or corporation owning, keeping, harboring or having the
care, custody or control of such dog not restrained as above provided, it
shall be presumed that such person, firm or corporation permitted or
allowed such dog to be off such premises in violation of this section.
C. No person, firm, company or corporation shall keep, suffer, permit or
allow to be kept on the premises owned or occupied by such person,
firm, company or corporation any dog or dogs which create any
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise, such as repeated or continual
barking, howling or whining, so as to be detrimental to the life, health,
safety or welfare of any individual.
(1) Any person, firm, company or corporation who shall do so shall be
in violation of this article and subject to a fine of not more than
$500.
(2) In determining whether any such noise is unreasonably loud or
disturbing, due consideration shall include, but not limited to, the
following factors:
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-2
1:239
(a) The loudness of the noise, as scientifically measured, or
otherwise.
(b) The intensity of the noise, as measured by intervals.
(c) The quality of the noise, as measured by pitch or tone.
(d) The duration of the noise, as measured by time.
(e) The composition of the noise, as measured by the number of
offending dogs.
(f) The time of day or night, of the noises.
(g) The proximity of the origin of such noise to the complainant,
measured in distance.
(3) Repeated violations of this article are prohibited and may be
deemed a public nuisance, which the Town Attorney is hereby
authorized to pursue an abatement of in an appropriate court of
law.
D. No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a premises on
which a dog is kept shall permit such premises to be unclean or
unsanitary.
E. No person shall hinder, resist or oppose any police officer, Animal
Control Officer or employee or representative of the Town in his
performance of his duties under this article.
F. Feces.
(1) No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any
dog shall cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on
or commit any nuisance on any sidewalk, gutter, street, play area,
park or other public area or on any private property without the
permission of the owner of such property. This prohibition shall not
apply to that portion of a street lying between the curblines or
pavement edges where no curbs exist, which portion may be used
to curb a dog, provided that any person who so curbs a dog shall
immediately remove all feces left by such dog as follows:
(a) Individuals may place feces directly in a public or private
sanitary sewer through deposit in a toilet on premises occupied
by the individual owning or who curbs the dog. Plastic bags
shall not be disposed of in a public or private sanitary sewer
through deposit into a toilet along with any dog feces.
Individuals may also dispose of dog feces contained in sealed
plastic bags with regular household trash. Business entities
must dispose of dog feces using a sanitary sewer system
through deposit in a toilet on premises occupied by that
business.
§ 99-2 AMHERST CODE § 99-2
1:240
§ 99-3. Applicability of statutory provisions.
Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall be applicable in addition
to the provisions of this article.
§ 99-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any dog of either sex.
LIVESTOCK — The meaning of the term "livestock" as used in this article
is confined to the ordinary use of the word and includes domestic animals
ordinarily raised for food or product. The term includes the following
animals, regardless of the purpose for which each may be owned:
§ 99-5. (Reserved)
§ 99-6. Responsibility of adults for dogs owned by minors.
In the event that the owner of a dog shall be a person under the age of 18
years, then the head of the household in which said person resides shall
be deemed to have custody and control of the dog for the purposes of this
article.
§ 99-7. Enforcement.
(b) In no event shall any feces be deposited in any storm sewer or
drainage ditch.
(2) Exclusion. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a
guide dog accompanying any blind person.
1. All animals with hooves, either single or split;
All members of the ovine (sheep), bovine (cows and cattle), caprine
(goats), equine (horses and ponies), and swine (pigs and hogs) families;
2.
3. Emus, rheas and ostriches; and
4. All poultry (chickens, roosters, turkeys, ducks, geese and the like).
A. This article shall be enforced by members of the Police Department, the
Animal Dog Control Officers or any other Town agent or employee
hereafter designated by the Town Board for that purpose.
B. The Animal Control Officers and other Town agents or employees as
may hereafter be designated by the Town Board are authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets upon any person, firm or corporation who
or which has committed a violation of this article in his presence.
C. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and
the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, each
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-7
1:241
§ 99-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 99-9. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this article or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or
part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 99-10. Repealer.
Upon this article taking effect, the Dog Ordinance of the Town of Amherst
adopted May 8, 1961, is superseded and therefore repealed.
§ 99-11. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 99-12. Rabies vaccination.
Any person owning, possessing or harboring a dog four months of age or
over in the Town of Amherst shall be required to have the dog vaccinated to
member of the Police Department, Animal Control Officer or any other
Town agent or employee hereafter designated by the Town Board for
these purposes is authorized and directed to enter upon any premises
upon which any dog is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition
by the person owning or having charge or control of such dog of the
identification or purebred license tag for such dog.
D. Violations set forth in Subdivision 1 of § 118 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law shall be prosecuted as such under the Penal Law.
E. The Animal Control Officers/members of the Town of Amherst Police
Department and other Town agents or employees as may hereafter be
designated by the Town Board are authorized to seize any livestock
owned, kept, harbored or maintained in violation of § 99-2(A) upon
obtaining a search warrant authorizing the seizure of said animal by a
Court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for
each week that said article is violated or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days, or both in violation of said article.
B. Any person, firm or corporation taking part in or assisting in any
violation of this article shall also be subject to the penalties herein
provided.
§ 99-7 AMHERST CODE § 99-12
1:242
prevent the spread of rabies, except that a rabies vaccine is not required as
follows:
§ 99-13. Fees.
§ 99-13.1. Local License Fee
A. To a dog brought into the Town for a period not to exceed 15 days; and
dogs confined to public or private hospitals devoted to the treatment of
sick animals.
B. To a dog whose health would be adversely affected by a rabies
vaccination, provided that a written statement, certified by a duly
licensed veterinarian, specifying such condition is presented to the
Animal Control Officer or the Town Clerk and filed with the Town
Clerk's office.
A. Applications for a license or a renewal thereof shall be accompanied by
a non-refundable processing fee as set by resolution of the Town Board
from time to time. The cost for said applications for a license or renewal
thereof for an unaltered dog must be at least five dollars ($5.00) more
than the cost of said applications for a license or renewal thereof for an
altered dog. In addition to the license fee, established herein, each
applicant for a dog license shall pay a surcharge, pursuant to New York
State Agriculture and Markets Law § 110(3) of (at least $1.00) if the dog
to be licensed is altered, or a fee of (at least $3.00) if the dog sought to
be licensed is unaltered. An application for a license or renewal shall be
in the form prescribed by the Amherst Town Clerk and shall provide for
the following minimum information:
(1) The name, residence address and telephone number of each owner;
and
(2) The name, sex, approximate age, breed, color, markings and other
identifying details of the dog; and
(3) Veterinarian's statement of spaying or neutering; and
(4) Rabies certification in accordance with the provisions of this
article; and
(5) Such other information or documentation deemed necessary by the
Town Clerk to effectuate the purpose of this article.
B. In the case of an altered dog, every application shall be accompanied by
a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian except that such
certificate is not required if same is already on file with the Town Clerk.
C. No individual under the age of eighteen (18) shall be deemed an owner
of record and be issued a dog license.
§ 99-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-13.1
1:243
§ 99-13.2. Impoundment Fees
§ 99-14. Issuance of license; identification tag.
D. Service and therapy dogs including guide dogs, hearing dogs and
detection dogs are exempt from all licensing fees with proper
documentation.
A. The fees payable by a dog owner for a dog impounded by the Town of
Amherst shall be as follows:
1st Impoundment Fee $30.00
2nd Impoundment Fee $60.00
3rd Impoundment Fee $100.00
plus a daily fee (Including the first
day)
$20.00
B. The fees payable by an owner of livestock impounded by the Town of
Amherst shall be as follows:
1st Impoundment Fee $50.00
2nd Impoundment Fee $100.00
3rd Impoundment Fee $150.00
Plus a daily fee (Including the first
day)
$50.00
A. Upon validation by the Town Clerk or authorized Animal Control Officer,
a dog license shall be issued and a record of its issuance retained in the
office of the Town Clerk.
B. No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any
dog, the new owner shall immediately apply for a new license for the
dog. A license cannot be transferred to another dog.
C. Identification tag.
(1) The Town Clerk shall assign an identification number to a dog when
it is first licensed. Such identification number shall be carried by
the dog on an identification tag which shall be affixed to the collar
of the dog at all times, except that the tag is not required to be
worn while the dog is participating in a dog show.
(2) No tag carrying an identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which the number has been
assigned.
(3) Any person wishing to replace a tag previously issued shall pay the
sum of $3 to the Town Clerk for a replacement tag.
§ 99-13.1 AMHERST CODE § 99-15
1:244
§ 99-15. Term of license and renewals.
All licenses issued pursuant to this article, and any renewal thereof, shall
expire on the last day of the last month of the period for which they
are issued, except that no license or renewal shall be issued for a period
expiring after the day of the 11th month following the expiration date
of the current rabies certificate for the dog being licensed. In the event
an applicant for a license or renewal presents a statement certified by a
licensed veterinarian, in lieu of a rabies certificate, then the license or
renewal shall be issued for one year from the date of the statement.
§ 99-16. When effective.
Sections 99-12 through 99-16 shall constitute part of the Code of the Town
of Amherst and shall take effect upon filing in the office of the Secretary of
State of New York.
§ 99-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-16
1:245

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 12-2-2019 by L.L. No. 21-2019]
§ 99-17. Definitions.
(a) Stray cat. The term 'stray' means an animal or animals that would
otherwise be pets, but that have been separated from a human
caretaker by means of escape or a lack of care, or sometimes by natural
disaster. The term 'cat' means a member of the species Felis catus.
(b) Best feeding practices. Best feeding practices means a person
supporting one or more community cats which shall adhere to the
following:
(1) Feeding is conducted on a regular schedule;
(2) Feeding is limited to the offering of food intended for community
cats to approximately one hour per day;
(3) Providing only food appropriate for cats, and not scraps or other
foods that may be dangerous, deadly, or hazardous to other cats or
other animals;
(4) The community cat feeding area is kept clean and free of trash;
(5) Food and/or water intended for community cats is kept in
containers and not on the ground;
(6) Feeding shall be conducted only within the confines of the property
of the person engaged in Trap, Neuter, Vaccinate and Return
(TNVR) practices as defined in this article and as provided for in
section (m) below.
(c) Community cat. The term community cat means any cat that is:
(1) Homeless, stray, or at large, where the cat:
(a) Has been socialized to people, or is less than five weeks old;
(b) Could become feral as connection with humans is farther
removed; and
(c) In the case of cats older than five weeks, has a good potential
to quickly become domesticated once again; or
(2) Feral, where the cat:
(a) Is not socialized toward humans;
(b) Is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned cat; or
(c) Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned; or
§ 99-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-17
1:247
(d) A cat that lives in the community but is not owned by a human,
sometimes referred to as a "free-roaming" or "street" cat.
(d) Community cat caretaker. The term 'community cat caretaker' means a
person who provides care to one or more community cats. However,
community cat caregivers are not the owner, harborer, controller, or
keeper of a community cat.
(e) Community cat program. The term 'community cat program' means the
non-lethal process of humanely trapping, sterilizing, vaccinating for
rabies, ear-tipping, and releasing community cats to their habitats.
(f) Colony. The term colony means a group of one or more community cats.
(g) Domesticated cat. The term domesticated cat means a cat:
(1) That is social towards humans;
(2) That currently lives within the residence or on the property of a
person or persons accepted as the cat's owner; and
(3) That is considered appropriate as a companion for humans.
(h) Ear-tipping. The term "ear-tipping" means the removal of the 1/4 inch
tip of a community cat's left ear, performed while the cat is under
anesthesia in compliance with any applicable federal or state law and
under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
(i) Harbor. The term harbor means to give permanent or long-term home
or shelter to an animal. The feeding of community cats in conjunction
with Trap, Neuter, Vaccinate and Release (TNVR or TNR) practices as
provided in section (m) below shall not constitute the harboring of cats.
(j) Neuter. The term neuter means to permanently sterilize male cats to
render them incapable of impregnating female cats by means of either
surgery performed to remove the reproductive organs or chemical
sterilization by which the cats are injected with a drug approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for that purpose.
(k) Spay. The term spay means to permanently sterilize female cats to
prevent estrus (heat) cycles and eliminate their ability to become
pregnant by means of either surgery performed to remove the ovaries
and uterus or chemical sterilization by which the cats are injected with
a drug approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
that purpose.
(l) Sterilize. The term sterilize means to spay or neuter a cat to render it
incapable of reproduction.
(m) Trap, Neuter, Vaccinate, and Return, referred to as 'TNVR' or' TNR'.
The term Trap, Neuter, Vaccinate and Return (TNVR or TNR) means a
program in which community cats are humanely trapped, evaluated,
vaccinated, sterilized, and ear tipped by a veterinarian and returned to
§ 99-17 AMHERST CODE § 99-17
1:248
§ 99-18. Harboring of cats.
Cats are prohibited within the Town except as follows:
§ 99-19. Public Nuisance
Any cat shall be considered a public nuisance if it has no known owner, no
known place of care or shelter and habitually trespasses upon private or
public property.
§ 99-20. Implementation
the trap location with the intent of humanely controlling or reducing
feline population and reproduction.
(n) Veterinarian. The term veterinarian means a person licensed to practice
veterinary medicine in the State of New York.
A. Any person harboring a cat shall make a reasonable effort to keep the
animal on the premises and under the control of said person.
B. No person shall harbor a cat which by its frequent yowling shall
unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of the community.
C. Any person harboring a cat shall make a reasonable effort to
expeditiously remove any droppings left by the cat on any public place
or on any private property not under the control of said person.
A. As defined in § 99-17(m), TNVR or TNR of community cats shall be legal
in the Town of Amherst, and interested citizens are encouraged to
participate in and support TNVR or TNR activities on a voluntary basis.
B. All persons who attempt to trap community cats for TNVR in the Town
of Amherst shall be familiar with the guidelines, supported by regional
and national feral and community cat organizations, as well as the
American Veterinary Medical Association regarding appropriate
methods of TNVR.
C. An ear-tipped cat received by local shelters shall be returned to the
location where trapped unless veterinary care is required.
D. A trapped, ear-tipped community cat shall be released on site unless
further veterinary care is required, in which case the cat will be
returned once the animal no longer needs care.
E. A community cat caretaker may reclaim a community cat if impounded
at a local shelter or impoundment facility, without fee, if sterilized or for
purposes of placing the cat in a community cat TNR program.
F. Trapping of a community cat is only permitted for purposes of a
community cat program, providing needed veterinary care, adoption,
transfer to a rescue group, or reunification with his/her owner.
§ 99-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-20
1:249
§ 99-20.1. Enforcement.
this article shall be enforced by the Village Code Enforcement Officials,
Town of Amherst Animal Control Officer and Amherst Police Department,
each of whom are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets
upon any person in violation of this article.
§ 99-21. Penalties For Offenses.
Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law, any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation as defined by the Penal Law and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense by a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both a fine
and imprisonment.
G. Socialized cats and all kittens subject to TNVR shall be eligible to be,
but not mandated to be, re-socialized and put up for adoption.
H. It shall not be a violation of this section to determine that the best
course of action for a particular cat, or cat colony, is to be left alone.
I. Leash laws, stray laws, licensing laws, and limitations on the number of
cats owned, kept, held, or harbored, and feeding bans shall not apply to
community cat caretakers.
J. Animal control and code enforcement officers shall use appropriate
opportunities to inform stakeholders about TNVR.
K. Animal control officers within the Town of Amherst shall implement and
administer this article in consultation with community cat welfare
experts, including Alley Cat Allies, NYC Feral Cat Initiative, Best
Friends Animal Society, American Association of Feline Practitioners,
Neighborhood Cats, IndyFeral, Feral Cat Focus, and the No Kill
Advocacy Center.
L. It shall be permitted in the Town of Amherst to feed community cats
provided that best feeding practices are followed.
§ 99-20 AMHERST CODE § 99-21
1:250
Chapter 103
EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE
§ 103 Title.
The title of this law shall be "Emergency Responder Radio Coverage."
§ 103-1. Legislative Intent.
§ 103-2. Applicability.
This article applies to a buildings located within the Town of Amherst.
§ 103-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this Local Law shall be to provide minimum standards
to insure a reasonable degree of reliability for emergency services
communications from within certain buildings and structures within the
Town of Amherst to and from emergency communications centers. It is the
responsibility of the emergency service provider to get the signal to and
from the building site.
§ 103-4. Scope.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to:
§ 103-5. Radio Coverage.
A. To ensure the safety of all Town of Amherst residents and its visitors.
B. The State of New York Codes Council has passed the New York State
supplements to the International Fire Code (IFC) which are effective
October 6, 2016.
C. The State of New York has mandated emergency responder radio
coverage for all new buildings only.
D. Emergency responders need the best technology to keep themselves,
the Town's residents and its visitors safe.
E. The Town of Amherst is taking proactive measures to keep its
Emergency Responders, residents and its visitors safe in existing
buildings, as well as in new buildings, by enforcing this new code in
existing buildings.
(1) Any and all buildings already covered under the International Fire Code
(IFC);
(2) Any structure where it is determined after testing, by the fire code
official, that a radio coverage system is required.
§ 99-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-5
1:251
§ 103-5.1. Inbound into the Building.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-5.2. Outbound from the Building.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-6. FCC Authorization.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-7. Enhanced Amplifications Systems.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-8. Initial Testing Procedures - Methods to Conduct Tests.
§ 103-9. Building Treatment.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall modify
any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be
done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for firefighters and
police officers. Inadequate radio coverage shall be deemed to render
such buildings or structures or any parts thereof unsafe and subject to
penalties including, but not limited to, a fine of up to Fifteen Hundred
Dollars ($1,500) per violation.
(b) The Town's emergency services shall determine the frequency range or
ranges that must be supported.
(c) For the purpose of this section, adequate radio coverage shall
constitute a successful communications test between the equipment in
the building and the communications centers for all appropriate
emergency service providers for the building.
(a) Testing shall be performed by a Town approved RF officer. The Town
will provide a list of qualified RF officers. It is the responsibility of the
building owner to contact the RF officer and make arrangements for
testing.
(b) Tests shall be made using frequencies close to the frequencies used by
the Town's emergency services to appropriate emergency services. If
testing is performed on the actual frequencies, then this testing must
be coordinated within the Town's RF Officers. All testing must be
performed on frequencies authorized by the FCC. A valid FCC license
will be required if testing is performed on frequencies different from
the Town's police, fire or emergency medical frequencies.
(c) The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-5 AMHERST CODE § 103-10
1:252
§ 103-10. Post-Treatment Testing and Proof of Compliance.
The system must meet the requirements of the IFC § 510(c).
§ 103-11. Permit Required.
A construction permit for the installation of or modification to public safety
radio amplification systems and related equipment is required.
§ 103-12. Annual Tests of System Performance.
§ 103-13. Condition of Occupancy.
A successful demonstration of compliance to § 103-5-1 and § 103-5-2 for
buildings referenced in § 103-4 and the testing referenced in § 103-12
shall be completed prior to final approvals issued under § 203-8-9 for the
occupancy of these buildings. Failure to comply with this Chapter shall
(a) Annual tests will be conducted by a Town approved RF officer. The Town
will provide a list of qualified RF officers to the building owners. If
communications appear to have degraded or if the tests fail to
demonstrate adequate system performance, the owner of the building
or structure is required to remedy the problem and restore the system
in a manner consistent with original approval criteria. Failure to
remedy any problems shall render the building and/or any appendages
unsafe. Testing shall consist of the following:
(1) In-building coverage test as described in § 103-9;
(2) Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same
as it was upon initial installation and acceptance;
(3) Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a
period of one (1) hour to verify that they will properly operate
during an actual power outage. If the battery exhibits symptoms of
failure within the one (1) hour test period, the test shall be
extended for additional one (1) hour periods until the integrity of
the battery can be determined.
(4) All other active components shall be checked to verify operation
within the manufacture's specifications; and
(5) At the conclusion of the testing, a report, which shall verify
compliance with this article, shall be submitted to the fire code
official.
(b) Test results, as set forth in § 103-9, shall be provided to the Town RF
Officers annually, on or before, the anniversary date of the initial
acceptance. The re-testing will be performed at no expense to the Town
or the appropriate emergency services departments as required in the
original testing procedures.
§ 103-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-13
1:253
result in the withholding, or suspension, of a certificate of occupancy from
the Town.
§ 103-14. Effective Date.
This Chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 104
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 172.
Wetlands — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 104-1. Definitions.
Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as those
defined in § 8-0105 of the Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617 of
Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 104-2. Scope.
No decision to carry out or approve an action other than an action listed
in Section 617.5 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations
as a Type II action or an action classified as excluded or exempt shall
be made nor shall any action, other than a Type II, excluded or exempt
action, be carried out or funded by the Town of Amherst or any of its
boards, departments or agencies prior to compliance with all requirements
of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules
and Regulations; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed
as prohibiting contemporaneous environmental, engineering, economic
feasibility or other studies and preliminary planning and budgetary
processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal for action which do
not commit the Town to approve, commence or engage in such action
or approval of any part of an application which relates only to technical
specifications and requirements, provided that no such partial approval
shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence the action until all
requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations have been fulfilled.
§ 103-13 AMHERST CODE § 104-3
1:254
§ 104-3. Actions likely to have significant effect on environment.
In addition to the Type I actions enumerated in Section 617.4 of Title 6
of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, actions affecting wetlands,
as defined in Article 24 of the Environmental Conservation Law (the
Freshwater Wetlands Act), and floodways, as indicated by the Army Corps
of Engineers or the Federal Flood Insurance Administrator, or within 100
feet from the water's edge on each bank of a flowing watercourse, are likely
to have a significant effect on the environment.
§ 104-4. Filing of environmental assessment forms. [Amended
5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
For the purpose of assisting in the determination of whether an action
may or will not have a significant effect on the environment, applicants
for permits or other approvals shall file an environmental assessment form
(EAF) or statement (with the Planning Department) setting forth the name
of the applicant, the location of the real property affected, if any, a
description of the nature of the proposed action and the effect it may have
on the environment. In addition, applicants may be requested to include
a detailed statement of the reasons why, in their view, a proposed action
may or will not have a significant effect on the environment. Where the
action involves an application, the statement or environmental assessment
form shall be filed simultaneously with the application for the action. The
information provided shall be upon a form prescribed by the Planning
Department. The form or statement shall be accompanied by drawings,
sketches, maps and other relevant explanatory material required by the
Planning Department.
A. An environmental assessment form shall be prepared by or on behalf of
any agency, board, body or officer of the Town in connection with any
Type I action such agency, board, body or officer contemplates or
proposes to carry out directly. For an unlisted action an environmental
assessment form in a short or long form may be prepared to facilitate a
preliminary determination of environmental significance.
B. Except as provided in the following subsection, an application for
rezoning, site plan, subdivision review, action by the Board of Appeals
or funding or any Type I action shall be accompanied by an
environmental assessment form and for an unlisted action may be
accompanied by a short- or long-form environment assessment form as
may be needed to assist in making a preliminary determination of
environmental significance. An applicant may prepare a draft
environmental impact statement to accompany the application in place
of the environmental assessment form.
C. Applications to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals
involving the granting of individual setback and lot line variances or
modifications and construction or placement of accessory or
appurtenant structures or improvements not changing land use or
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:255
§ 104-5. Determination by Planning Director. [Amended 8-2-1982
by L.L. No. 6-1982; 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
§ 104-6. Actions following determination. [Amended 5-2-1983 by
L.L. No. 1-1983]
§ 104-7. Town to act as lead agency for certain actions. [Amended
5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in 6
NYCRR 617.6 and 6 NYCRR 617.8. In all cases, the agency acting for
density need not be accompanied by an environmental assessment
form.
A. All environmental assessment forms or statements shall be referred to
the Planning Department for review and preparation of a
recommendation to the lead agency. The Planning Department shall
submit a written recommendation on such application within 30 days
following receipt of a complete application and statement or
environmental assessment form; provided, however, that such period
may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and Planning
Department. The recommendation shall state whether a proposed
action is exempt or excluded or may or will not have a significant effect
on the environment. The Planning Department may hold informal
meetings with the applicant and may meet with and consult any other
person for the purpose of aiding it in making a recommendation on the
application.
B. The time an application for approval or funding of an action shall be
deemed filed is the date preliminary determination of environmental
significance or non-significance is rendered or, if in lieu of an
environmental assessment form the applicant prepares a draft
environmental impact statement, the date the applicant files a draft
environmental impact statement acceptable to the lead agency.
A. If the lead agency determines that a proposed action is an exempt,
excluded or Type II action listed in 6 NYCRR 617.5, the Planning
Department shall file the determination as provided in 6 NYCRR 617.6.
Thereafter, the proposed action may be processed without further
regard to this chapter.
B. If the lead agency determines that the proposed action is not an
exempt, excluded or Type II action, the proposed action shall be
reviewed and processed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations.
C. Except as to determinations required to be made by the lead agency,
this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations shall be administered by the Planning Department.
§ 104-4 AMHERST CODE § 104-7
1:256
the Town shall be that agency, board, body or officer having authority
to approve or carry out the action sought. The Town shall be the lead
agency for all actions where the anticipated impacts are primarily of local
significance, it has the governmental power most suitable for investigating
those impacts or it has the greatest capability for providing thorough
environmental assessment of the action. Actions shall include, but are not
limited to the following:
§ 104-8. Planning Department to assist in lead agency designation.
The Planning Department shall act as the Town clearinghouse for lead
agency designation. It shall assist agencies and applicants to identify other
agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved in approving,
funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. It may make
recommendations concerning the designation of a lead agency.
§ 104-9. Review of actions involving federal agency.
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Section 617.15 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 104-10. Action of Planning Department following determination.
[Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
Following a determination that a proposed action may have a significant
effect on the environment, the Planning Department for the lead agency
shall, in accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of the New
York Code, Rules and Regulations:
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations.
B. Construction or expansion of buildings, structures and facilities within
the Town.
C. Variances.
D. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the Town.
E. Site plan review and special use permit.
F. Construction or expansion of nonresidential facilities.
G. Parking lots and roads.
A. Immediately notify the applicant of the determination and shall request
the applicant to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) in
the form of a draft environmental impact statement. Processing of the
application shall be suspended until the draft environmental impact
statement is submitted and accepted. Upon acceptance of a draft
environmental impact statement, the time for processing it shall run
concurrently with the time requirements applicable to processing the
application for approval or funding of the action. A public hearing on
§ 104-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-10
1:257
§ 104-11. Completion of draft environmental impact statement;
hearing.
§ 104-12. Determination that action will not have significant effect.
[Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
If upon the basis of a draft environmental impact statement or a public
hearing thereon, the lead agency determines that an action will not have a
significant effect on the environment, the proposed action may be processed
without further regard to this chapter. Notice of the determination shall be
filed by the Planning Department in accordance with 6 NYCRR 617.12.
§ 104-13. Final environmental impact statement. [Amended
5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the lead agency assisted by the
Planning Department shall prepare a final environmental impact statement
in accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations. If the action involves an application, the final
environmental impact statement shall be prepared within 45 days after the
close of any hearing or 60 days after the filing of the draft environmental
the draft environmental impact statement shall be held concurrently
with any hearing to be held on that application.
B. In the case of an action not involving an applicant, prepare a draft
environmental impact statement.
A. Upon completion or submission of a draft environmental impact
statement, a notice of completion containing the information specified
in Section 617.12(d) of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations shall be prepared, filed and circulated by the Planning
Department as provided in Subdivisions 617.12(e) and (f).
B. If the lead agency determines that a public hearing on a draft
environmental impact statement should be held, notice thereof shall be
filed, circulated and sent by the Planning Department in the same
manner as for a notice of completion. The notice shall be published in
the official newspaper of the Town at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
The notice shall also state the place where substantive written
comments on the draft environmental impact statement may be sent
and the date before which comments shall be received. [Amended
5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
C. The hearing shall be held by the lead agency no less than 15 days nor
more than 60 days after completion or submission of the draft
environmental impact statement, unless it determines that additional
time is necessary for public or other agency review of the draft
environmental impact statement or a different hearing date is required
by other applicable law or regulation. [Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L.
No. 1-1983]
§ 104-10 AMHERST CODE § 104-13
1:258
impact statement, whichever last occurs. The lead agency may extend this
time as necessary to complete the statement or where problems identified
with the proposed action require material reconsideration or modification.
§ 104-14. Fees for preparation or review of environmental impact
statement.
Fees for preparation or review of an environmental impact statement
involving an applicant for approval or funding of an action shall be fixed
from time to time by a resolution of the Town Board. If the applicant
prepares the environmental impact statement, the Town may charge a
fee for actual expenses of reviewing it. If a Town agency prepares an
environmental impact statement on behalf of an applicant, it may charge a
fee for the cost of preparation but not for the cost of professional review.
§ 104-15. Notice of completion of environmental impact statement.
[Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
Notice of completion of a final environmental impact statement shall be
prepared, filed and circulated by the Planning Department as provided
in Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations. A copy shall
be sent to each person to whom the notice of completion of the draft
environmental impact statement was sent. Copies of the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed and made available for review in the same
manner as the draft environmental impact statement.
§ 104-16. Decision to approve action. [Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L.
No. 1-1983]
No decision to carry out or approve an action which has been the subject
of a draft environmental impact statement shall be made until after the
completion of a final statement.
§ 104-17. Approval contingent upon meeting certain requirements.
[Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
The lead agency shall not approve an action which may have a significant
effect on the environment unless it finds that:
A. Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations of
Town policy, to the maximum extent practicable, from among the
reasonable alternatives thereto, the action to be carried out or
approved is one which minimizes or avoids adverse environmental
effects, including the effects disclosed in the relevant environmental
impact statements; and
B. All practicable means will be taken in carrying out or approving the
action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental effects.
§ 104-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-18
1:259
§ 104-18. Copy of determination to be filed.
For public information purposes, a copy of the determination shall be filed
and made available as provided in Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations.
§ 104-19. Statements and determinations to be public records.
Except as provided in Section 617.16 of Title 6 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations, environmental assessment forms or statements,
notices of completion, draft and final environmental impact statements,
hearing records and written determinations in connection therewith are
public records.
§ 104-20. Certain actions exempt. [Amended 5-2-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law for local agencies shall be exempt
from this chapter. After those dates, if a lead agency modifies an action or
an applicant requests modification of a previously undertaken or approved
action, the Agency may determine that the modification shall be an action
subject to this local law and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York, Codes,
Rules and Regulations.
§ 104-21. Repealer.
This chapter supersedes the provisions of Local Law Nos. 1 and 5 of the
year 1977, both of which are hereby repealed.
§ 104-22. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately and shall apply to all applications
and proceedings now pending before the Town and all of its departments,
boards and agencies.
Chapter 106
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Wetlands — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 104-18 AMHERST CODE § 106-1
1:260
§ 106-1. Conformity required. [Amended 5-8-1961; 10-22-1962]
No excavation, removal or storage of earth, sand, gravel, rock or topsoil
other than excavations and storage necessary in connection with the
construction of buildings, retaining walls or fences shall be commenced
in the Town of Amherst, except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 106-2. Permit required.
Before the excavation, removal or storage of any of the above materials,
the owner or lessee of such premises or tract of land shall obtain a written
permit therefor, to be issued by the Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst,
subject to approval of the Town Board in its discretion.
§ 106-3. Public hearing. [Amended 3-9-1964; 5-1-2006 by L.L. No.
6-2006]
No such permit may be issued unless and until the premises or tract of
land with respect to which such permit is sought has been determined
to be a proper use of such land as determined by the Town Board. The
public hearing shall be pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 203, Zoning, § 8-2-3.
§ 106-4. Information required on application; erection of corner
posts.
A. The applicant shall file with the Town Engineer of the Town of Amherst
an application in duplicate, together with a comprehensive plan drawn
to a scale of one inch to 100 feet, setting forth in detail:
(1) Location and extent of the proposed excavations.
(2) Exact condition of premises before and after excavation.
(3) Drainage systems to be installed to ensure proper surface drainage
during and after completion of work.
(4) Grades of all creeks or drainage ditches at fifty-foot intervals for a
minimum distance of 500 feet beyond the parcel of land covered by
the permit.
(5) Location of all existing buildings on said premises.
(6) Elevations at intervals of 50 feet.
B. The elevations shown on the above-mentioned plan shall refer to United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
C. Such plan must be prepared by an engineer or land surveyor duly
licensed to practice in the State of New York.
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-4
1:261
§ 106-5. Consent of adjoining property owners required.
No excavation or stockpiles shall be made within 300 feet of the right-ofway
of any public road, street, highway or public area or within 100 feet of
any property line of adjoining land unless written consent of the adjoining
property owner shall be first obtained and a duplicate or original copy
attached to the application.
§ 106-6. Restoration where topsoil is removed.
In those instances where topsoil is to be removed, at least four inches of
topsoil capable of supporting vegetation shall be left upon the surface, and
the area from which the topsoil is taken shall be prepared into a loose
seedbed, fertilized and seeded in the following steps:
D. Corner posts shall be set designating the land area involved. Such posts
shall have a sign affixed thereto 24 inches in length by 12 inches in
height, containing the name of the person to whom the permit has been
issued, the permit number and a statement of the month of issue. The
top of such corner posts shall be at least four feet above ground level
and placed in position by the licensed engineer or surveyor at the time
of the original survey. These posts shall be maintained in their exact
positions throughout the entire operation to aid in the inspection of the
area to which the permit relates by all interested persons. In the event
that such posts are not in place, said permit shall be subject to
revocation at the discretion of the Town Board until such time as they
have been replaced in exact position.
A. Disked or harrowed to loosen ground to a depth of two inches.
B. Fertilized with 1/2 ton per acre of complete fertilizer (5-10-5 or similar
analysis).
C. Smoothed with a smoothing harrow.
D. Seeded with a grass seed with 12 pounds per acre of the following
clover grass mixture, mixed and sown under the supervision of an
inspector representing the Town of Amherst:
Landino White Clover 1 pound per acre
Wild White Clover 1 pound per acre
Timothy 5 pounds per acre
Kentucky Blue Grass 5 pounds per acre
Total 12 pounds per acre
E. Rolled firm.
F. Notification shall be given to the Town Engineer two days prior to
commencement of operation for seeding to ensure opportunity for
inspection and supervision.
§ 106-4 AMHERST CODE § 106-7
1:262
§ 106-7. Deposit.
§ 106-8. Fees; permit term.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst shall charge or collect a fee of $25
per acre for the aforesaid permit, which permit shall expire one year from
the date thereof. Upon written application, the Town Board may extend said
permit for a period of one additional year.
§ 106-9. Area limitation for topsoil removal.
No permit shall be granted at the same time for the removal of topsoil
for more than six acres owned or leased by the same operator; provided,
however, in the event that the work under an existing permit shall be graded
and completed with the exception of seeding, the holder of said permit may
at that time request an additional permit.
A. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant or the record owner of
the premises or tract of land shall deposit with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Amherst the sum of $2,500 for six acres and $500 per acre for
less than six acres, which sum shall be held in escrow for the faithful
performance of the conditions contained in this chapter, the observance
of all municipal ordinances and to defray the cost of inspection of the
premises from time to time by a representative of the Town of Amherst
and also to indemnify the Town of Amherst against all costs and
disbursements in regard to inspection or otherwise. Said deposit shall
not bear interest and so much as shall remain after deduction of
inspection fees, together with other costs and charges of the Town of
Amherst resulting from the failure of the holder of the permit to comply
with the terms of this chapter, shall be refunded to the holder of said
permit; provided, however, that if the cost to the Town of Amherst to
make full compliance with the above-stated requirements shall exceed
the amount of the deposit, the holder of said permit shall be liable to the
Town of Amherst for any deficiency. In the event of failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, the holder of the permit will be given
30 days in which to correct such default, and at the expiration of such
time the Town of Amherst shall have the right to correct and/or
complete the work, and the cost thereof will be deducted from the
deposit hereinbefore referred to, or if such deposit shall be insufficient
to defray the cost, the holder of the permit shall be liable for any
deficiency.
B. No refund shall be made to the holder of the permit until a letter of
completion has been issued by the Town Engineer certifying to the fact
that all the provisions of this chapter and conditions of the permit have
been fully complied with. In the event of the issuance of a new permit,
cash or a certified check shall be submitted covering the total as set
forth above, and any refund on previous permits will be made only after
all requirements have been fully met, including a visible growth of
cover resulting from seeding as prescribed in § 106-6.
§ 106-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-10
1:263
§ 106-10. Removal of topsoil for regrading excepted.
Nothing herein contained shall require a person to obtain a permit for or
prevent the moving of the above-mentioned materials from one part of his
premises or tract of land to another part of the same premises or tract
of land when such is necessary for regrading; provided, however, that any
person engaged in the development of areas known as "subdivisions" within
the Town of Amherst and moving topsoil to correct grades shall replace
topsoil to the same depth as existed thereon prior thereto.
§ 106-11. Interpretation of certain terms.
The words "person," "owner," "lessee," "applicant" and/or "holder of a
permit" as used herein shall apply to all individuals operating as sole
proprietors, partnerships, firms, associations or corporations.
§ 106-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates or causes or participates in the violation of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$100 or to imprisonment for not more than three months, or to both such
fine and imprisonment. The person violating or causing or participating
in the violation of the same shall be a disorderly person. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
Notwithstanding the penalties herein provided, the Town of Amherst may
enforce obedience to this chapter or any part thereof by injunction to
restrain the violation thereof.
§ 106-13. Modifications.
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Town Board of the Town
of Amherst shall have the power in passing upon the application required
herein to vary or modify any of the regulations or provisions contained
herein so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured and substantial justice done.
§ 106-14. Severability.
If any provisions of this chapter shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of the chapter.
§ 106-15. Repealer.
The provisions of Article XXII of the Building Ordinance of the Town of
Amherst with all amendments thereto are hereby repealed and rescinded.16
16.Editor's Note: This reference is to the Zoning Ordinance adopted 12-23-1935, and the
material repealed has not been included in later comprehensive revisions of Zoning.
§ 106-10 AMHERST CODE § 106-16
1:264
§ 106-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately from the date of its service as
against a person served personally with a copy thereof, certified by the
Town Clerk under the Corporate Seal of the Town and showing the date
of its passage and entry in the minutes; and otherwise, 10 days after the
publication and posting as required by the Town Law.
Chapter 108
EXPERT FEES, REIMBURSEMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Controlled access highways — See Ch. 120.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 121.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 108-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Expert Expense Reimbursement Local
Law."
§ 108-2. Legislative findings, intent, and purpose.
The Town Board hereby finds and determines that in order to protect
and safeguard the Town of Amherst, its residents and their property, with
respect to certain land developments within the Town, all should be
designed and constructed in a competent and workmanlike manner and in
conformity with all applicable governmental codes, rules and regulations
and dedicated and conveyed to the Town in a legally sufficient manner. In
order to assure the foregoing, it is essential that the Town have available
to it all necessary professional expertise to assist in the review of plans,
designs and applications and make recommendations to the Town Board,
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Town of Amherst takes great pride in the skill and
professionalism of its staff. However, from time to time, the staff is called
upon to review and evaluate matters outside the range of staff training.
These situations may require the Town to seek out skills not possessed by
the Town employees but which are not required frequently enough to justify
the hiring of new staff. At the same time, the cost of retaining such outside
expertise should not be borne by the taxpayers of the Town but rather by
those who seek to profit from the decisions of the Town and its boards.
Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to establish a mechanism whereby
the Town may hire necessary expertise that is needed infrequently without
imposing the cost on its taxpayers.
§ 106-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:265
§ 108-3. Statutory authority; local supersession.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of Subparagraphs (a)(12) and
(d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii) and Municipal Home Rule
Law § 22. To the extent that the Town Law of the State of New York does not
authorize the Town Board, Town Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
or Historic Preservation Commission to require the reimbursement to the
Town of expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the professional
review of applications for land use approvals, it is the expressed intent of
the Town Board to change and supersede such statutes. More particularly,
such statutes do not authorize the deferral or withholding of such approvals
in the event such expenses are not paid to the Town. It is the expressed
intent of the Town Board to change and supersede Town Law §§ 64(17-a),
264, 265, 267, 267-a, 267-b, 274-a, 274-b, 276, 277, 278, and 280-a to
empower the Town to require such payment as part of the approval process.
§ 108-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind who or which requests the Town
Board, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Historic
Preservation Commission to approve a land use application.
LAND USE APPLICATION — An application for development plan approval,
planned district rezoning, planned unit development, amendments to the
zoning map, rezoning, temporary use permits, subdivision approval, site
plan approval, open development area site plan approval, an area variance,
use variance, special use permit, a certificate of appropriateness under
Chapter 120, Controlled Access Highways, and Chapter 121, Historic
Preservation, of the Code of the Town of Amherst, as amended, and any
additional review for those as needed to comply with the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act, Environmental Conservation Law,
Article 8, and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and Chapter 104 of
the Code of the Town of Amherst, Environmental Quality Review, as
amended.[Amended 9-18-2017 by L.L. No. 19-2017]
TOWN — The Town of Amherst.
§ 108-5. Retention of expert assistant; reimbursement by applicant.
[Amended +5-1-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006; 9-18-2017 by L.L. No.
19-2017]
A. The Town may hire any attorney, consultant and/or expert necessary to
assist the Town in reviewing a land use application.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 203, Zoning, § 6-7-11, of the
Code of the Town of Amherst with respect to applications for special use
permits for telecommunications facilities, if, prior to the completion of a
review of a land use application, the Town discovers the need to retain
§ 108-3 AMHERST CODE § 108-5
1:266
§ 108-6. Exceptions.
consultant and/or expert services, the applicant shall deposit with the
Town funds sufficient to reimburse the Town for the reasonable costs
of consultation and/or evaluation in connection with review of the
application. The Town will maintain a separate escrow account for such
funds.
C. Upon receipt of such funds, the Town Clerk shall cause the money to be
placed in an account in the name of the Town and shall keep a separate
record of all money so deposited and the name of the applicant and the
project for which the sums were deposited.
D. The Town's attorneys, consultants and experts shall invoice the Town
for services rendered in reviewing the application. The Town shall
furnish a copy of each invoice received to the applicant upon receipt of
the invoice by the Town.
E. The Town shall review and audit all invoices received and shall approve
payment only of such fees as are reasonable in amount and necessarily
incurred by the Town in connection with a review of a land use
application. For purposes of this chapter, a fee is reasonable in amount
if it bears a reasonable relationship to the average charge by such an
attorney, expert or consultant to the Town or others for services
performed in connection with the review of a project similar to that
involved in the land use application. In this regard, the Town may take
into consideration the size and type of project involved in the land use
application and any special conditions or considerations as the Town
may deem relevant in connection with review of the particular land use
application.
F. Contracts for the retention of attorneys, experts and/or consultants,
except for experts and/or consultants hired by attorneys, shall be let
pursuant to the purchasing policy of the Town of Amherst unless the
contract is one that must be competitively bid.
G. After payment of all outstanding invoices, any funds held by the Town
upon completion of a review of a land use application shall be returned
to the applicant.
A. The following developments are hereby exempt from the application of
this chapter:
(1) Any development of land of one acre or less abutting an existing
public highway.
(2) Any subdivision of land into four or fewer lots abutting an existing
public highway.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, an
applicant or developer shall not be required to reimburse the Town for
any part of a fee incurred by the Town for services performed in
§ 108-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-6
1:267
§ 108-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not effect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof that can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 108-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately when it is filed in the Office of
the Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and published pursuant to § 130 of the Town Law and Chapter 28 of
the Code of the Town of Amherst.
Chapter 110
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Gasoline sales — See Ch. 118.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Lighting — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 110-1. State code applicable.
The New York State Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted for and to
be effective throughout the Town of Amherst outside the Village of
Williamsville.
§ 110-2. When effective.
Following adoption, this chapter shall take effect immediately upon
publication and filing as required by law.
connection with matters, including but not limited to those resulting
from complaints by third parties, as to which the Town determines the
applicant had no responsibility or were beyond the reasonable control
of the applicant.
§ 108-6 AMHERST CODE § 110-2
1:268
Chapter 114
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 77.
§ 114-1. Title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the
"Games of Chance Law of the Town of Amherst."
§ 114-2. Word usage; definitions.
§ 114-3. License required.
Games of chance may be conducted in the Town by an authorized
organization after obtaining a license therefor from the Town Clerk of
the Town of Amherst, in accordance with the provisions, requirements
and limitations of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, the rules and
regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this
chapter.
§ 114-4. Conduct of games on Sunday.
The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is authorized, and licenses
issued by the Town Clerk should specifically so provide, except as is
otherwise provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, and in
no event shall such games of chance be conducted on Easter Sunday,
Christmas Day or New Year's Eve.
§ 114-5. Restrictions.
Restrictions on the conduct of games of chance, as authorized herein, shall
be as contained in § 189 of the General Municipal Law.
A. The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, unless otherwise provided herein or unless the context
requires a different meaning.
B. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst.
OFFICER — The Chief of Police of the Town of Amherst shall be the
chief law enforcement officer.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst.
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-6
1:269
§ 114-6. Enforcement officer designated.
The chief law enforcement officer of the Town, the Chief of Police, shall
exercise control over and supervise all games of chance conducted under
an appropriately issued license. Such officer shall have all of those powers
and duties set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 114-7. License fee.
The fee payable to the Town Clerk upon issuance of a license shall be
in accordance with and as provided in the Town Law, provided that at a
referendum at the special election held for the purpose of submitting this
chapter for approval by the electorate pursuant to the provisions of law, a
majority of the qualified electors of the Town, voting at said referendum,
shall approve the same by voting for the adoption of said chapter.
§ 114-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately if approved by the qualified
electors of the Town of Amherst at a referendum to be held at the same time
as the general election on November 7, 1989.17
Chapter 116
(RESERVED)
Chapter 118
GASOLINE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Lighting — See Ch. 132.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 166.
§ 118-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the manner and
methods pertaining to the sale and dispensing of gasoline and other
flammable liquids within the Town of Amherst.
§ 118-2. Operation of dispensing devices. [Amended 11-9-1959]
A. Gasoline, when being sold or dispensed to the public, shall be pumped
and dispensed by the owner, lessee, attendant, operator or other
17.Editor's Note: This local law was approved at a referendum held on 11-7-1989.
§ 114-6 AMHERST CODE § 118-2
1:270
§ 118-3. Special fuel-dispensing devices. [Amended 2-14-1972,
effective 3-4-1972]
Anything hereinbefore provided to the contrary notwithstanding, when a
permit therefor has been approved by the Town Board, special fueldispensing
devices, such as, but not limited to, coin-operated, card-operated
and remote-preset types, are permitted at automobile service facilities,
provided that:
authorized employee of a service station who shall not be less than 18
years of age, except as hereinafter provided, physically competent to
act in an emergency, fully instructed regarding safety precautions and
who shall comply with the approved standard of safety in the handling
of gasoline lines and flammable liquids.
B. A person between the age of 16 years and 18 years, however, may pump
and dispense gasoline as aforesaid, provided that he is enrolled in or
has successfully completed a course of instruction in an authorized
public or private school which requires as part of the course the
working in a gasoline service station. Further, such person at all times,
while so working, must have available for inspection a certificate from
the principal, president or other director of the school that such person
is enrolled in such course or has successfully completed same.
A. There is at least one attendant, qualified as provided in § 118-2 of this
chapter, on duty while the facility is open to the public.
B. The sole function of such attendant shall be to observe, control and
supervise the dispensing of Class I flammable liquids through such fueldispensing
devices.
C. The attendant shall require the engine of the vehicle to be shut off and
shall prohibit smoking in the fueling area.
D. Signs reading "No smoking—Shut off motor" shall be conspicuously
posted at each dispensing island.
E. The attendant shall prevent the dispensing of Class I liquids into
portable containers other than those constructed of metal or durable
fireproof plastic which close with a screw or spring cap.
F. The attendant shall immediately clean up accidental spills and employ a
fire extinguisher in the event of fire.
G. There shall be clear vision between the controlling mechanism in the
building and the dispensing island and further constant contact
between said points by means of a voice intercommunication system,
which shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times.
H. Clearly identified emergency power controls capable of disconnecting
power to all dispensers shall be installed at a location not less than 20
feet from any dispenser and not more than 60 feet from the most distant
§ 118-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-3
1:271
§ 118-4. Revocation of permit. [Amended 2-14-1972, effective
3-4-1972]
The Town Board may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the foregoing
section in the event of any violation of the regulations therein contained.
The provisions of this section shall be in addition to all other penalties or
punishments as prescribed in § 118-6 of this chapter.
§ 118-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SERVICE STATION — Any premises or portion of premises, public or
private, where gasoline or other flammable fluid fuel for self-propelled
vehicles, boats or portable internal combustion engines is dispensed into
the fuel tanks of such equipment, including outdoor facilities on such
premises used for lubrication and minor service of such vehicles, boats,
machines or engines.
§ 118-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-31-1966]
Every violation by any person, firm, association or corporation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an offense against this
chapter, and, upon conviction therefor, such person, firm, association or
dispenser and in a location where all dispensers are visible to the
attendant. [Amended 5-22-1972]
I. Two twenty-pound Purple K fire extinguishers or better shall be
maintained in proper operating condition at the site of the emergency
power controls at all times. [Amended 8-28-1972, effective
9-9-1972]
J. Dispensing devices and delivery nozzles shall be of the type authorized
under the Fire Prevention Code of this Town. Those meeting the
standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories or Factory Mutual
Engineering Division may be considered to be in compliance with this
chapter.
K. A control shall be provided that will permit the pump to operate only
when a dispensing nozzle is removed from its cradle on the dispensing
unit and the switch on the dispensing unit is manually activated. The
control shall also stop the pump when the nozzle is returned to its
cradle.
L. There shall be no latch-open device on any self-service dispensing
nozzle.
M. An approved impact valve, designed to close automatically in the event
of severe impact or fire exposure, shall be installed in the dispensing
line at the base of each dispensing device.
§ 118-3 AMHERST CODE § 118-6
1:272
corporation shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$100 or to imprisonment not to exceed three months, or both, for each and
every offense.
§ 118-7. When effective.
Upon adoption, this chapter shall become effective 10 days after publication
and posting as required by law.
Chapter 119
GEODETIC CONTROL POINT NETWORK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 203. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 118-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-7
1:273

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 119-1. Purpose and intent.
A. The Town has established a geodetic control point network comprised
of approximately 100 permanent and monumented control points. This
"infrastructure" consists of existing control points and new first order
permanent and distinguishable control points installed to N.G.S.
specifications. All control points have been occupied, tied together and
adjusted using G.P.S. units to achieve extremely accurate coordinate
values. From these observations the datum computed, and adjusted
coordinate values, are published locally and adopted herein by the
Town Board. N.G.S. standard networks produce one single unified
reference system for horizontal and vertical control work within the
Town encouraging uniform use, sharing and efficient transfer of
geospatial data. Necessary quality control is provided and upheld
between all associates and users. Additional field work, adjustments
and identification are continually undertaken to further density, expand
and update the Town's network.
B. The perimeter of the Town is approximately 32 miles long,
encompassing almost 54 square miles in area, establishing the need for
a system of permanent horizontal and vertical control to provide a
common basis for surveying and mapping operations. Permanent
geodetic control points were set on an approximate spacing of one mile
within the Town. These points consist of a "Bernt'sen" Top Security Rod
Monument System, of which 71 were installed to N.G.S. specifications
for first order control points. In addition, 6 N.G.S Published First Order
Control Stations, 13 N.G.S Published Second Order Control Stations, 7
N.G.S. Azimuth Stations, 13 previously established N.Y.S. D.O.T. and five
existing E.C.D.P.W. Highway Division control points were recovered,
reused and the coordinate values updated. The integrity of each
existing control point was verified before integration into the Town
network.
C. This newly established reference system, or datum, is a set of numerical
quantities that will serve as a common foundation for all Town projects
to ensure an integrated product. The Town unified network is also being
used as the foundation for its geographic information system, digital
mapping projects, aerial photography, orthophotography,
photogrammetry, surveying and subdivision control, horizontal and
vertical datum unification, mapping and charting activities and a wide
variety of engineering and scientific applications.
D. The "Standards and Specifications for Geodetic Control Networks,"
published by the Federal Geodetic Control Subcommittee, and the
recently enacted New York State Plane Coordinate Law are the basis for
specifications and guidelines used in establishing this network. All of
the permanent geodetic control points in the Town control point
network are referenced to the U.S. N.A.D.'27 (feet), N.A.D.'83 (metric)
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-1
1:275
§ 119-2. Administration.
The Engineer is empowered to administer and enforce this chapter. The
Engineer reviews, evaluates and approves all plans for proposed
development(s), utility installations and construction within the Town. To
ensure that the purpose and intent of this chapter will be met, the Engineer
shall issue rules, regulations, procedures and technical criteria necessary
to carry out the intent of this chapter and shall have a copy of these
requirements filed with the Amherst Town Clerk.
§ 119-3. Abbreviations.
Abbreviations shall be as follows:
E.C.D.P.W. Erie County Department of Public Works
E.C.W.A. Erie County Water Authority
F.G.C.S. Federal Geodetic Control Subcommittee
G.I.S. Geographic Information System
G.P.S. Geodetic Positioning System
H.A.R.N. High Accuracy Reference Network
N.A.D. North American Datum
N.A.V.D. North American Vertical Datum
N.G.S. National Geodetic Survey
M.S.L. Mean sea level
and N.A.D.'83/92 H.A.R.N. (metric) datum which provide the basis for
horizontal geodetic control latitudes and longitudes. Control points are
also referenced to the published values of N.G.V.D.'29 datum (feet)
and converted to N.A.V.D.'88 datum (meters) which provide the vertical
elevations. The Town network and datum is G.P.S.-derived and is tied
into the N.Y. S.P.C.S., West Zone, with a minimum accuracy for second
order (Class 1) horizontal control networks and a minimum accuracy of
third order for vertical control networks. These specifications comply
with conventional standards of classification for horizontal and vertical
control (F.G.C.S.) and not that of geodetic standards.
E. The Amherst Geodetic Survey Monumentation Network Local Law is
intended to generate widespread use of a single unified horizontal and
vertical control reference system along with preserving and protecting
the existing established geodetic control points and the datum upon
which locations are based. The Town is committed to maintaining and
protecting this infrastructure in order to promote continued and
increased use for all interested parties. Typical mandatory use of the
system includes initial control for setting subdivision boundaries and
survey control required on various Town projects, including all survey
and drainage work performed by the Engineer. This law also provides a
basis for survey quality control and security.
§ 119-1 AMHERST CODE § 119-3
1:276
N.G.V.D. National Geodetic Vertical Datum
N.Y. New York
N.Y.S.D.O.T. New York State Department of Transportation
R.O. Record owner
S.P.C.S. State Plane Coordinate System
T.O.A. Town of Amherst
U.S. United States
U.S.C. and G.S. United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
§ 119-4. Short title; word usage; definitions.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Town of
Amherst Local Law 6-1996," providing for the protection, preservation,
continued use and reestablishment of the Amherst permanent geodetic
survey monumentation network of horizontal, vertical and control,
which shall be referred to as the "Geodetic Survey Monumentation
Network Local Law."
B. Words in this chapter and the referenced codes are used in their
ordinary English usage except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning or where a specific definition is set forth. The
following terms and definitions herein shall be, from this point forward,
defined as meaning the following, unless specifically noted otherwise:
AGENT — The designated representative of an owner, lessor, operator,
occupant or person, as filed with the agency.
AZIMUTH — The horizontal angle (an astronomic angular distance
measured on a horizontal circle in a clockwise direction, from either the
north or the south point in the horizon) in a clockwise direction from
the positive Y or negative Y axis with magnitude between 0° and 360°
or a numerical bearing of a line between two known and defined control
points.
AZIMUTH MARK — An established network control point, peripheral
point or reference point, usually a monument, that can be additionally
used to establish a reference azimuth for the beginning and closing
control of additional survey work. The minimum observation for an
azimuth mark is at least one angular observation (horizontal direction
or horizontal angle) and one distance measurement from the respective
control point to the azimuth mark in question.
BENCH MARK — A monumented (permanently marked) or otherwise
described survey/vertical control point whose adjusted elevational
height is referenced to M.S.L. The bench mark has a numeric elevation,
varying from the nearest tenths, hundredths and sometimes the
thousandth of a foot, associated with the uppermost top point of the
monuments (the crest of the domed cap of the monumented control
point).
§ 119-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-4
1:277
CONTROL POINT — Any survey point whose geodetic position is
determined by a survey project, monumentation (or otherwise
permanently marked), triangulation, trilateration, traverse or G.P.S.
station or recoverable survey point. This position has been referenced
to the published N.G.S. control datum that is used for both horizontal
and vertical control. The point is a monument permanently marked with
an alphanumeric symbol or a concise, intelligible name stamped on a
disk cap and meets the N.G.S. specifications for a permanent first order
control point. The Town's control points are Bernt'sen Top Security
Rod Monument System Points, which consist of the following: section
or sections of rod, six-inch-diameter PVC pipe, permanently stamped
domed cap, access cover rim, access cover, concrete encasement,
earthen ground around the control point within the designated
easement of occupation and/or a fifteen-foot circumference around
the monument, the "Carsonite" boundary post or any other visible
identifying marker, peripheral survey points or any other type of
geodetic control survey marker that may be the property of the Town.
All control points shall be installed under the direction of a New York
State licensed land surveyor and also comply with the required order
as specified by the Engineer. Since all of the control points have been
established by G.P.S. units, this definition shall also include, but not be
limited to, the electronic digital file G.P.S. logs, software and adjustment
data, and applicable metadata information for each control point.
DESTRUCTION OF A CONTROL POINT — Any and all disturbance,
damage, movement and vandalism to a control point will qualify the
monument as being destroyed and shall necessitate the need for
replacement and reestablishment. Damage to a control point shall also
include any and all damage from natural occurrences. All
interpretations and decisions regarding the need and responsibility for
replacement shall be at the discretion of the Engineer.
DEVELOPER — Any company, corporation, person, surveyor, agency or
representative thereof who undertakes or who let contracts for, but not
limited to, a building project, or provides public services in the areas
of agriculture, electric power lines, cables, conduit and lighting cables;
gas, oil, steam, petroleum or gaseous materials; communication, alarm
or signal lines, telephone, cable or satellite communications, cables or
conduit; water, irrigation and slurry lines; sanitary, storm, backyard
drainage systems and drain lines; topographic survey work; excavation
and earth work; and transportation facilities.
ELEVATION — The vertical distance from a datum, generally M.S.L., to
a point or object on the earth's surface.
ENGINEER — Town Engineer of the Town of Amherst, or permanent
full-time duly authorized representative.
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT — Amherst Engineering Department,
1100 North Forest Road, Williamsville, New York 14221.
GEODETIC CONTROL NETWORK — System of permanent
monumented coordinated control points established by the office of
§ 119-4 AMHERST CODE § 119-4
1:278
the United States National Oceanic Survey, formerly known as the
"United States Coast and Geodetic Survey," and by other governmental
agencies, extended or maintained.
GEODETIC CONTROL POINT — Shall be referred to as a "control
point" (as defined above); all geodetic control points to be set under the
direction of a New York State Licensed Land Surveyor.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM — A computerized database
management system for the storage, retrieval, analysis and display
of spatial (map) data using modern coordinate systems to define the
positions of features on the earth's surface for more accurate
representation in the database.
LESSOR — A grantor of a lease interest in premises.
OCCUPANT — A person in occupancy, in possession or in control of
premises, or using premises.
OPERATOR — A person engaged in the activity of renting or providing
space or premises for occupancy or use by others.
PERSON — Shall include entities such as partnerships, firms,
associations and corporations as well as individuals.
RECORD DRAWING — A drawing(s) that reflects the actual placement
of a control point as constructed in relation to the horizontal and the
vertical planes. The drawing(s) shall comply with the National Map
Accuracy Standards and digital formats, as defined by the Engineer.
SURVEYOR — Any person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of
New York.
SURVEY POINT — Any point which has one or more direction,
elevation, angles (horizontal or vertical), distances or vectors measured
to it or from it. A survey point may be a monumented (permanently
marked) control point, peripheral point, a reference mark, or azimuth
mark.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst.
TOWN ATTORNEY — The Town of Amherst Town Attorney or
authorized representative.
VERTICAL CONTROL POINT — Shall be known as a "bench mark" as
defined above.
VICINITY OF PRESERVATION — The area located within 500 feet of
the perimeter of a proposed or existing development site. This distance
shall increase to 1,500 feet if blasting will occur on the site during
construction. Blasting permits must be secured in accordance with
applicable Town local laws.
VICINITY OF USE — The area located within 2,500 feet of a control
point network. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to
determine if there is at least one of two intervisible pair of existing
control points, or one monumented control point with azimuths of
§ 119-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-4
1:279
record, within 2,500 feet of a project. The only exception shall be if the
entire project involves less than five residential lots, in which case the
distance is reduced to 1,200 feet.
§ 119-4 AMHERST CODE § 119-4
1:280
ARTICLE II
Use Requirements
§ 119-5. Rules and regulations.
A. The Engineer shall prescribe procedures, rules, regulations and issue
technical criteria to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. A
copy of such procedures, rules, regulations and criteria shall be filed
with the Amherst Town Clerk and be made available for inspection by
the public.
B. The Town, having established a permanent geodetic control network
and datum, shall publish datum information for use only within the
Town, unless other potential uses are approved by the Engineer. All
persons wishing to use this network will do so in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 119-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-5
1:281

ARTICLE III
Preservation Requirements
§ 119-6. Control point preservation.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the record owner, developer or legal
representative, individually or in combination thereof, to preserve and
protect the Town's permanent geodetic control points, peripheral
survey points or any other geodetic survey point(s) that comprise the
Town's geodetic control point network.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the record owner, developer or legal
representative, individually or in combination thereof, to research and
ascertain the exact location of any existing control point(s), peripheral
survey point(s) or any other geodetic survey points which are part of
the Town's geodetic control point network that are in the vicinity of use.
If such survey control exists within the specified vicinity of use, then
said project's boundaries shall be tied into the horizontal and vertical
control established by the existing Town's control point network. The
acceptable error in the accuracy of the field work necessary to establish
the development boundaries and the ties shall at a minimum be second
order Class II work. An accuracy certification statement shall appear on
the separate signed and scaled boundary and topographic survey
drawings. All angle points of the boundaries of the project shall show
the coordinates of said points as reduced to M.S.L. The horizontal
control shall be referenced to the N.Y. S.P.C.S. West Zone coordinate
system, as established by the U.S.C. and G.S., and vertical control in
N.A.V.D.'88 shall also be identified on the submitted drawings.
C. All control points, peripheral survey points, azimuth marks or any other
geodetic survey control which are part of the Town's geodetic survey
monumentation network and which are located within the vicinity of
use shall be shown, called out, labeled and described on all project
plans, topographic surveys and drawings and submitted to the Amherst
Engineering Department for verification and approval prior to the
project reaching the design stage.
D. Where the design of a project is such that an existing permanent
geodetic control point, peripheral survey point or other survey point in
the Town's geodetic survey monumentation network will be destroyed,
then the record owner/developer shall give a minimum of 60 days'
written notice to the Engineer of said destruction. A letter containing
all the specifics of the control point(s) that will be destroyed shall be
sent to the Engineer outlining all reasons surrounding the destruction,
as well as plans for replacement. All project plans, surveys and
drawings shall reflect monument removal and replacement actions. The
record owner/developer shall meet with the Engineer for the purpose of
preparing the necessary plans, information and schedules for the
reestablishment of the destroyed control point(s) to the required
specifications of the established geodetic control network. All drawings
shall meet the provisions of this chapter.
§ 119-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-6
1:283
E. When relocation and/or replacement of a control point is required, the
record owner, developer or responsible party shall submit to the
Engineer record drawings of the permanent control point(s) installation
along with tie sheets, control point record sheets, coordinate values,
G.P.S. occupation log record sheets and any other information deemed
necessary by the Engineer. This information shall be in acceptable
electronic digital format and submitted within 45 days of completion of
the installation. The installation of a permanent geodetic control point
shall be scheduled with the Engineer and shall include peripheral
survey points consisting of a minimum of three horizontal and two
vertical survey points and the required G.P.S. unit occupation and data
collection. The installation of a control point shall comply with the most
current N.G.S. specifications for existing permanent first order geodetic
control points and any specific requirements of the Engineer.
F. A bond in the amount of $1,000 per each control point shall be
submitted to the Engineer within 10 days of the notice of destruction to
the Engineer. This bond shall be subject to forfeiture if, in the opinion of
the Engineer, there is adequate proof that the provisions of this chapter
have been violated. The Engineer or Building Commissioner may issue
notices and stop-work orders with respect to acts of violation
committed during the progress of any project.
§ 119-6 AMHERST CODE § 119-6
1:284
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Remedies
§ 119-7. Enforcement.
Wherever it appears that a project will cause the destruction, disturbance,
damage or removal of permanent geodetic control points, peripheral survey
points or any other geodetic survey control points which are part of the
Town's control network, the record owner, developer or legal representative
of the parcel of land where the control point(s) lies shall provide the
Engineer 60 days' advance written notice. This notification shall be in
written letter form and sent without delay as soon as the record owner
becomes aware of the apparent control point destruction. It shall be the
responsibility of the record owner to conform with the all procedures of
Article III, Preservation Requirements.
§ 119-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
provision of this chapter or to fail in any manner to comply with a
notice, directive or order of the Engineer or Commissioner of Building
or his representative issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Any person having been served with a directive from the Engineer or
Commissioner of Building, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
who shall fail to comply with the directive within 30 days after such
service or within the time fixed by the Engineer or Commissioner of
Building for compliance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and
shall be punishable by with a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each week of continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 119-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-8
1:285
Chapter 120
HIGHWAYS, CONTROLLED-ACCESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 120-1. Purpose.
The Town Board finds that the public interest, health, safety and welfare will
be promoted by providing for controlled-access highways, as hereinafter
defined, within the Town highway system. The Town Board further finds that
the designation of controlled-access highways will contribute to, protect
and enhance the physical and visual environment of the Town.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any Code Enforcement Officer in the
Building Department of the Town of Amherst, New York.
COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — The Commissioner of Building of the
Town of Amherst, New York.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A Town highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right
of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner
as may be determined by the Town Board.
§ 120-3. Authorization to designate.
A Town highway entirely or partly constructed, reconstructed or improved
at a location where no public highway theretofore existed may be
designated by the Town Board, after receiving a recommendation from the
Town Superintendent of Highways, as a controlled-access highway.
§ 120-4. Right of access; governing provisions.
The owners or occupants of abutting property or any other person shall
have no right of access as operators of vehicles or in any capacity other
than as pedestrians or bicyclists except at junctions of such highways with
other Town highways and also excepting as such access may be reserved by
the deed or final vesting order describing the property which has been or
which hereafter shall be acquired for the purpose of such controlled-access
highway. In addition, access to and from abutting properties from which a
part has been dedicated for the purpose of such controlled-access highway
may be authorized by the Town Board. A controlled-access Town highway
§ 119-8 AMHERST CODE § 120-4
1:286
shall be subject in all other respects to the provisions of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, the Highway Law and all local laws and ordinances relating to
Town highways.
§ 120-5. Designation.
The following Town highways or portions thereof are designated controlledaccess
highways:
Highway Location
Youngs Road From Sheridan Drive to Casey Road
§ 120-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building or a Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 120-7. Violations; penalties for offenses.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, partnership, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter. Any offense of this chapter shall be classified as a
violation.
B. Notice of violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice
of violation or order. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued; and
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the Commissioner of Building or Code Enforcement Officer shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination
of the unlawful access to a controlled-access highway.
D. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local
laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person, occupant,
operator or owner who violates any provision of this chapter or any
regulation contained herein is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-7
1:287
Chapter 121
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 121-1. Designation; title.
This chapter shall be Chapter 121 of the Code of the Town of Amherst and
may be cited as the "Historic Preservation Law of the Town of Amherst."
§ 121-2. Authority. [Amended 5-16-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
In accordance with Section 96-a of the General Municipal Law of the State
of New York entitled "Protection of historical places, buildings and works of
art," and Article 5-K of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York,
entitled "Historic Preservation," the Town Board of the Town of Amherst has
the authority to provide, by local law, regulations, special conditions and
restrictions for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and the use of
places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects
having special character or special historical or other aesthetic interest or
value. Pursuant to that authority, the Town Board has prepared and adopted
this Chapter setting forth standards to be followed in historic preservation.
§ 121-3. Purpose.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts is
necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general
welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded in its
past and inasmuch as Amherst has many significant historic, architectural
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days,
or both.
E. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Commissioner of Building or Code
Enforcement Officer from instituting appropriate action to restrain,
correct or abate a violation. If the owner of a premises fails to comply
with an abatement or correction order within the time prescribed, the
Commissioner of Building or Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
violation to be corrected or abated, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
cost of such correction or abatement shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the violation is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
§ 120-7 AMHERST CODE § 121-3
1:288
and cultural resources which constitute its heritage, this chapter is
intended to:
§ 121-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADAPTIVE REUSE — Conversion of a building originally designed for a
certain purpose to a different purpose.
ALTER — To change one or more exterior architectural features of a
landmark, an improvement on a landmark site or a structure within an
historic district.
BUILDING — Any structure or part thereof having a roof supported by
columns or walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Building of the Town
of Amherst.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Preservation Commission approving plans for alteration, construction,
removal or demolition of a landmark, an improvement to a landmark site or
a structure within an historic district.
CONSTRUCTION — Building an addition or making an alteration to an
existing structure or building a new principal or accessory structure.
DEMOLITION — Destruction of a building, structure or improvement.
EXTERIOR — Architectural style, design, general arrangement and
components of the outer surfaces of an improvement, building or structure
as distinguished from the interior surfaces, including but not limited to the
kind and texture of building material and the type and style of windows,
doors, signs and other such exterior fixtures.
FACADE — The exterior of a building or structure that can be viewed.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically definable area so designated
pursuant to this code.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence,
gate, wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment or
any part thereof.
A. Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which
represent distinctive elements of Amherst's historic, architectural and
cultural heritage.
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
C. Protect and enhance Amherst's attractiveness to visitors and support
and stimulate the Town's economy.
D. Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development
of the Town.
§ 121-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:289
LANDMARK — Property, object, structure or natural feature or any part
thereof so designated pursuant to this code.
LANDMARK SITE — A significant historical or cultural site(s) where
buildings or structures no longer exist, so designated pursuant to this code.
OWNER — A person, firm or corporation which owns the fee of property
or a lessor state therein, a mortgage or vendee in possession, a receiver,
an administrator, an executor, a trustee or any other person, firm or
corporation in control of property.
PRESERVATION — Retention of essential character of an improvement,
object, building, natural feature or structure as embodied in its existing
form, integrity and material. This term includes the retention of trees,
landscaping and vegetative cover of a site. This term may include temporary
stabilization work, as well as ongoing maintenance of historic building
materials.
PRESERVATION COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Town of Amherst
Preservation Commission.
PROPERTY — Land and improvements thereon.
RECONSTRUCTION — Reproduction of the exact form and detail of a
vanished building, structure, improvement or part thereof as it appeared at
a specific time.
REHABILITATION — Repair or alteration that enables buildings, structures
or improvements to be efficiently utilized while preserving those features of
buildings, structures or improvements that are significant to their historic,
architectural or cultural values.
RESTORATION — Recovery of the form and details of a building, structure
or improvement and its site during a particular time.
SITE — A plot or parcel of land.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent
or temporary location on the ground. This term shall include but not be
limited to buildings, walls, fences, signs, billboards, lighting fixtures, screen
enclosures and works of art.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, County of Erie, State of New York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Amherst, Erie County,
New York.
TOWN CLERK — The Town of Amherst Town Clerk.
§ 121-5. Historic Preservation Commission. [Amended 5-16-2018 by
L.L. No. 10-2018]
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Town of
Amherst Historic Preservation Commission."
B. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The Town of
Amherst shall be the primary residence of each Commission member.
§ 121-4 AMHERST CODE § 121-5
1:290
Commission members shall serve terms of four years, with the
exception of the initial term, in which four (4) members shall serve
terms of four (4) years and three (3) members shall serve terms of two
(2) years.
C. Appointment of Commissioners shall be made by the Town Board.
D. To the extent available in the Town of Amherst, the Commission should
consist of the following:
(1) At least one (1) shall be an architect.
(2) At least one (1) shall be an historian.
(3) At least one (1) shall be a licensed real estate broker.
(4) At least one (1) shall be a licensed professional engineer.
(5) All members shall have demonstrated significant interest and
commitment to the field of historic preservation.
(6) The Director of the Buffalo Niagara Heritage Village, or his/her
designee shall be a nonvoting, ex officio member of the Commission
and the designee shall be a resident of the Town of Amherst.
E. The Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson shall be elected by and from
voting members of the Commission. The terms of office shall be two (2)
years. If the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson cannot fulfill his or her
term of office, a Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be elected by
and from the membership to fulfill the remainder of the term until the
next regular election.
F. If any Commissioner resigns or otherwise cannot fulfill his or her term
of office, the Town Board shall appoint an interim member to serve the
remainder of the term.
G. The Vice Chairperson shall ensure that minutes of all Commission
meetings are suitably recorded, prepared and distributed.
H. The powers of the Commission shall include:
(1) To recommend designation of historic landmarks, sites and districts
to the Town Board for its consideration.
(2) To advise and recommend to the Town Board on matters of
employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission.
(3) To promulgate rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct
of its business.
(4) To adopt criteria for the identification of significant historic
architectural and cultural landmarks and or for the delineation of
historic districts.
§ 121-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:291
§ 121-6. Designation of historic landmarks, sites and districts.
[Amended 5-16-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
(5) To conduct surveys of significant historic, architectural and
cultural landmarks within the Town.
(6) To make recommendations to the Town Board on the acceptance or
donation of facade easements and development rights, the
acquisition of facade easements and development rights or other
interests in real property as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
(7) To increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
education programs.
(8) To make recommendations to the Town Board concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the Town.
(9) To recommend acquisition of a landmark or structure by the Town
where its preservation is essential to the purposes of this chapter
and where private preservation is not feasible.
(10) To approve or disapprove applications for certificates of
appropriateness, subject to review by the Building Commissioner
pursuant to this Chapter.
I. The Commission shall meet at least monthly if any business is pending.
Meetings may be held at any time on the written request of any two
Commission members. The Commission must meet at least once
quarterly.
J. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of
the Commission members, but not less than a majority of the full
authorized membership may grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
A. The Commission may recommend designation of an individual property
as a landmark, subject to Town Board approval, if it:
(1) Is associated with the lives of individuals or of people or of events
significant in the national, state or local history.
(2) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, a period or a
method of construction.
(3) Represents the work of a master architect or designer or possesses
high artistic values.
(4) Represents a significant or distinguished entity whose components
may lack individual or special distinction.
§ 121-5 AMHERST CODE § 121-6
1:292
(5) Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
B. The Commission may recommend designation of a property or a group
of properties as an historic site, subject to Town Board approval, if it:
(1) Contains significant historical or cultural sites where buildings or
structures no longer exist, such as a battlefield, a cemetery or a
former transportation facility; or sites which may yield information
important to area history or prehistory.
C. The Commission may recommend designation of a group of properties
as an historic district, subject to Town Board approval, if it:
(1) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation as a landmark; or
(2) Is an area that represents several periods or styles of architecture
typical of different areas of history; or
(3) Is an area that has several buildings of the same architectural
period or style and thus constitutes unified architectural
streetscape consistency or a significant community uniformity of
style; or
(4) Is an area connected with significant events or cultural happenings
or development its involving ethnic, religious groups or other
groups of special historical interest; and
(5) By reason of possessing such qualities, constitutes a distinct
section of the Town of Amherst.
D. The boundaries of each proposed historic district designated
henceforth shall be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in
the Town Clerk's office for public inspection.
E. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by the Town Clerk thirty
(30) days prior to a public hearing to the owner(s) of any property(ies)
proposed for historic designation. The notice shall describe the
property proposed for designation, summarize the proposed action and
announce the date, time and location of the public hearing. A copy of
the notice of proposed designation shall also be sent to the Town Board.
F. Once the Historic Preservation Commission has issued a notice of a
proposed designation, no building permits shall be issued by the
Building Commissioner except for emergency repairs until a final
determination on the proposed designation has been reached. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall provide a copy of any notice of
proposed designation to the Building Commissioner.
G. The notice of proposed designation shall also be sent to the Town of
Amherst Highway Department, the Town of Amherst Engineering
§ 121-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-6
1:293
§ 121-7. Certificates of appropriateness required.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, excavation, grading, demolition, new construction or
moving of a designated landmark or property within an historic district,
nor shall any person make any material change to such property, its light
fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements
which affect the appearance or cohesiveness of the landmark or historic
district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 121-8. Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness.
Department, the Town of Amherst Planning Department, the Town of
Amherst Assessor's Department, the Buffalo Niagara Heritage Village
and any other Town department and/or county or state agency as
appropriate. Each department/agency shall be given thirty (30) days
from the date of transmission to provide comments on the proposed
designation to the Historic Preservation Commission.
H. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to recommending
designation of any landmark, historic site or historic district. The
Commission, the property owner and any interested parties may
present testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing which will
become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural
importance of the proposed landmark or historic district. The record
may also contain staff reports, public comments or other evidence
offered outside of the hearing. A public hearing notice must be
published by the Town Clerk in the Town's designated official
newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date.
I. The Commission will recommend to the Town Board the designation of
an historic landmark, site or district. The Town Board will also conduct
a public hearing prior to acting on the recommendation.
J. The Commission shall file notice of each property designated as a
landmark and of the boundaries of each designated historic district
with the Erie County Clerk's office, the Town of Amherst Clerk's office,
the Town of Amherst Building Department, the Town of Amherst
Planning Department, the Town of Amherst Highway Department, the
Town of Amherst Engineering Department and the Town of Amherst
Assessor's Department.
K. Minutes of any business conducted by the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be placed on file in the Town of Amherst Clerk's office
and will be posted to the Town's website.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to the
interior of buildings.
§ 121-6 AMHERST CODE § 121-8
1:294
§ 121-9. Application for certificate of appropriateness.
B. The Commission's decision shall be based upon the following principles:
(1) Features which contribute to the character of the historic landmark
or district shall be retained with as little alteration as possible.
(2) Any alteration of existing features shall be compatible with its
historic character as well as with the surrounding property.
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the property in which it
is located and/or surrounding historic district.
C. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(3) Texture, materials and color and their relation to the property
itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
(5) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the
significance of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such certificate
with the Historic Preservation Commission. The application shall
contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location and photographs of the property.
(3) Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available.
(4) Perspective drawings, including the relationship to adjacent
properties, if available.
(5) Samples of color and/or materials to be used.
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type(s) of lettering to be used, all dimensions and
colors, a description of materials to be used, the method of
§ 121-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-9
1:295
§ 121-10. Hardship criteria.
§ 121-11. Hardship application procedure.
illumination and a plan showing the sign's proposed location on the
property.
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission. The Commission shall act to approve or deny
a certificate of appropriateness within 65 days of the date upon which a
completed application is filed with the Historic Preservation
Commission. If the application is not acted upon within 65 days, the
application shall be deemed approved. The applicant may request an
extension of the decision deadline date if so desired. The certificate of
appropriateness required by this chapter shall be in addition to and not
in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other
ordinance of the Town of Amherst.
A. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return regardless
of whether that return represents the most profitable return
possible.
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use permitted by
Chapter 203, Zoning, which would result in a reasonable return.
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
B. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return regardless
of whether that return represents the most profitable return
possible.
A. After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship application process.
§ 121-9 AMHERST CODE § 121-11
1:296
§ 121-12. Maintenance and repair required.
§ 121-13. Administration and enforcement; display of certificate.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the hardship
application, at which time an opportunity will be provided for
proponents and opponents of the application to present their views.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an
alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by registered mail, and a copy shall be filed with both
the Town Clerk's office and with the Building Department. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying
the hardship application.
E. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued while the
hardship application is pending. The Commission shall make a
determination on whether a hardship exists. Building and demolition
permits shall be issued in accordance with that determination.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any architectural feature of a landmark or
property within an historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, color or outward appearance.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any architectural feature which would, in the judgment
of the Historic Preservation Commission, produce a detrimental effect
upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and
character of the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(2) Deterioration of roof or other horizontal members.
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations,
including broken windows or doors.
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for
public safety.
A. Administration. The Building Commissioner shall administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. In connection with overseeing
§ 121-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-13
1:297
§ 121-14. Penalties for offenses.
§ 121-15. Appeals. [Amended 6-20-2011 by L.L. No. 18-2011;
5-16-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission
relating to designation, hardship, demolition permit application (see
Chapter 151, Section 56 for related regulations) or a certificate of
appropriateness may, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision
in the Town Clerk's office, file a written application with the Town Board
for review of the decision. The Town Board shall schedule a public hearing
on the matter without unnecessary delay. The appeal of the Commission's
decision may be based only upon the record and criteria utilized by the
Commission to render its decision. If new information becomes available
subsequent to the Commission's decision, a new application must be
submitted to the Commission. The Town Board's decision on the appeal shall
be considered final.
this responsibility, the Building Commissioner shall provide a permit
procedure coordinated with the established building permit procedure.
B. Enforcement. All work performed pursuant to this chapter shall
conform to any requirements included herein. It shall be the duty of the
Building Commissioner to inspect periodically any such work to assure
compliance. In the event that work is found that is not being performed
in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a stop-work order, and all work shall
immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project
as long as the stop-work order is in effect.
C. The certificate of appropriateness shall be displayed on the building in a
location conspicuously visible to the public while work pursuant to the
certificate is being done.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result
in the termination of any permits issued or any proceedings
commenced under provisions of this chapter.
C. Any person(s) who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a landmark
to fall into a serious state of disrepair which results in a violation of this
chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to an
appearance acceptable to the Historic Preservation Commission. Any
action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the Town Attorney
upon authorization by the Town Board. This civil remedy shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 121-13 AMHERST CODE § 121-16
1:298
§ 121-16. Conflict with other provisions.
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are imposed by the
provisions of any law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. Where greater restrictions are imposed by any law, ordinance
or regulation, such greater restrictions shall apply.
§ 121-17. Compliance required prior to action.
No decision to carry out or approve an action subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall be rendered by any department, board, commission,
officer or employee of the Town of Amherst until there has been full
compliance with all requirements of this chapter. This shall not prohibit
environmental, engineering, economic feasibility or other studies,
preliminary planning or budgetary processes, nor the granting of an
application relating only to technical specifications and requirements, but
not authorizing commencement of action until full compliance with this
chapter has been met.
§ 121-18. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the entire area of the Town of Amherst, excluding
that area within the corporate limits of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 121-19. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and, to this end, the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 121-20. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 122
HOUSE TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 121-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-20
1:299
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "House Trailer Ordinance."
§ 122-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Amherst by the more
efficient regulation of house trailers and trailer camps.
§ 122-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOUSE TRAILER — Any vehicle used or occupied as sleeping or living
quarters, mounted on wheels and propelled either by its own power or
power-driven vehicle to which it may be attached, and includes an
automobile trailer equipped with living quarters or sleeping facilities and a
house car.
TRAILER CAMP — Any lot, piece or parcel of ground whereon four or more
house trailers, house cars or automobile trailers equipped with sleeping or
living quarters are located or parked, otherwise than for the purpose of
loading, unloading or discharge or entrance of occupants or passengers.
§ 122-4. License required for trailers and trailer camps.
§ 122-5. Trailer camp licenses; fees.
A. House trailer. No person or persons being the owner or occupant of any
premises within the Town of Amherst shall use or permit the use of such
premises for the parking, storage use or other location of a house trailer
without a license obtained as hereinafter provided; nor shall any
person, being the owner or operator of a house trailer, park, store or
otherwise locate said house trailer upon any premises within the Town
of Amherst without obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Trailer camp. No person or persons, being the owner or occupant of any
land or premises within the Town of Amherst, shall use or permit the
use of said land or premises as a trailer camp without obtaining a
license therefor as hereinafter provided.
A. Issuance of license. The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst, upon
written application and upon receipt of the license fee therefor, may,
with the written approval of the Building Inspector of the Town of
Amherst, issue a license to become effective from the date thereof and
to continue in force for the term specified therein, but in no event
longer than through the 31st day of December next succeeding for the
§ 121-20 AMHERST CODE § 122-5
1:300
use of premises therein specified as a trailer camp. Such license shall
not be transferable nor assignable.
B. Application for license. The application for such license shall state the
name and address of the applicant, if an individual, and the name and
address of the partners, if a partnership, and the names and addresses
of the principal officers, if a corporation; the name and address of the
owner of the premises upon which the trailer camp is to be located, and
if such applicant is not the owner of such premises, the nature of the
interest of such applicant in said premises; a description of the land or
premises upon which the proposed trailer camp is to be located; a
complete plan of the proposed layout showing the extent and area to be
used for trailer camp purposes; the proposed roadways and/or
driveways; proposed location or site for house trailer location and
construction of all proposed sanitary conveniences, laundry buildings
and slop sinks, the proposed method of sewage disposal or removal, the
plan for water supply, electric light and a plan for proposed toilet, wash
rooms and laundry. Such application shall, when presented to the Town
Clerk, be immediately referred to the Building Inspector, whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter, except as herein
otherwise provided and shall have the power subject to the approval of
the Health Officer and of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst to
approve or reject such application. Upon the approval of such
application by the Building Inspector, the Town Clerk shall issue such
license. The approval or rejection of such application by the Building
Inspector shall be in writing, and the rejection thereof shall state briefly
the reasons for such rejection. Any person deeming himself aggrieved
by the action of said Building Inspector may, within 30 days thereafter,
apply to the Town Board of the Town of Amherst for a review of such
action. The Town Board may affirm or reserve or modify the
determination of the Building Inspector and may direct the Town Clerk
to issue or refuse such license.
C. Fees. The applicant shall at the time of issuance of such license pay to
the Town Clerk a fee in accordance with the following schedule of fees:
Trailer Camp Capacity
(trailers) Fee
Not more than 5 $50
Not more than 10 $100
Not more than 15 $150
Not more than 20 $200
More than 20 $500
D. Term of license. Such license shall be effective from and after the date
of issuance to and including the 31st day of December next succeeding
the date of issuance.
§ 122-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-6
1:301
§ 122-6. Trailer licenses; fees.
§ 122-7. Trailer camp regulations.
A. Terms of license. The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst, upon proper
written application and upon receipt of the license fee therefor, may
issue a license to continue in force for the term specified therein, but in
no event longer than four weeks from the date of issuance thereof to
any owner or operator of a house trailer parked or otherwise located
upon the premises in the Town of Amherst for a period longer than
seven days. The owner or operator of such house trailer, however, in the
event that same shall be parked or otherwise located in a duly licensed
trailer camp, may obtain a renewal of such license; provided, however,
that no house trailer shall be permitted to remain in any trailer camp or
camps in the Town of Amherst for a longer period than eight weeks in
each twelve-month period.
B. Application for license. The application for such license shall state the
name of the applicant, his residence address, the name and make of
house trailer, the registration number of such house trailer and the
state in which registered and the year of issue of registration; and if
such house trailer is propelled by another power drive vehicle to which
it may be attached, the make, registration number, state and year of
registration and the name of the owner of such other vehicle; the street
and number where such house trailer is or is to be located and a
statement of the estimated duration of stay in such proposed location;
whether or not such proposed location is a duly licensed trailer camp,
and if not, the consent in writing of the owner of the premises to such
use of the land must be presented with the application.
C. Fees. Each such applicant shall pay at the time of issuance of such
license a fee of $1 for each such house trailer.
D. Term. Such license and the renewal thereof shall be issued for a period
not exceeding four weeks from and after the date of issuance, the
expiration date of such license to be marked upon such license in a
space to be provided therein.
A. Location. All land used as a trailer camp shall be well-drained, of ample
size, and free from heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds. The land
shall be properly graded to ensure rapid drainage during and following
rain and shall at all times be drained so as to be free from stagnant
pools of water. No trailer camp shall be located within any residential
zoning district except for the RMH-8 District, as same are defined by
the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Amherst adopted December 23,
1935, and all amendments thereto, and shown upon the use map
forming a part of said Zoning Ordinance.18 No trailer camp shall be
located within 500 feet of any residence except the residence of the
owner of such camp, nor within 500 feet of a school, church, or other
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning.
§ 122-6 AMHERST CODE § 122-7
1:302
place of worship unless the Town Board shall otherwise order.
[Amended 5-1-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
B. Camp plan. Each such trailer camp shall provide not less than 875
square feet (25 feet by 35 feet) for each house trailer. The trailer camp
shall be subdivided and marked off into rectangular shaped lots,
grouped in blocks with camp streets at least 20 feet wide between each
block. No house trailer shall be located within 30 feet of any highway or
street line nor within 20 feet of any adjacent property line. Such trailer
camp shall be surrounded by a suitable woven wire, open metal fence
not less than five feet nor more than six feet high, having only necessary
opening for entrance and exit facilities. Barbed wire shall not be used
for such fences.
C. Each such trailer camp shall be provided with approved sewer and
water connections to existing public sanitary sewer and water systems
of the Town or of any district thereof or of any public service
corporation operating in such Town where such trailer camp is located,
in a district where such sanitary sewer and water systems are available.
Separate sewer connections for each trailer, based upon the maximum
capacity of each such camp, shall be provided. Where such trailer camp
shall be located in an area of the Town where public sanitary sewer,
water service and fire hydrants are not available, sewer facilities and
water supply shall be regulated as hereinafter provided in Subsection G
of this section.
D. Water supply. A sufficient supply of pure drinking water placed in
conveniently located buildings from approved water service facilities of
the Town of Amherst shall be provided. No common drinking facilities
shall be permitted. Drinking fountains and water faucets shall be placed
in locations other than in any toilet room or water closet compartment.
E. Toilets. Such trailer camp shall be provided with service buildings in
which shall be installed water closets, placed in separate compartments
properly separated from any other water closets, each compartment
being not less than three feet wide, enclosed in proper partitions in the
ratio of one water closet for every five females, or less; and one water
closet for every five males, in addition to one urinal for 10 males, or
less. Such minimum water closet and urinal accommodations shall be
based upon the total camp capacity according to the accepted plans and
shall be computed on the basis of a minimum of three persons to each
house trailer with the sexes being considered as equal in number and
the house trailers being computed according to the maximum permitted
capacity of such trailer camps. The room or rooms of the service
buildings herein referred to, housing water closets and urinals, shall
have a floor constructed either out of concrete or tile and same shall be
washed daily.
F. Showers. Each such trailer camp shall provide one lavatory or wash
basin for each toilet room having three toilets or fraction thereof; one
shower or tub for each sex for each five persons or fraction thereof and
§ 122-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-7
1:303
one slop sink or basin with water supply over for each two trailers.
Such minimum shower or tub accommodations shall be computed in the
same manner as provided in Subsection E in the case of toilets.
G. Camps outside improvement districts. Where such trailer camps shall
be located in an area of the Town where public sanitary sewers, water
and fire hydrants are not available, the installation of privies, cesspools
and septic tanks may be permitted. In general, the basis of designation
and installation of these rural conveniences shall conform to the
Sanitary Code adopted by the Public Health Council, Chapter 7, as
same now provides or may hereafter be amended to provide.
H. Garbage receptacles. Each such trailer camp shall provide equipment
sufficient to prevent littering of the ground and premises with rubbish,
garbage, refuse and the like and shall provide flytight metal
depositories with tight-fitting covers at conspicuous locations upon
such premises. Such depositories shall be kept at all times in sanitary
condition. No house trailer shall be located more than 100 feet from a
metal depository. All garbage, refuse, rubbish and the like shall be
collected at least twice a week.
I. Registration of house trailer occupants. The owner or operator of each
such trailer camp shall keep a permanent record in writing of all guests
or house trailer occupants using the facilities of such trailer camp,
which record shall include the following with reference to each such
house trailer:
(1) Name and address of each occupant.
(2) Date of arrival.
(3) Name and owner of the house trailer.
(4) Make of the house trailer.
(5) State in which the house trailer is registered.
(6) Registration number of the house trailer.
(7) Year of issue of registration and, in addition, for each such house
trailer being propelled by an automobile or vehicle to which it may
be attached, the following:
(a) Name of the owner of the automobile.
(b) State in which the automobile is registered.
(c) Registration number of the automobile.
(d) Year of issue of registration.
(e) Make of automobile.
§ 122-7 AMHERST CODE § 122-7
1:304
§ 122-8. Trailer regulations.
J. Removal of wheels. It shall be unlawful to remove wheels from a house
trailer or otherwise permanently affixing such house trailer to the
ground. Such attempted removal shall be grounds for the revocation of
the permit for such house trailer and shall subject such house trailer
and the owner thereof to the requirements of the Building Code and
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Amherst.19
K. Time limit on period of stay. No house trailer shall be permitted to
remain in any trailer camp for a longer period than eight weeks in each
twelve-month period.
L. Miscellaneous provisions:
(1) All plumbing fixtures installed in such trailer camps shall conform
to the provisions of the Plumbing Code of the Town of Amherst.20
(2) Trailer camps must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
A. Location. No house trailer shall be located upon any land or premises
within the Town of Amherst other than trailer camps unless such land
or premises has erected thereon, conveniently accessible to such house
trailer, adequate sanitary facilities and an approved water supply
system.
B. Restriction on number of trailers. Not more than one such house trailer
shall be permitted to park and otherwise locate on each separate lot or
parcel of land other than a trailer camp, and no such house trailer shall
hereafter park or hereafter be permitted to park by any person in a
trailer camp located within 500 feet of any residence other than the
residence of the owner or operator of said trailer camp unless the Town
Board shall otherwise order.
C. Duration of stay. No such house trailer shall be permitted to remain
upon any premises other than a trailer camp for a longer period than
four weeks in every 12 months, nor in any trailer camp for a longer
period than eight weeks in each twelve-month period.
D. Location of house trailer on lot. Such house trailer shall not be parked
or otherwise located on any lot or parcel of land other than a trailer
camp, nearer than five feet to the side line of the same nor within 30
feet of the street line of such premises.
E. Removal of wheels. It shall be unlawful to remove wheels from a house
trailer or otherwise permanently to affix such house trailer to the
ground. Such attempted removal and/or affixation shall be grounds for
the revocation of the permit for such house trailer and shall subject
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration, and Ch. 203, Zoning.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration.
§ 122-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:305
§ 122-9. Enforcement; inspections.
The Building Inspector of the Town of Amherst shall enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter as hereinbefore set forth with the assistance
of the Health Officer and of the police officers of the Town of Amherst.
It shall be the duty of such Health Officer to ascertain that the sanitary
requirements hereinbefore required are complied with. Such Building
Inspector, Health Officer and police officers shall have the right to enter
upon such trailer camp or other premises for the parking or location of a
house trailer at all times.
§ 122-10. Revocation of license.
If the Health Officer, upon inspection, finds that such trailer camp is not
being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition or that such trailer camp
is not being conducted in accordance with the regulations applicable to
such trailer camp and the provisions of this chapter, he shall serve upon
the holder of such license or the person in charge of such trailer camp an
order in writing directing that the conditions therein specified be remedied
within five days after the service of such order. If, after the expiration of
such period, such conditions remain unchanged or are not corrected in
accordance with the order of the Health Officer, the Health Officer shall
serve a notice in writing upon such trailer camp owner or the person in
charge of such trailer camp requiring the holder of such license to appear
before the Town Board of the Town of Amherst at a time to be specified
in such notice, not less than 24 hours, and show cause why such license
should not be revoked. The Town Board may, after a hearing at which the
testimony and witnesses of the Health Officer and the holder of the license
shall be heard, revoke the license if the conditions described in the original
order have not been corrected in accordance with the terms of such order
or if the holder of such license has violated the regulations applicable to
such trailer camp or has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or
for other sufficient cause. Upon the revocation of such license, the premises
shall forthwith cease to be used for the purpose of a trailer camp and all
house trailers shall be removed therefrom.
§ 122-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-31-1966]
Every violation by any person, firm, association or corporation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an offense
against this chapter, and upon conviction therefor, such person, firm,
association or corporation shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10
nor more than $100 or to imprisonment for a period of not less than one
day nor more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment; and
in addition, any person, firm, association or corporation which shall violate
such house trailer and the owner thereof to the requirements of the
Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance21 of the Town of Amherst.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration, and Ch. 203, Zoning.
§ 122-8 AMHERST CODE § 122-11
1:306
any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall omit, neglect or refuse
to do any act required by this chapter shall severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance respectively forfeit and pay a penalty of
$50. The imposition of all penalties for any violation of this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue. The application of the above
penalty or penalties or the prosecution of the violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of conditions
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 122-12. Nonapplicability.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the sale, storage
or garaging within a building or structure of a house trailer or house
trailers, nor shall the same be applicable to the exhibition for sale of house
trailers upon any property in the Town of Amherst, provided that the other
ordinances of said Town shall be complied with.
§ 122-13. Applicability of other legislation.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abrogate any of the
provisions of the Sanitary Code established by the Public Health Council of
the State of New York, as same now provides or as same may hereafter be
amended to provide. In the event of inconsistencies existing between the
provisions of this chapter and said code, said code shall govern.
§ 122-14. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision or provision of this chapter shall
be invalid, such invalidity shall apply only to the section, paragraph,
subdivision or provision adjudged invalid, and the rest of this chapter shall
remain valid and effective.
§ 122-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and immediately after its
passage, publication of notice of adoption and posting as prescribed by law,
except that the operators of trailer camps located in the Town of Amherst at
its effective date shall be allowed 30 days from and after such effective date
within which to comply with the provisions hereof.
§ 122-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-15
1:307
Chapter 125
IMPROVEMENTS, CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 125-1. Permit required; fee. [Amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No.
10-2003]
No person, firm, association or corporation shall install, construct or
perform any work incident to the installation and/or construction of any
public improvement upon real property in the Town of Amherst without first
having obtained a permit therefor, to be issued by the Town Engineer, that
the plans and specifications as submitted by the applicant comply with the
specifications and requirements of the Town of Amherst. The fee for such
permit shall be determined by Town Board resolution.
§ 125-2. Application forms.
The application for such permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Town of Amherst and shall contain such information as the Town Engineer
of the Town of Amherst shall require to determine that the proposed
improvement will conform with the specifications and requirements of the
Town of Amherst for such proposed improvement.
§ 125-3. Submission of map and specifications.
All applications shall be accompanied by a map or survey, together with
specifications, prepared by a civil engineer duly licensed by the State
of New York, one copy of which shall be filed with the Town Engineer,
the Superintendent of Highways and the Planning Board of the Town of
Amherst.
§ 125-4. Town specification to be furnished; fee.
The Town Engineer shall provide such applicant with a set of standard
specifications and requirements of the Town of Amherst for such work,
for which a charge of $25 per copy shall be made, and no work shall be
performed except in accordance therewith.
§ 122-15 AMHERST CODE § 125-5
1:308
§ 125-5. Inspection and supervision of work. [Amended 8-15-2005
by L.L. No. 6-2005]
No work shall be performed except under the supervision and inspection of
inspector designated by the Town Engineer. The fees of such inspector are
fixed at 10% of the construction cost of the public improvement. The fee
shall be paid to the Town prior to the issuance of the permit. The inspection
fee may be increased by a commercially reasonable amount during or after
implementation of the improvement at the discretion of the Town Engineer
or the Town Engineer's designee due to unforeseen field conditions or
complexity of design. An increase in inspection fee above 10% shall be
commercially reasonable if it bears a reasonable relationship to the average
charge to the Town or others for services performed in the inspection of a
project similar to that involved in the permitted project.
§ 125-6. Bond requirements.
If the improvements to be installed or constructed are upon real property
to which the Town of Amherst has acquired title, the holder of the permit,
before commencing any work in connection therewith, shall deliver to the
Town of Amherst a bond as surety, executed by a solvent surety corporation
authorized to do business in the State of New York, in a sum equal to the
cost of the work to be performed, which bond shall be approved by the Town
of Amherst, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all work in accordance
with the specifications and requirements of the Town of Amherst.
§ 125-7. Duration of bond.
Such bond shall remain in full force and effect until the certificate of
completion and satisfactory compliance with this chapter shall have been
issued by the Town Engineer.
§ 125-8. Failure to comply.
In the event that the holder of such permit shall fail or refuse to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, the above described bond shall be forfeited to
the Town of Amherst.
§ 125-9. Enforcement.
The holder of a permit shall comply with all the ordinances of the Town of
Amherst and all laws of the State of New York now in force or hereafter
adopted applicable to the work to be performed thereunder. Compliance
with the provisions of this chapter shall be a condition precedent to the
acceptance of any street, highway or other public improvement by the Town
of Amherst for the purpose of maintenance.
§ 125-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication in accordance
with the provisions of law.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-10
1:309
Chapter 126
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
§ 125-10 AMHERST CODE § 125-10
1:310
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the meaning of terms used shall be as follows:
DRY INDUSTRIES — Industries which are not significant industrial users
under the regulations (40 CFR 35.925-12).
DRY USERS — Industrial users [as defined in 40 CFR 35.905-9(a), (b), (c),
(d) and (e)] which discharge only nonprocess segregated domestic wastes
or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FWPCAA — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.
ICR — Industrial cost recovery as defined by the EPA in its rules and
regulations.
ICR PERIOD — Thirty years, commencing with the certification by the
Town Engineer that the treatment facility is complete and has been built
according to the approved plans and specifications or as otherwise provided
in § 126-13 hereinafter.
ICR SYSTEM — All elements, ordinances, rules and regulations, SIC and/or
other identification of industrial users, etc., necessary to develop, operate
and implement a plan that will meet the requirements of Section
204(b)(1)(B) of FWPCAA, P.L. 92-500 (the Act), and will comply with EPA
guidelines for an ICR system.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NYS or DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
SIC — The Standard Industrial Classification Manual, published 1972, or
the latest edition.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, Erie County, New York.
USERS — Any person or owner depositing or discharging sewage or
industrial wastes into any sanitary sewer in the Town.
§ 126-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of the Town's sanitary
sewer system, including other municipalities by any arrangement or
agreement and all users by contract and users by any other arrangement or
agreement.
§ 126-3. Application and permit.
Before making any connection to the Town's sanitary sewer system, all
users shall make application to the Town and shall have obtained a permit
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-3
1:311
for said services. As a part of said application and as a condition for said
services, each user shall agree to abide by the provisions of the rules and
regulations as set forth herein.
§ 126-4. Authority of Town Board.
The Town Board, at all times, has the right to review any and all permits
for connections to the Town sanitary sewer system and to disapprove any
and/or all such permits it may deem detrimental to the best interests of the
sewer districts at any time during the rendering of service.
§ 126-5. Right of entry upon owner default.
The Town has the right, upon reasonable notice to the property owner and
upon the property owner's failure to make necessary repairs, to enter upon
any user's property or premises at any time to repair any leak, break or
other damage which, if left unrepaired, would or could be detrimental to the
Town sanitary sewer system, and charge the cost thereof to the property
owner.
§ 126-6. User charges.
It is understood by all users that construction of the Town sanitary sewer
system is dependent upon a construction grant from the federal government
pursuant to the rules of the EPA. Therefore, all users agree that as a
condition for obtaining a permit to connect with facilities of the Town
sanitary sewer system, each user shall be responsible for, and obligated
to collect and pay to the Town sanitary sewer system, that portion of the
federal grant allocable to the treatment of wastes from industrial users, all
in accordance with Section 35.925-12, Rules and Regulations of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, relating to grants for construction
of treatment works. These costs shall consist of, but not be limited to, the
following charges:
A. User charges. The Town shall compute the local or Town use charge on
an annual basis in accordance with the report entitled "Sanitary Sewer
User Charge System For Sanitary Sewer Districts No. 1 and No. 16 and
Tributory Districts Thereto — September 17, 1979" which was adopted
by said Town Board on September 17, 1979.
B. Industrial cost recovery (ICR) plant facilities. The Town shall compute
the ICR on an annual basis for the treatment of wastes in accordance
with the formula set forth herein.
§ 126-3 AMHERST CODE § 126-6
1:312
ARTICLE II
ICR Payments and Procedures
§ 126-7. Computation of ICR payments.
A. The Town shall be responsible and collect the proper amount of federal
funds from industrial users and determine that each industrial user is
treated fairly and consistently and assessed ICR payments in
accordance with applicable law and generally accepted accounting
principles.
B. ICR payments shall be in proportion to those industrial wastewater
characteristics which influence the cost of construction of the
treatment works. These characteristics include flow, biochemical
oxygen demand, suspended solids, nutrient removal and such others
that may be appropriate. The Town will allocate the construction costs
of the interceptor sewers (those sewers funded by EPA Grant No.
C-360618; Town Job No. 70-6) to industrial users based on the design
discharge from such users as a percentage of the design flow in the
interceptor sewer. Such allocation of the cost will be based on the
portion of the interceptor sewer downstream from the industrial
discharge.
C. The following shall be taken into consideration relative to the
computation of the individual industrial user's ICR payment, which will
annually be computed following the format as set forth on Table 4.
(1) If an industrial user's maximum flow (hourly, daily, monthly,
seasonally, etc.) contributes to the cost of consideration of a
treatment works, it shall be the basis for the user's ICR payment.
No credit shall be given to the industrial user for the time period
when the user is not operating and not discharging wastewater.
(2) Industrial users discharging uncontaminated cooling waters into
municipal treatment facilities shall have such cooling water
considered a process waste, and it shall be included in the ICR
computations.
(3) The cost of wastewater collection and treatment facilities, designed
with unreserved excess capacity for expanded future use, will not
be recovered from existing users under EPA guidelines.
(4) Industrial cost recovery shall be based on Step 3 construction and
administrative costs, plus related Step 1 and Step 2 costs. Step 1 or
Step 2 grant costs which do not result in actual Step 3 construction
are not allocable to individual industrial users and consequently
will not be recovered.
(5) Industrial users discharging pretreated process wastes into the
municipal treatment facilities shall pay industrial cost recovery
based on the characteristics of the pretreated process wastes.
§ 126-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-8
1:313
§ 126-8. Payments for reserved capacity.
Industrial users may reserve capacity in the treatment works (including
used and unused capacity) through formal, written agreement which shall
be subject to industrial cost recovery as set forth below:
§ 126-9. Payments by new industries.
A "new industry" is one which connects to a treatment works after such
treatment works has been put into service. ICR payments by a new industry
shall begin on the date use is initiated and shall continue for the unexpired
portion of the ICR period or until the industry ceases use of the facility,
whichever occurs first. Total ICR recovered from a new industry shall be the
federal design cost of the capacity used (see Table 2) multiplied by the ratio
of its period of use to the ICR period.
§ 126-10. Discontinuance or change of use by industry.
A. In such cases, the industrial user shall be required to pay the full ICR
allocable to the capacity reserved. In the event that the industrial user
exceeds its reserved capacity, it shall be required to pay ICR calculated
on the full reserve capacity plus additional ICR for use above the limits
of the reserved capacity or any element thereof.
B. In the event that the treatment works are expanded in the future with
P.L. 92-500 grant assistance, an industrial user who has executed a
reserved capacity agreement and has made ICR payments based upon
full reserved capacity will not incur additional ICR charges associated
with the cost of expansion until the industrial user's actual use of the
treatment works exceeds its reserved capacity.
C. Industrial users with reserved capacity contracts will be required to pay
any additional ICR charges associated with the cost of upgrading a
treatment works.
A. If an industrial user discontinues use of the treatment works (including
termination of any agreement for reserve capacity), its payment for
industrial cost recovery will cease. There is no requirement for other
industries presently using the treatment works to assume the portion of
the ICR payment which is unrecovered due to the departure of an
industrial user. Total ICR recovered from an industry which
discontinues use during the ICR period shall be the federal design cost
of the capacity used (see Table 2) multiplied by the ratio of its period of
use to the ICR period. A significant industry planning to discontinue its
use of the treatment facility during the ICR period must make its
intention known in the letter of intent required under 20 CFR
35.925-12.
B. Likewise, if an industrial user's flow or any waste characteristic, as
enumerated in § 126-7B changes as a result of flow equalization,
pretreatment, change of process, etc., and it results in a higher unit
§ 126-8 AMHERST CODE § 126-10
1:314
§ 126-11. Lump sum payments.
An industrial user may wish to fulfill its industrial cost recovery obligation
by making a lump sum payment, in lieu of annual payments, for its entire
share of the cost of construction of the treatment works. Such payments
may be accepted by the grantee and either processed as a normal ICR
payment or set aside in a separate account to be drawn annually for the
remainder of the industrial cost recovery period. Lump sum payments will
not relieve an industrial user from the obligation of making additional future
payments should its wastewater flow or load increase. Discounts from the
total industrial cost recovery requirement will not be given to industrial
users making advanced ICR payments.
§ 126-12. Jurisdiction of federal requirement.
Section 204(b)(1)(B) of the Act supersedes and nullifies any and all state or
local laws and ordinances and orders in conflict therewith. Any agreement
between the Town and any industry, or between the Town and any other
political jurisdiction or other party, which purports to relieve any industry
from payment of the federal share of the grant or which purports to limit
the power of a Town to demand collection of the federal share of the cost of
construction from each industrial user will not be grounds to circumvent or
avoid the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(B), EPA regulations, and ICR/
EPA guidelines.
§ 126-13. Implementation of ICR systems.
cost for flow, biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, nutrient
removal or other wastewater characteristic which influences the cost
of construction of the treatment works for ICR purposes to other
industrial users, the other industrial users shall not be required to
make payments based upon any unit rate higher than their highest
established rate.
C. However, all industrial users shall be required to make payments based
upon the amounts of pollutants and flows (§ 126-7B) actually treated at
the plant.
A. The industrial cost recovery period will commence when the Town
Engineer's certificate of compliance is filed. However, at the time any
element of a treatment works funded by the federal construction grant
becomes operable, it must be placed in the ICR system, and the ICR
period will begin from the date of beneficial use by the first industrial
user.
B. Immediately after the ICR period begins, the Town shall establish the
accounting period for the ICR system, which shall be based on the
calendar year or any other appropriate annual period that the Town
may establish. Adjustment for individual industrial users shall be made
where appropriate and necessary to maintain administrative integrity
and simplicity.
§ 126-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-13
1:315
§ 126-14. Appeals procedure.
C. Not later than 30 days after the ICR period begins, the Town shall notify
the Regional Administrator, in writing, of the date of this
implementation of the ICR system. The first payment to the Town by the
industrial users shall be made not later than one year after the
beginning of the ICR period.
A. The Town's proposed ICR system and plans are subject to an
administrative appeal procedure under this section by individual
industrial users who wish to have an opportunity to be heard regarding
the reasonableness of the allocations and ICR assessments imposed
upon them.
B. Such appeals shall be made in writing to the Town Board 30 days before
their regularly scheduled meeting. Upon receipt of such notice, the
Town Board will schedule a hearing before the Appeal Board, which will
be appointed by the Town Board to hear said appeal, within 10 days of
receiving of such appointment. Said Appeal Board shall consist of at
least the following: Town Engineer, Town Comptroller, Town Attorney,
Town Assessor, Chairman of the Town Board Sanitary Sewer Committee
and two members who are citizens of the Town of Amherst.
C. All requests for appeals must be completely documented at the time the
appeal is requested. Such documentation shall not be limited to flow
measurements, strengths, citation of ordinances, rules and regulations,
computations, etc. Three copies shall be submitted with the request for
appeal.
D. The Town Board and/or Town Engineer may request additional
information, and the industrial user making the appeal shall furnish all
requests for such information at least 20 days before the hearing is
scheduled.
E. Others affected by the ICR system may obtain local review of the
grantee's administration of the ICR system, in accordance with the
procedures outlined above.
§ 126-13 AMHERST CODE § 126-14
1:316
ARTICLE III
Pretreatment Standards; Inspections
§ 126-15. Pretreatment.
§ 126-16. Inspection.
The inspectors, agents or representatives of the Town, New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and/or
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) charged with the enforcement of
this section of the law shall be deemed to be performing a governmental
function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the Town, the
Town Engineer, nor the individual inspector, agent or other representative
shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted,
caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of
such governmental function. The owners or occupants of premises where
industrial waste is created or discharged into the sanitary sewer shall
allow the Town Engineer, his inspectors, agents, representatives, New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and/or
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) free access at all reasonable times
to all parts of such premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling or
any of their duties hereunder, and the failure or refusal of such owners
or occupants to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the
disconnection of water and/or sanitary sewer service.
A. Owners or occupants or any other person generating waste prohibited
from discharge into public sanitary sewers by the foregoing shall
pretreat or otherwise dispose of such prohibited waste so as to make
the waste discharged to the public sanitary sewer acceptable under the
standards established in this chapter and/or in compliance with federal
standards promulgated pursuant to FWPCAA.
B. All major contributory industries as defined by 40 CFR 128.124 must
comply with federal pretreatment standards and any other applicable
requirements promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in accordance with Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments (FWPCAA) of 1972 and any more stringent
pretreatment standards necessitated by local conditions.
§ 126-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-16
1:317

ARTICLE IV
Connection to Sanitary Sewer System
§ 126-17. Inspections.
All connections, including work within the public and/or Town's right-of-way,
shall be inspected by the Town under the direct supervision of the Town
Engineer or his representative.
§ 126-18. Users outside Town limits.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town may approve a permit to a
user outside the Town limits.
§ 126-19. Work and materials subsequent to issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of a proper application and after a permit has been issued for
a connection by the Town, all work performed and all materials required
shall be at the expense of the user. All work and materials installed shall
be subject to inspection by the Town Engineer or authorized representative,
and no such work shall be laid or covered until after such representative
shall have approved all work and materials and a satisfactory test has been
completed.
§ 126-20. Installation and maintenance of Town equipment.
The Town shall have the right to install and maintain, at the Town's expense,
any auxiliary recorders, transmitters and/or other equipment within and/or
around the meter pits which the Town shall deem to be in the best interests
of the Town and to the operation of its system.
§ 126-21. Conditional individual sewage treatment service.
It is not the purpose of the Town to treat sewage for individual consumers,
and the Town has the right to reject any and all such applications for such
treatment. The Town does recognize, however, that in some cases no other
source of treatment is available and, in the interest of public health, will
review any such application in writing on the form provided by the Town for
such service of a temporary nature. As a condition for such service, the user
shall agree to connect with a municipal sewer system as soon as available.
§ 126-22. Town authority over applications and rates.
The Town shall have the right to accept and/or reject any and all
applications for service of a nature not hereinbefore covered by these rules
and regulations, including the right to determine the rates for such service,
and shall approve only those permits which will not be detrimental to the
best interests of the Town.
§ 126-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-23
1:319
§ 126-23. Control of service connections.
No person, except the Town Engineer or his authorized representative, shall
terminate or restrict service at any connection to or from the Town sanitary
sewerage system.
§ 126-24. Termination of service detrimental to system.
The Town has the right, upon reasonable notice to the property owner and
upon the property owner's failure to make necessary repairs, to terminate
service from or in any Town main or to any service connection to said mains
at any time, without notice, that it is deemed necessary because said service
is detrimental to the Town's sanitary sewerage system. The Town shall not
be responsible for any damage that may result therefrom.
§ 126-25. Interruption of service.
The Town shall use reasonable care and diligence to provide a constant
treatment of sewage for all users, but shall have the right at any time,
without notice, to terminate services in its mains or in any service
connection for the purpose of making repairs and/or extensions or for any
other purpose, and it shall be expressly agreed that the Town and its
officers, agents and employees shall not be liable for any deficiency or
failure of any kind for any cause whatsoever.
§ 126-26. Additional rights of Town.
The Town shall have the following rights, in addition to all other such
reservations set forth within these rules and regulations for ICR and user
charges:
A. To make such changes in the rules and regulations as it may deem to be
in the best interests of the Town.
B. To make such changes in the rates for sewage treatment as may in its
judgment seem to be for the best interests of the Town.
C. To order existing service connections and/or fixtures to be replaced
with the acceptable materials as determined by the Town Engineer and
to refuse service with all penalties hereinbefore set forth for failure of a
consumer to comply with such order.
D. To have free access to enter the premises of any consumer, at any
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection, reading, repair and/or
replacement of meters or other fixtures.
E. To enter into contracts with other corporations for sewage treatment,
either into or out of the Town, to or from such corporations and under
such terms and conditions as shall properly protect the best interests of
the Town.
§ 126-23 AMHERST CODE § 126-26
1:320
F. To reject any or all applications for service which do not provide for full
compliance of these rules and regulations.
§ 126-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-26
1:321
Chapter 127
(RESERVED)
Chapter 129
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 116.
Lighting — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 184.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 129-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared that the unrestrained accumulation of junk motor
vehicles is a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of citizens of the
community, necessitating the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof.
§ 129-2. License and certificate of approval required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall operate, establish or
maintain a junkyard in the Town of Amherst until he or it has obtained a
license as hereinafter provided and has obtained a certificate of approval
for the location of such junkyard.
§ 129-3. Application procedure for licenses and certificates of
approval.
Application for the license and the certificate of approval application shall
be made in writing to the Town Board of the Town of Amherst. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate of the Building
Commissioner of said Town that the proposed location is not within an
established district restricted against such uses or otherwise contrary to
the prohibitions of Chapter 203, Zoning. The application shall contain a
description of the land to be included within the junkyard.
§ 129-4. Hearing.
A hearing on the application shall be held by the Town Board not less
than two weeks nor more than four weeks from the date of the receipt of
the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by
mail to the address given in the application and shall be published once
in a newspaper having a circulation within the Town of Amherst, which
publication shall be not less than seven days before the date of the hearing.
§ 126-26 AMHERST CODE § 129-5
1:322
§ 129-5. Conduct of hearing; items to be considered.
At the time and place set for hearing, the Town Board shall hear the
applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on the application
for the license. In considering such application, the Board shall take into
account the suitability of the applicant with reference to his ability to
comply with fencing requirements or other reasonable regulations
concerning the proposed junkyard and to any other matter within the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 129-6. Review of application.
At the time and place set for hearing, the applicant and all other persons
wishing to be heard on the application and certificate of approval for the
location of the junkyard shall be heard. In passing upon same, it shall
take into account, after proof of legal ownership of right to such use
of the property for the licensed period by the applicant, the nature and
development of surrounding property, its proximity to churches, schools,
hospitals, public buildings or other places of public gathering and whether
or not the proposed location can be reasonably protected from affecting the
public health and safety by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors, smoke or
other causes. The Board shall also take into account the clean, wholesome
and attractive environment which is considered to be of vital importance
to the continued general welfare of citizens, also the type of street or road
servicing the junkyard or from which the junkyard will be seen, the natural
or artificial barriers protecting the junkyard from view and the proximity of
the proposed junkyard to established residential and recreational areas.
§ 129-7. Grant or denial of license; appeal procedure.
After hearing, the Town Board shall, within two weeks, make a finding as
to whether or not the application should be granted, giving notice of its
finding to the applicant by mail. If approved, the license, including the
certificate of approved location, shall be forthwith issued, to remain in
effect until the following April 1. Approval shall be personal to the applicant
and not assignable. Licenses shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of
the annual license fee without hearing, provided that all provisions of this
chapter are complied with during the licensed period, the junkyard does
not become a public nuisance and the applicant does not have a record of
conviction for violation of law. The determination of the Town Board may be
reviewed under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 129-8. Fee.
The annual license fee shall be $25, to be paid at the time the application
is made and annually thereafter in the event of renewal. In the event that
the application is not granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
In addition to the license fee, the applicant may be assessed with the costs
of advertising such application, and the license shall be conditioned upon
payment of same.
§ 129-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-9
1:323
§ 129-9. Fencing requirements.
Before use, a new junkyard shall be completely surrounded with a fence
at least five feet in height, or such greater height as the Town Board shall
determine, which shall substantially screen the junkyard, with a suitable
gate which shall be closed and locked except during the working hours
of such junkyard or when the applicant or his agent shall be within. Such
fence shall be erected not nearer than 50 feet to a public highway. All motor
vehicles and parts thereof stored or deposited by the applicant shall be kept
within the enclosure of the junkyard, except as removal is necessary for the
transportation of same in the ordinary course of business, and wrecking or
other work on such motor vehicles and parts shall be accomplished within
the enclosure.
§ 129-10. Compliance by established junkyards.
Within 60 days from the preparation of this chapter, the owner of an
established junkyard shall furnish the Town Board with information as to
the location which is required in an application, together with the license
fee, and the Town Board shall issue him a license valid until next April 1,
at which time such owner may apply for renewal as herein provided. Such
owner shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, including the
fencing requirement as set forth in § 129-9.
§ 129-11. Location restrictions.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter, no junkyard
hereafter established shall be licensed to operate within 500 feet of a
church, school, hospital, public building or place of assembly.
§ 129-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 129-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and publication
in accordance with the provisions of law.
Chapter 130
LANDSCAPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
Trees — See Ch. 179.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 129-9 AMHERST CODE § 129-13
1:324
§ 130-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Amherst Landscapers
Law."
§ 130-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — All grass, weeds, brush, leaves, flowers, shrubs,
limbs up to six inches in diameter and six feet in length, small stumps not to
exceed 24 inches in diameter and four feet in length.[Amended 1-19-1999
by L.L. No. 3-1999]
LANDSCAPER — Any person providing services of planting, trimming or
cutting of bushes, shrubs, flowers, vegetables, trees or grass for which a
contract or agreement has been established on other than his own property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All real property, improved or unimproved, owned
by any municipal corporation, person or otherwise and which is not included
in the definitions of "public highway" and "public place."
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any street open to the public for its full width from
property line to property line, including the sidewalk area, whether or not
installed.
PUBLIC PLACE — All real property available to or open to use by all
residents of the Town of Amherst outside the corporate limits of the Village
of Williamsville.
§ 130-3. Permit required.
No person who is a landscaper shall conduct any such activities or remove
any landscape material of any kind from the premises of any person or
transport the same through or upon any street, avenue, parkway, road,
boulevard or highway within the Town of Amherst, outside the corporate
limits of the Village of Williamsville, unless he shall have first obtained
a permit from the Town Clerk and shall have agreed to conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 130-4. Permits; vehicle certificates; fees.
A. All landscapers shall apply to the Town Clerk for a permit upon forms to
be furnished by said Town Clerk and pay a permit fee as set by the Town
Board and published in said Town Clerk's office. In addition to the basic
permit fee, there shall be paid to the Town Clerk a vehicle certification
fee as set by the Town Board and published in said Town Clerk's office
for each motor vehicle, including trailers, in excess of one which is to be
§ 129-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:325
§ 130-5. Use of compost facility; tipping fees and finished material
prices. [Amended 1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ 130-6. Disposal of landscape material.
used in furtherance of the landscape business. [Amended 1-19-1999
by L.L. No. 3-1999]
B. The permit application shall specify the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the landscaper.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of each principal partner
or corporate officer of the landscaper.
(3) The make, serial number, license number and load capacity of each
motor vehicle, including trailers, to be utilized by the landscaper
for which a vehicle certificate shall be issued.
C. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be issued as of the
date of the granting thereof and shall expire on December 31 in the
year in which the permit is issued.
D. Permits shall not be assignable or transferable. Vehicle certificates
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously affixed to each
motor vehicle or trailer and shall not be removed therefrom.
E. Certificates for motor vehicles shall be placed on the driver's side door,
below the side-view mirror.
F. Certificates for trailers shall be placed on the tongue or hitch.
G. The vehicle certificate shall be unobstructed and readable from a
distance of not less than 10 feet.
H. A substitute or replacement certificate shall be issued upon the
payment of a fee as set by the Town Board and published in the Town
Clerk's office for each replacement upon the filing of an affidavit or
such other proof as may be required by the Town Clerk. [Amended
1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
A. A licensed landscaper who has secured a permit as prescribed herein
and is using a certificated vehicle shall be authorized to use the Town of
Amherst compost facility for the disposal of landscape material. The
permit holder shall secure tipping fee disposal tickets from the Town
Clerk.
B. Tipping fees and finished material prices. The Town Board shall review
fees and prices on a yearly basis. Current fee and price structures shall
be posted in the Town Clerk's office and at the compost facility.
§ 130-4 AMHERST CODE § 130-6
1:326
§ 130-7. Enforcement. [Amended 1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Refuse Control Department, the
Amherst Police Department, the Engineering Department and such other
departments or persons as may be designated by the Town Board of the
Town of Amherst.
§ 130-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Landscape material for disposal at the Town of Amherst compost facility
shall not be bagged or contain any foreign objects such as stone, brick,
concrete, plastic or metal.
B. During the period from October 1 through December 15, annually,
there will be no tipping fee for leaves and grass delivered to the
compost facility. [Amended 12-19-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994;
1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
C. The burning of landscape material is prohibited.
D. All landscape material, if removed from the serviced property by the
landscaper, shall be transported to the Town of Amherst compost
facility for disposal except as herein provided.
E. The landscaper may leave landscape material at the serviced property,
upon the approval of the property owner, provided that the landscape
material is placed in proper containers for Town collection. The
landscape material shall not be placed at the curbside of the serviced
property unless regular scheduled garbage and refuse collection will
take place within 24 hours from the time of its placement.
F. The placing of landscape material on public highways, public places or
private property is prohibited, except as hereinafter provided.
G. During the period of October 15 through December 1, annually, leaves
only may be placed within the highway right-of-way adjacent to the
travel portion thereof. [Amended 3-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
A. The Town Clerk may revoke a landscaper's permit for violating any
provisions of this chapter.
B. In addition to a permit revocation by the Town Clerk, a violation of any
provision of this chapter by a person shall be deemed an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-8
1:327
Chapter 132
LIGHTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 68.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 132-1. General restrictions. [Amended 6-17-1974, effective
6-29-1974]
No person, corporation, partnership or association of persons shall use or
operate or permit to be used or operated on their premises artificial lighting
or illumination which unreasonably disturbs the sleep, comfort and repose
of other residents or inhabitants in the vicinity, either by reason of the
power or intensity or the location of said artificial lighting or illumination.
§ 132-2. Restrictions during certain hours.
The illumination and lighting of such premises between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with more lighting and illumination than is reasonably
necessary and proper for the safeguarding and protection of persons and
property upon such premises shall be presumed to be lighting and
illumination of such power and intensity as to annoy or disturb
unreasonably the sleep, comfort and repose of the persons residing in the
vicinity and shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 132-3. Unauthorized signs and lights.
No person, firm, partnership or association of persons shall place, maintain
or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal,
light, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles or is likely to be construed as an official traffic control device,
light or lights of an emergency motor vehicle, as authorized by the laws
of the State of New York, or which attempts to direct or regulate the
movement of traffic.
§ 132-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-31-1966]
Every violation by any person, firm, association or corporation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an offense against
this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, such person, firm, association or
corporation shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment
not to exceed three months, or both, for each and every offense.
§ 130-8 AMHERST CODE § 132-5
1:328
§ 132-5. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon publication and
posting within the provisions of law.
Chapter 138
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 65.
Blasting and explosives — See Ch. 78.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 138-1. Findings; intent.
The Amherst Town Board determines that the creation of unreasonable
noise within the Town limits of Amherst is detrimental to the comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare, and to the quality of life of the
citizens of the Town. Therefore, it intends hereby to prohibit all
unreasonable noise from all sources subject to its police power in order
to preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare, and the
peace, quiet, comfort and repose of all persons within the Town.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level of the allencompassing
noise associated with a given environment, being usually
a composite of sounds from many sources and/or the A-weighted soundpressure
level exceeded 90% of the time L90% based on a minimum period
of 10 minutes.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network
by a trained operator. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.
DECIBEL (dB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound-pressure
level; the number of decibels of measured sound is equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base of 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the
measured sound to the sound pressure of standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated dB.
PROPERTY BEING USED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL PURPOSES — Any
property, including vacant land, which is not used for residential purposes,
as defined herein.
PROPERTY BEING USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES — Property which
contains one or more dwelling units, including but not limited to single-
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-2
1:329
family attached or detached dwelling units, multiple dwellings, hotels,
motels, senior citizen housing, adult residential care facilities, nursing
homes, dormitories, sororities and fraternities.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE — The imaginary line, including its
vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another,
or the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit located within a
multiple-dwelling-unit building.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels conforming to American National Standards Institute Type I or II
standards.
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICES — Any device, instrument, mechanism,
equipment or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio,
phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument,
television, loudspeaker or other sound-making or sound-producing device,
or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the
human voice or other sound.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any device, fixed or movable, which is
located or used on geographically defined real property other than a public
right-of-way.
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any noise defined in § 138-5 of this chapter.
§ 138-3. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause to be made
or permit to be made any unreasonable noise within the geographic
boundaries of the Town of Amherst, or within those areas over which the
Town has jurisdiction.
§ 138-4. Determination of unreasonable noise.
A determination as to the existence of unreasonable noise may be
established by the specific acts enumerated within § 138-5 of this chapter.
§ 138-5. Prohibited acts.
The following acts and the causes thereof are declared to be in violation of
this chapter:
A. The use of any sound-reproduction device outside of a structure
whereby the sound emitted from such device is audible on property
being used for residential purposes at a point more than 100 feet from
the real property boundary line of the property from which said noise
emanates.
B. The use or operation of any sound-reproduction device inside a
structure so as to result in the sound, or any part thereof, emitted from
such device to be projected therefrom outside the structure whereby
the sound emitted from such device is audible on property being used
§ 138-2 AMHERST CODE § 138-5
1:330
for residential purposes at a point more than 100 feet from the real
property boundary line of the property from which the noise emanates.
C. The use and operation of any sound-reproduction device in a vehicle
which would constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle
operators or where conditions of overcrowding or any street repair or
any other physical conditions are such that the use of a soundreproduction
device would deprive the public of the right to the safe,
comfortable, convenient, and peaceful enjoyment of a public street,
park or place for public purpose and would constitute a threat to the
safety and welfare of the public. Said noise disturbance is deemed to be
in violation of this section if it can be heard from a distance of greater
than 50 feet.
D. The use or operation of any sound-reproduction device in a vehicle
which would constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle
operators.
E. The use or operation of any sound-reproduction device within 500 feet
of any school, church or courthouse while the same is in session so as to
interfere with the function of such facility, provided that conspicuous
signs are displayed indicating the location of such facility.
F. The use or operation of any sound-reproduction device within 500 feet
of any hospital, nursing home or medical facility so as to interfere with
the function of such facility or so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities while confined to
or being treated at such facility, provided that conspicuous signs are
displayed indicating the location of such facility.
G. Snow removal equipment: The use of snow removal equipment between
the hours of 11 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day so as to disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities.
H. The use or operation of any audible burglar alarm or motor vehicle
burglar alarm, unless the operation of such alarm shall be terminated
within 10 minutes after such alarm is first activated.
I. The operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating in
excess of 10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such
motor vehicle, for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the
vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic congestion, so that
the sound emanated therefrom is audible on property being used for
residential purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of
the following day. This provision shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles or to public utility vehicles actually engaged in
emergency operations.
J. The operation, repair, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, go-cart or minibike on property being
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-5
1:331
used for residential purposes so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
K. The use or operation of a refuse-collecting vehicle anywhere which,
when collecting or compacting, projects sound which is audible on
property being used for residential purposes between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
L. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal or bird which shall
make sounds which are audible on property being used for residential
purposes for a continued duration in excess of 15 minutes or which
shall disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities.
M. The conduct of any construction activities, including but not limited to
the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of
buildings, public or private roadways, roads, premises, parks, utility
lines or other property, including related activities such as land
clearing, grading, earthmoving, excavating, blasting, filling or
landscaping, so as to project a noise therefrom which is audible on a
property being used for residential purposes except that such activities
may be conducted 1) between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., on Monday
through Friday; 2) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday; and 3)
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sunday.
N. The making of any noise for advertising purposes in any street or public
place or by means of aircraft; the advertisement, article, business,
calling or profession upon any street, sidewalk or entrance to a place of
business by means of any horn, megaphone, siren, bell, radio or any
other sound-producing or sound-amplifying mechanism, instrument or
device.
O. The use of any sound-reproduction device associated with a drivethrough
facility between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
P. Noise levels by land use:
(1) For noise that is not defined as a violation in items A through O of
§ 138-5, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to
be operated any stationary noise source in such a manner as to
create a sound-pressure level in dB(A)s which exceeds the limits set
forth for the receiving land use category in Table I when measured
at the property boundary.
§ 138-5 AMHERST CODE § 138-5
1:332
§ 138-6. Exceptions.
The following sounds shall not be deemed to be in violation of this chapter:
§ 138-7. Enforcement.
Table I: Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving
Land Use Category
Maximum Permissible Sound
Level (dBAs) Receiving Land
Use
Sound Source
Land Use
Category Time Period Residential Nonresidential
Residential 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
70 75
11:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
50 50
Nonresidential 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
70 75
11:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
50 75
(2) The restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to alarms as
defined in § 138-5H of this chapter.
A. The sound created by bells or chimes associated with a church,
synagogue or any other place of public worship.
B. The sound created by any governmental agency or by the use of public
warning devices.
C. The sound created by public utilities in carrying out the operations of
their function.
D. The sound created by sporting events of any public organization or
private school, or carnival, fair, exhibition or parade, provided that such
event shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
A. When the enforcement officer or official seeks to apply the decibel
provisions set forth in the aforementioned Table I relative to any
violation of this chapter, such officer shall use a sound-level meter
conforming to ANSI (American National Standards Institute). Type II
standards shall be used and shall be calibrated at least annually.
Qualified Town personnel approved by the Chief of Police shall operate,
witness and read the sound-level meter(s) and related equipment. The
wind-velocity gauge shall conform to accepted standards and shall be
checked periodically for accuracy.
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-7
1:333
§ 138-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day that such
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense punishable as such. This
chapter shall be enforced by the Town of Amherst Police Department.
§ 138-9. Severability.
If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence or other portion of this
chapter shall for any reason be held or adjudged to be invalid or illegal
or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intention
of the Town Board that such section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence or
other portion so adjudged invalid, illegal or unenforceable shall be deemed
separate, distinct and independent, and the remainder of this chapter shall
be and remain in full force and effect.
§ 138-10. Repealer.
The Noise Ordinance of the Town of Amherst, adopted by the Town Board
on July 6, 1993, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed.
§ 138-11. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon its filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 139
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 166.
§ 139-1. Limitation on liability.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Amherst, or any
of its official, agents or employees, or the Superintendent of Highways of
the Town, or against any improvement district in the Town, for damages
or injuries to person or property sustained by reason of any tree, street,
highway, public place, land, building, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
grading, openings, drain, sewer, parks or playground equipment, being
defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or because of obstructed
conditions unless written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
Amherst.
§ 138-7 AMHERST CODE § 139-1
1:334
obstructed condition of such tree, street, highway, public place, land,
building, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, openings, drain,
sewer, parks or playground equipment, was actually given to the Town
Clerk, or the Superintendent of Highways, specifying the particular place,
and the defect at issue and there was thereafter a failure or neglect within
a reasonable time to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of. No such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of
snow or ice upon any street, highway, public place, land, building, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk unless written notice thereof, specifying the
particular place, and the defect at issue, was actually given to the Town
Clerk or the Superintendent of Highways and there was a failure or neglect
to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 139-2. Responsibilities of Superintendent of Highways.
The Superintendent of Highways shall transmit, in writing, to the Town
Clerk of the Town, within five days after receipt thereof, all written notices
received by him pursuant to this chapter, and he shall take any and all
corrective action with respect thereto as soon as practicable.
§ 139-3. Records to be kept; notification of Superintendent of
Highways.
The Town Clerk shall keep an index record, in a separate book, of all
written notices which the Town Clerk shall receive of the existence of
a defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or upon any
town owned property, tree, building, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
grading, opening, drain, sewer, parks or playground equipment, or of any
accumulation of ice and snow upon, any Town street, highway, public place,
land, building, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, opening, drain,
sewer, parks or playground equipment; or by any improvement district,
which record shall state the date of the receipt of the notice, the nature and
location of the condition stated to exist and the name and address of the
person from whom the notice is received. The record of such notice shall be
preserved for a period of five years from the date it is received. The Town
Clerk, upon receipt of such written notice, shall immediately and in writing
notify the Superintendent of Highways of the Town of the receipt of such
notice.
§ 139-4. Effect of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to repeal or modify or
waive any existing requirement or statute of limitation. On the contrary,
this chapter shall be held to be additional requirements to the right to
maintain any action. Nor shall anything herein contained be held to modify
any existing rule of law relative to the question of culpable conduct, nor
to impose upon the Town, its officers and employees and/or any of its
improvement districts, any greater duty or obligation than that it shall
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-4
1:335
keep its trees, streets, highways, public places, land, buildings, bridges,
culverts, sidewalks, crosswalks, grading, openings, drains, sewers, parks
or playground equipment in a reasonably safe condition for reasonably
anticipated public use and travel.
§ 139-5. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 140
MAILBOX SETBACK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151. Snowplowing — See Ch. 166.
§ 140-1. General.
§ 140-2. Location.
A. A mailbox or newspaper delivery box, hereafter referred to as mailbox,
shall not be allowed to exist in the Town's right-of-way if, in the opinion
of the Highway Superintendent, it interferes with the safety of the
traveling public or the function, maintenance, or operation of the street,
road, or highway system.
B. The location and construction of mailboxes shall conform to the rules
and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service as well as to standards
established in this Chapter.
C. A mailbox installation that conforms to the criteria in this Chapter shall
be acceptable unless the Town's Highway Superintendent determines
that it interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function,
maintenance or operation of the street, road or highway system in
which circumstances a right-of-way permit shall be obtained from the
Town's Highway Superintendent. A right-of-way permit shall not be
required in the case of a conforming installation.
D. Where discretionary action is required by the Town's Highway
Superintendent, application shall be made to the Town's Highway
Superintendent and written permission received prior to installation of
the mailbox.
§ 139-4 AMHERST CODE § 140-2
1:336
A. Access. A mailbox shall not be permitted where access is otherwise
prohibited by New York law or regulations promulgated by the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles and/or Department of
Transportation.
B. Placement. A mailbox shall be placed on the right-hand side of the
roadway, in the direction of the delivery route, except on one-way
streets where they may be placed on the left-hand side. The bottom of
the mailbox shall be at an elevation between four (4) feet and four (4)
feet four (4) inches above the roadway surface.
C. Normal Offset. The roadside face of the mailbox shall be offset from the
edge of the traveled way a minimum distance of the greater one of the
following:
(1) Ten (10) to twelve (12) inches where no paved shoulder exists;
(2) The width of the all-weather shoulder present plus ten (10) to
twelve (12) inches;
(3) The width of an all-weather turnout, as specified by the Town's
Highway Superintendent plus ten (10) to twelve (12) inches.
D. Offset on Curbed Streets. The roadside face of the mailbox shall be set
back to a distance of between ten (10) and twelve (12) inches from the
curb face.
E. Offset on Residential Low-Volume, Low-Speed Roads without Curb or
All-Weather Shoulders. The roadside face of the mailbox shall be offset
between eight (8) and twelve (12) inches behind the edge of pavement.
F. Offset on Very Low-Volume, Low-Speed Rural Roads. The roadside face
of the mailbox may be offset six (6) feet eight (8) inches from the
traveled way as determined by the Town's Highway Superintendent.
Clearances as low as two (2) feet eight (8) inches may be authorized by
the Highway Superintendent.
G. Driveway Entrance. Mailboxes at driveway entrances shall be placed on
the far side of the driveway fifteen (15) feet from the far side of the
driveway in the direction of the delivery route.
H. Intersecting Street or Road. When a mailbox is located at an
intersection, it shall be placed a minimum distance of one hundred
(100) feet beyond the center of the intersecting street in any direction
of the delivery route. When the average daily traffic on the intersecting
street exceeds four hundred (400) vehicles per day, the distance shall
be two hundred (200) feet.
I. Guardrail. Where a mailbox is to be installed in the vicinity of an
existing guardrail, it shall be placed behind the guardrail unless
application is made and written permission received from the Town's
Highway Superintendent.
§ 140-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-3
1:337
§ 140-3. Sizes.
The following sizes of mailboxes as authorized by the U.S. Postal Service are
authorized to be installed in the Town:
§ 140-4. Structure.
A. Nineteen (19) inch length, six and one half (6 1/2) inch width, eight and
one half (8 1/2) inch height;
B. Twenty-one (21) inch length, eight and three-fourths (8 3/4) inch width,
ten and one half (10 1/2) inch height;
C. Twenty-three and one-half (23 1/2) inch length, eleven and one half (11
1/2) inch width, thirteen and one half (13 1/2) inch height.
A. Materials. Mailboxes shall be of light sheet metal, fiberglass, plastic or
light material construction and conform to the requirements of the U.S.
Postal Service. Newspaper delivery boxes shall be of light sheet metal
or plastic construction and of minimum dimensions suitable for holding
a newspaper.
B. Support.
(1) Number of Boxes. No more than two (2) mailboxes shall be
mounted on a support structure unless the support structure and
mailbox arrangement have been shown to be safe by crash testing
as conducted by the Federal Highway Administration or the New
York State Department of Transportation. Lightweight newspaper
delivery boxes may be mounted below the mailbox on the side of
the mailbox support.
(2) Concrete Foundation. Mailbox supports shall be placed in native
soil or in crushed aggregate base materials whenever these
materials provide adequate support. Mailbox supports shall not be
placed in concrete unless necessary for support. Mailbox supports
shall not be set in concrete placed at a depth any greater than
twelve (12) inches.
(3) Posts. A single four (4) inch by four and one half (4 1/2) inch
diameter wooden post or metal post with a strength no greater
than a two (2) inch diameter standard strength steel pipe, and
embedded no more than twenty four (24) inches into the ground
shall be acceptable as a mailbox support. A metal post shall not be
fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-twist device that
extends no greater than ten (10) inches below the ground surface.
(4) Attachment. The post-to-mailbox attachment details shall be of
sufficient strength to prevent the mailbox from separating from the
post top if the installation is struck by a vehicle or a snow plow. The
minimum spacing between the centers of support posts shall be
three-fourths (3/4) of the height of the posts above the ground line.
§ 140-3 AMHERST CODE § 140-5
1:338
§ 140-5. Shoulder and parking area construction.
It shall be the responsibility of the postal patron to inform the Town's
Highway Superintendent of any new or existing mailbox installation where
shoulder construction of a Town maintained street is inadequate to allow
all-weather vehicular access to the mailbox.
§ 140-6. Removal of Nonconforming or Unsafe Mailboxes.
Any mailbox that is found to violate the intent of this Chapter shall be
declared unacceptable and removed by the postal patron upon notification
by the Town's Highway Superintendent. At the discretion of the Town's
Highway Superintendent, based on an assessment of hazard to the public,
the postal patron shall be granted not less than twenty-four (24) hours, nor
more than thirty (30) days, to remove an unacceptable mailbox. After the
specified removal period has expired, the unacceptable mailbox shall be
removed by the Town at postal patron's expense.
§ 140-7. Payment of Damages to Mailboxes.
If a mailbox is not installed according to the requirements of this Chapter,
the Town will not be liable to repair or replace the mailbox if damaged by a
Town owned snowplow.
Chapter 143
PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Off-street parking — See Ch. 144. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parking spaces designated for
handicapped persons provided by owners or operators of parking areas
or provided pursuant to any provision of state or local law, ordinance or
regulation.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
Words in this chapter are used in their ordinary meaning. The following
terms have the meanings set forth, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE — A structure containing one or more offices
or retail stores.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — A parking space required to be
available for use for handicapped persons or for vehicles registered in
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:339
accordance with § 404-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law
or operated under § 1203-a or required to be furnished under any other
provision of state or local law, ordinance or regulation and any parking
space designated for handicapped persons provided voluntarily by the
owner or operator of a parking area.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — A severely disabled person or a person
temporarily unable to ambulate without the aid of an assisting device as
defined respectively in §§ 404-a and 1203-a of the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
§ 143-3. Specifications.
The following specifications apply to handicapped parking spaces required
to be furnished pursuant to this chapter or any other state or local law,
ordinance or regulation:
A. The paved portion of each required handicapped parking space may be
marked with the international symbol of access.
B. The minimum size of each required handicapped parking space shall be
nine feet by 19 feet. Required handicapped parking spaces not adjacent
to a sidewalk or driving lane on the longer axis shall be provided with a
four-foot access aisle. Required handicapped parking spaces may be
arranged so that an access aisle is located between and shared by two
spaces.
C. Signs for required handicapped parking spaces.
(1) A sign or signs shall be provided to indicate spaces provided for
handicapped persons. The sign shall be of the size and design
prescribed in the New York State Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, except that other signs which include the
international symbol of access acquired prior to the enactment of
this chapter may be used until December 31, 1988.
(2) The Commissioner of Building shall establish the height of signs
identifying required handicapped parking spaces so that they are
visible to motorists and pedestrians. [Amended 7-1-1985 by L.L.
No. 2-1985]
D. Number of handicapped parking spaces required. Except as otherwise
provided by any provision of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law, the person, firm or corporation owning or operating a parking area
serving a commercial structure and having at least 25 off-street parking
spaces shall designate therefrom, for use by handicapped persons only,
at least one of every 25 spaces or fraction thereof, not exceeding 100
spaces. For parking areas having more than 100 parking spaces, the
person, firm or corporation owning or operating it shall designate
therefrom, for use by handicapped persons only, the number of spaces
required for that purpose pursuant to the provisions of the New York
§ 143-2 AMHERST CODE § 143-3
1:340
§ 143-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the following:
§ 143-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter, the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, the New York Building Construction Code and any other
provision of state or local law, ordinance or regulation requiring the
provisions of handicapped parking spaces and specifications for their size,
marking and signing shall be enforced by the Town of Amherst Building
Department. The provisions of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law
and of this chapter prohibiting the use of handicapped parking spaces
by other than handicapped persons or drivers of vehicles registered in
accordance with § 404-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and
being used to transport a handicapped person shall be enforced by the Town
of Amherst Police Department.
§ 143-6. Prohibited conduct; penalties for offenses.
State Building Construction Code. [Amended 12-19-1983 by L.L. No.
5-1983]
E. Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located as close as
reasonably practicable to the facility or building served by the parking
area and reasonably distributed so as to provide convenient access for
use by handicapped persons.
A. Every shopping center or facility with at least five separate retail
stores, having at least 20 off-street parking spaces provided for use by
the shopping public, except that the provisions of § 143-6A shall not
apply to those regulated by the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1203-c.
B. Parking areas required to include handicapped parking spaces
pursuant to the New York State Building Construction Code.
C. Parking areas serving commercial structures erected before July 5,
1977, containing 25 or more off-street parking spaces.
D. Other parking areas in which parking spaces for handicapped persons
having been voluntarily provided, if they are marked and signed as
provided in § 143-3.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any area designated
under this chapter as a handicapped parking space unless the vehicle
bears a permit issued under § 1203-a or is registered under § 404-a of
the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and the vehicle is being
used for the transportation of a handicapped person. A violation of this
subsection or of § 1203-c(4) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be
punished by a fine of $20.
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-6
1:341
Chapter 144
PARKING, OFF-STREET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking for handicapped — See Ch. 143.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 184.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
Removal and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
189.
§ 144-1. Purpose.
In order to secure safety and protect persons and property from fire, certain
parking areas and access roads within the Town of Amherst, outside the
Village of Williamsville, shall be regulated as hereinafter provided.
§ 144-2. Word usage; definitions.
B. No person, firm or corporation owning or operating a parking area
within which handicapped parking spaces are required to be provided
pursuant to this chapter or the provisions of the New York State
Building Construction Code shall fail to provide the handicapped
parking spaces required thereunder or under any other law or fail to
comply with the specifications as to size, access, marking and signing
contained in § 143-3 hereof. A violation of this subsection shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $250.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural. Words used shall
imply their usual and customary meanings except as they are given
specific meanings herein.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — An area near or around the perimeter of a building or
on an access road thereto within or on which parking and standing
are prohibited and includes those designated by the Planning Board
pursuant to Chapter 203, Zoning.
OWNER — Includes, in addition to its usual and customary meaning, a
lessee, receiver, trustee or assignee or other person or entity operating
a hospital, shopping center, hotel or fire station.
PARKING AREA — An area of property near or contiguous to and
provided with premises having one or more buildings used as a means
of access to and egress from those buildings and for the parking of
motor vehicles of users, customers and patrons thereof and loading and
stacking areas in connection therewith.
§ 143-6 AMHERST CODE § 144-2
1:342
§ 144-3. Request for regulation of area.
The owner or person in general charge of the operation and control of an
existing hospital, shopping center, hotel or fire station or the Chief of the
fire department for the area in which it is located may submit a written
request that it be made subject to regulation hereunder. All requests shall
include a plan for the implementation of the rules and regulations proposed.
Upon receipt of the request, the Town Clerk shall refer it to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board may require the applicant, the owner or person
in general charge to submit additional information as it deems necessary.
The Planning Board may submit the proposal to other public agencies and
shall submit it to the owner or person in charge, where the request comes
from another source, for additional advice and recommendations.
§ 144-4. Regulation of new areas.
Whenever a new hospital, shopping center, hotel or fire station is
constructed or an existing one is enlarged, the Planning Board may make it
subject to regulation under this chapter without request.
§ 144-5. Public hearing.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to determine whether a
hospital, shopping center, hotel or fire station or enlargement thereof shall
be subject to regulation under this chapter. The hearing shall be advertised
in the same manner as provided in Chapter 203, Zoning, for site plan review
and may be a part of such review.
§ 144-6. Establishment of fire lanes.
After the hearing, the Planning Board may establish one or more fire lanes
upon the access roads or parking areas for or premises of a hospital,
shopping center, hotel or fire station if it determines that they are necessary
to secure safety and protect persons and property from fire. The Board shall
direct the owner to erect signs and mark pavement necessary to designate
the fire lanes established. Fire lanes shall not be located so as to eliminate
existing parking spaces.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
SHOPPING CENTER — An area of private property totaling at least five
acres having one or more stores or business establishments and nearby
or contiguous parking area or areas and driving lanes.
STAND or STANDING — The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
§ 144-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-7
1:343
§ 144-7. Parking in fire lanes prohibited.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane.
§ 144-8. Removal and storage of vehicles.
Any vehicle removed and stored pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be impounded until the owner or operator pays the reasonable cost of
removal and storage, which charge shall be in addition to all other penalties
under this chapter. Any vehicle may be removed and stored at the order of
the Police Department if it is:
§ 144-9. Adoption of rules and regulations regarding signs and
markings.
The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations as to number, location
and type of signs, devices and markings it deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 144-10. Compliance with regulations required.
Any sign, device or marking on or of property required to comply with
or carry out an order, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall be erected and maintained by the owner of the property regulated.
Failure to erect any such sign, device or marking within the time established
therefor by the Planning Board or thereafter maintain it shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 144-11. Enforcement.
Except as otherwise herein provided, this chapter shall be enforced by the
Town Police Department.
§ 144-12. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of § 144-10 of this chapter shall be an offense punishable by
a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or a fine of $150, or both.
Each violation of § 144-7 of this chapter shall be an offense punishable by a
term of imprisonment not exceeding five days or a fine of $50, or both.
§ 144-13. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
A. Parked in a fire lane at any time.
B. Parked, abandoned or found unattended in the parking area or access
roads of any hospital, shopping center, hotel or fire station during a
snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency where it constitutes
an obstruction to traffic or is located where standing or parking is
prohibited.
§ 144-7 AMHERST CODE § 144-13
1:344
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 144-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 145
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats — See Ch. 79.
Dogs — See Ch. 99.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 148.
Recreation and open space — See Ch. 155.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as "Town of Amherst Regulations for Parks,
Playgrounds and Recreation Areas."
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, and all other terms and words shall be given their common
meanings:
MOTOR VEHICLE — All such vehicles as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York and, in addition thereto, minibikes, mopeds,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and all other motorized recreational
vehicles.
RECREATION AREA — Includes the Audubon Recreation Center, Clearfield
Community Center; all parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts,
golf courses, trailways, bikeways, jogging paths and swimming pools owned
and operated by the Town of Amherst outside of the Village of Williamsville
and such other recreation areas as may come under the control and
jurisdiction of the Town of Amherst.
§ 145-3. Restrictions on operation of motor vehicles.
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle in or on any recreation area,
except on the roads and within the spaces specifically designated for
parking.
§ 144-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:345
§ 145-4. Restrictions on parking of motor vehicles.
No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle within or on
a recreation area except in the portions thereof specifically designated for
that purpose and only during the hours when use of the area is permitted.
Proof of ownership shall be presumptive evidence in an action for
enforcement of this section that the owner parked, caused his vehicle to be
parked, left standing, stored or left his vehicle within such recreation area.
§ 145-5. General regulations.
No person shall:
B. This restriction shall not apply to golf carts as used upon Town golf
courses within designated areas.
A. Swim, bathe or engage in boating in or upon any pond located within a
recreation area.
B. Permit a dog, cat or other animal to be in or on a recreational area
during special events as determined by the Town Board and at all other
times unless on a leash not exceeding six feet in length.
C. Engage in any type of golfing activity in any recreation area except on
Town golf courses.
D. Be in or upon the grounds or within the buildings of any recreation area
for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without
prior written permission from the Recreation Commission.
E. Sell goods, merchandise and/or services within any recreation area
without a permit issued by the Town Clerk with the approval of the
Town Board.
F. Leave, deposit or discard any garbage or refuse, as defined in the
Garbage and Refuse Ordinance,22 in or on any recreation area, except
in receptacles provided for such purpose.
G. Transport onto any recreation area garbage or refuse, as defined in the
Garbage and Refuse Ordinance, with the intent to deposit the same in
receptacles provided on premises for garbage and refuse.
H. Be under the influence of alcohol in or on a recreation area to the
degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property or
annoy persons in the vicinity.
I. Possess alcoholic beverages within any recreation area unless a permit
is issued therefor by the Town Clerk upon the approval of the Town
Board.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Solid Waste.
§ 145-3 AMHERST CODE § 145-5
1:346
§ 145-6. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense punishable by
a fine not to exceed $150 or imprisonment for 15 days, or both.
§ 145-7. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately.
Chapter 148
PEDDLING, SOLICITING, TRANSIENT BUSINESSES AND
MOBILE FOOD VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Vending machines — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 148-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, and the preservation and protection of
property of the Town of Amherst and its residents.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth unless
the context of their use clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person by or for whom an application is made under this
chapter.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION —
J. Bring into or have in his or her possession within a recreation area any
bottle or other container made of glass.
K. Operate a motor vehicle or other recreational device on or within a
recreation area at a speed of more than 15 miles per hour or of any such
lesser speed which has been ordered by the Recreation Commission
and posted.
L. Use skateboards or similar devices in or on a recreation area except
where designated for such use.
M. Operate a bicycle on or within a designated recreation area unless it
conforms to the requirements of § 1236 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, military veterans, not-forprofit,
educational or religious association, society or other
A.
§ 145-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-2
1:347
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — A self-contained mobile food unit in which
ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — The owner or owner's agent of a mobile food
vehicle.
PEDDLER — A person who engages in peddling.
PEDDLING —
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture, society or other organization or association of any kind, whether
acting as principal, agent, employer or employee.
PROPERTY — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other article or thing of
every kind or nature except newspapers.
SOLICITING —
SOLICITOR — A person who engages in soliciting.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst outside the Village of Williamsville.
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — A retail or wholesale business, other than a
mobile food vehicle vendor (as regulated separately in this Local Law),
conducted from a temporary structure or tent, truck, van or trailer, stand,
parking lot or vacant parcel of land, in a public right-of-way or in or on
any other place in the Town, but not (1) outdoor sales of property or
services accessory to a business conducted within a permanent structure
on a same premises or (2) the sale of food products raised or produced on
organization or any other association, society or organization qualified
as a tax-exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
Any governmental entity or organization, including, without limitation,
a school district, fire district and fire company.
B.
Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange any property or service,
either for immediate or future delivery or performance upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the Town, and including,
without limitation, activities commonly known as "hawking."
A.
Delivery or distribution of advertising matter, literature, pamphlets,
samples or handbills house to house or on any of the streets, roads or
highways or by going from place to place in the Town, but not including
the delivery or distribution of newspapers, magazines or political or
religious materials.
B.
Seeking, taking or offering contracts or orders for any property for
future sale or delivery or performance of any service upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the Town.
A.
Seeking or taking subscriptions or contributions of money or property,
upon any street, road or highway or from house to house in the Town.
B.
§ 148-2 AMHERST CODE § 148-2
1:348
the same premises from a temporary or seasonal stand, provided that the
principal structure or activities otherwise comply with the zoning and other
ordinances of the Town.
§ 148-3. Permit or registration required.
§ 148-4. Exemptions.
No permit under this chapter shall be required:
§ 148-5. Requirements for charitable organizations.
No charitable organization shall engage in soliciting before it files with the
Town Clerk a list of the names, addresses and dates of birth of the persons
who will conduct the activity on its behalf and a statement of the time period
during which the solicitations shall occur. The Clerk shall provide a copy of
the list to the Police Department. No person shall engage in soliciting on
behalf of a charitable organization until this information has been provided
to the Town Clerk.
§ 148-6. Hours.
No peddling, soliciting or transient business activities, whether or not
exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter, shall be conducted
before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Mobile food vending shall not be
conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on a residential property
except for the following:
A. No person shall engage in peddling, soliciting, mobile food vehicle
vending or a transient business without first obtaining a permit or
registering or both as required by this chapter.
B. No motor vehicle shall be used for peddling, mobile food vehicle
vending or conducting a transient business unless a permit shall first
have been obtained, which permit shall at all times be displayed in a
conspicuous location that is visible from the outside of the vehicle.
A. By any charitable organization or its agents or employees or veterans
licensed pursuant to General Business Law § 32.
B. By any business, service or activity licensed under any other ordinance
or law of the Town of Amherst.
C. For lawn cutting, leaf raking and snow shoveling services for residential
property.
D. By political parties and candidates for public office.
E. For peddlers and solicitors not over sixteen (16) years old.
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:349
A. When the mobile food truck and vending activities are not located
within the required front yard as defined by the Zoning Ordinance
of the Town of Amherst (Chapter 203 of the Code of the Town of
Amherst), the allowable hours of operation shall be from 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
Mobile food vending shall not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00
p.m. on a non-residential property or in a right-of-way adjacent to a nonresidential
property.
§ 148-7. Application requirements.
A. An application for a permit under this chapter shall contain the
following:
(1) The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant.
(2) A physical description of the applicant, giving date of birth, height,
weight and color of hair and eyes. A photograph may be required.
(3) The name and address of the person, if any, by whom the applicant
is employed and for whom or through whom orders are to be
solicited, cleared, filled or delivered.
(4) A description of the business or activity in which the applicant
intends to engage and of the nature of any property or services
involved.
(5) For peddlers or solicitors, a list of crimes for which the applicant
has been arrested or convicted, including the dates and places.
(6) A statement as to the period of time during which the applicant
intends to engage in the business or activity regulated under this
chapter.
(7) Proof that the applicant, or his or her employer or principal, is
registered for sales tax purposes, if the business or activity to be
conducted is subject to sales or use tax.
(8) A description of any motor vehicle that will be used for pickup or
delivery of property or for the purpose of bringing any such
property into the Town for peddling, soliciting or transient business
purposes, or from which a transient business will be conducted, to
include the name of manufacturer, year, type of vehicle, vehicle
identification number, registration plate number, title holder and
name of the person other than the title holder to whom the vehicle
is registered, if any.
(9) The location where a transient business or mobile food vending
operation is to be conducted, if known.
(10) Further information required by the Town Clerk or the Police
Department.
§ 148-6 AMHERST CODE § 148-7
1:350
§ 148-8. Investigation of applicant.
§ 148-9. Fees.
The following fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk with an application for a
permit:
Type of Permit Fee
Peddler's or solicitor's permit $50
Transient business permit $50
Mobile Food Vehicle Vendor permit $400 for the first vehicle
$200 for each additional vehicle
$200 for permit renewals in
accordance with § 148-10B.
§ 148-10. Permit regulations.
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant and sworn to before a
notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
C. If mobile food vending or a transient business is to be conducted on
private property, the written consent of the property owner, if other
than the applicant, shall be filed with the application or shall be
prominently displayed on the mobile food vending vehicle or at the
transient business site.
A. For peddling or soliciting permit applications, the Town Clerk shall
forward a copy of the application to the Police Department. A copy of
any application for a transient business or mobile food vendor shall be
forwarded to the Building Department. The Police Department shall, to
the extent possible, determine whether or not the applicant has
accurately reported convictions and is otherwise a person of good
moral character and reputation. The Police and Building Departments
shall report the results of their investigations of applications to the
Town Clerk within ten (10) business days of the receipt of the copy.
B. The Police Department shall perform the same investigation and
provide the report of the results to the Town Clerk within ten (10)
business days of the receipt of a copy of a list filed pursuant to the
requirements of § 148-5 of this chapter.
A. After receipt of reports from the Police Department and Building
Department, when required, the Town Clerk shall issue the permit
requested unless the applicant for a peddler's or solicitor's permit has
been convicted of a felony at any time or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude within five (5) years prior to the application, and has
not been granted relief from civil disabilities, or otherwise is found not
to be a person of good moral character and reputation.
§ 148-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-10
1:351
B. Solicitors', peddlers' or transient business permits issued pursuant to
this chapter automatically expire ninety (90) days after issuance.
Mobile food vendor permits shall automatically expire one (1) year after
the date of issuance.
A. Mobile food vendor permit that is renewed prior to the date of
expiration or within thirty (30) days after the date of expiration shall
be eligible for the renewal fee.
C. Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
D. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked if, following its
issuance, the Police Department determines that the applicant was
convicted for any crime not reported in the application or is otherwise
not a person of good moral character and reputation. A permit may also
be revoked for any violation of this chapter committed after its
issuance.
E. A transient business permit shall be limited to a single location. If the
location is in a public right-of-way, it must be approved by the state,
county or town authority having jurisdiction. If the location is not in a
public right-of-way, it must be approved by the Building Department.
F. For Mobile Food Vendors:
(1) It shall be unlawful to conduct business from a mobile food vehicle
within a public right-of-way or on private property within the Town
without having first obtained a valid mobile food vendor permit for
each mobile food vehicle.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business in
a location within one hundred (100) feet of the primary entrance of
an establishment that is open to the public and where ready-to-eat
food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution. This requirement shall
be waived if permission for the mobile food vending operation is
obtained from the owner of the property that contains the
establishment where ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked,
wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for service, sale or
distribution.
(3) Within non-residential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a
mobile food vendor to conduct business at a single location within a
public right-of-way for a duration exceeding three (3) hours. Within
residential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a mobile food
vendor to conduct business within a public right-of-way except for
mobile food vehicles that operate for less that23 twenty (20)
minutes at a single location or that operate within an area where a
block party is being conducted.
23.So in original. Should be "than."
§ 148-10 AMHERST CODE § 148-10
1:352
§ 148-11. Prohibited acts.
(4) At all times, mobile food vendors must abide by the New York State
Transportation Law and all applicable Parking, Vehicle and Traffic
Laws, Ordinances, Rules and Regulations.
(5) All signage associated with a mobile food vendor must be
permanently affixed to the mobile food vehicle. No accessory
signage shall be placed outside or around the mobile food vehicle.
(6) All mobile food vendors must provide trash receptacles of sufficient
capacity to contain all trash and waste generated in association
with the business of the mobile food vendor. All waste and trash
shall be placed in the trash receptacles. All trash, waste, litter and
debris shall be removed from the site of the vending operation at
the end of each daily operation.
(7) It shall be unlawful to discharge liquid waste, fats, oils or grease on
the land. Such discharges shall be held in appropriate containers
and then disposed in a legally permissible manner.
(8) Mobile food vendors shall not conduct operation from a site that
contains a gasoline service.
(9) Each mobile food vehicle shall be inspected annually by the
Building Department for fire-safety code compliance.
(10) All required permits shall be posted conspicuously on the mobile
food vehicle.
(11) Each mobile food vehicle shall be registered as a commercial
vehicle with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
(12) When parked on a public or private right-of-way, products shall not
be dispensed from the street side of the mobile food vehicle.
(13) A mobile food vehicle shall not be operated in reverse in order to
attempt or make a sale.
(14) When parked on a public or private right-of-way, a mobile food
vehicle shall not be parked within sixty (60) feet of an intersection
with another public or private right-of-way boundary.
A. No person shall use private real property for any activity requiring a
permit under this chapter without the written consent of the owner, and
in compliance with § 148-7C.
B. No person regulated by this Local Law shall hawk or cry property,
offers, contracts or services upon any location in the Town, or use any
loudspeaker, horn or other sound making device.
C. No person holding a permit under this chapter shall engage in any
activity regulated hereunder unless he or she has the permit on his or
§ 148-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-11
1:353
§ 148-12. Trespassing.
§ 148-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation. Each violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 148-14. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Building
Department of the Town of Amherst.
Primary enforcement of the Mobile Food Vending regulations contained
in this Local Law shall be the responsibility of the Building Department.
Matters concerning the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the New York State
Transportation Law, illegal parking and trespassing shall be the
responsibility of the Police Department. If the Building Department
determines an issue to be a police matter, the Building Department shall
refer that issue to the Police Department.
§ 148-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Local Law shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Local Law.
Chapter 149
PICKETING
her person or as it pertains to a mobile food vendor, on the mobile food
vehicle.
A. The owner or occupant of a residential building may post a notice
prohibiting peddlers and solicitors. The notice shall be placed in a
conspicuous place adjacent to the entrance door of the building. The
letters of the notice shall be at least 1/2 inch in height and shall contain
a statement saying in substance that "peddlers or solicitors are
prohibited." No person shall engage in any activity regulated by this
chapter by attempting to enter a building or ringing a doorbell or
knocking on an entrance door to any residence building at which
entrance such a notice has been posted.
B. Any person engaged in an activity regulated under this chapter,
whether that person is exempt or not, who has entered upon private
property, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart therefrom when requested to do so by any occupant.
§ 148-11 AMHERST CODE § 149-1
1:354
§ 149-1. Declaration of policy.
It is declared that the protection and preservation of the home is the
keystone of democratic government; that the public health, welfare and
the good order of the community require that members of the community
enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility, and
privacy, and when absent from their homes and dwellings, carry with them
the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may return to
the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; that the practice of picketing
before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and
distress to the occupants; that such practice has as its object the harassing
of such occupants; and without resort to such practice full opportunity
exists, and under terms and provisions of this chapter will continue to exist
for the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights; and
that the provisions hereinafter enacted are necessary for the public interest
to avoid the detrimental results herein set forth.
§ 149-2. Picketing residence or dwelling unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the
residence or dwelling of any individual in the Town of Amherst.
§ 149-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not in excess of $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both.
§ 149-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 151
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 85.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 121.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Landscapers — See Ch. 130.
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
Trees — See Ch. 179.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 184.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 149-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:355

ARTICLE I
Legislative Findings and Applicability
§ 151-1. Legislative findings.
Buildings or structures which are severely deteriorated or damaged by any
cause, collapsed, or are in danger of collapsing or the construction of which
is not completed, and open excavations become dangerous or unsafe to
the public. Brush, grass, rubbish and weeds in undue accumulations on
lands may constitute a fire hazard, and such accumulations and poisonous
shrubs, weeds or other growths may constitute a health hazard. In order to
protect and preserve the peace, good order, safety and general welfare of
the community, the Town Board determines that it is necessary to establish
a procedure for the securing or removal of such buildings or structures, the
covering or filling of such excavations and the cutting, trimming, removal or
spraying of such brush, grass, shrubs, growth or rubbish.
§ 151-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply within the Town of Amherst outside the Village of
Williamsville.
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:357

ARTICLE II
Unsafe or Dangerous Structures
[Amended 8-16-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982]
§ 151-3. Inspection; report to Clerk.
Whenever it appears that a building or structure is so severely deteriorated
or damaged by any cause, collapsed or in danger of collapsing, or that the
state of construction is such that the building or structure has become or
is in danger of becoming dangerous or unsafe to the public, the Building
Commissioner shall cause it to be inspected. If the Commissioner then finds
that the condition of the building or structure is such that it is dangerous
or unsafe to the public, he shall file a report with the Town Clerk setting
forth that fact giving the particulars supporting his conclusion and stating
the action required to be taken to make the building or structure safe
and secure or requiring its removal and reporting any action taken by him
pursuant to § 151-8.
§ 151-4. Service of notice.
A notice, containing the information hereinafter required, shall be served
on the owner, or some one of the owner's executors, agents, lessees or any
other person having a vested or contingent interest in the premises, known
to the Commissioner. The notice may be served personally or by registered
mail addressed to the known address, if any, of the person to whom it is
directed as shown by the records of the Town Assessor, Receiver of Taxes or
Erie County Clerk. Failure of the person to receive the mailed notice shall
not impede the continuance of the procedure hereby established. In any
case where a notice is served by mail, a copy thereof shall be posted on the
premises.
§ 151-5. Contents of notice.
The notice, which shall constitute a permit to do work therein required,
shall contain:
A. A description of the premises with its tax account number and street
address.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous.
C. An order requiring the building or structure to be repaired or otherwise
made safe and secure or removed and any excavation in connection
therewith to be covered or filled and a statement that the work required
may be commenced immediately and when it shall be completed.
D. A statement that the Town Board will hold a hearing, at a specified time
and place, to determine if the Town shall repair, otherwise make safe
and secure, or remove the building or structure and fill any excavation
in connection therewith, if the order is not obeyed.
§ 151-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-6
1:359
§ 151-6. Filing of notice; effective period; vacation.
A copy of the notice shall be filed in the Erie County Clerk's office. The
County Clerk shall file the notice in the same manner as a notice of
pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. When
filed, the notice shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency, except as
otherwise provided in this section. The notice shall be effective for a period
of one year from the filing date unless earlier vacated by order of a judge or
justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the Town Attorney. Upon
the filing of an order or consent vacating the notice, the County Clerk shall
mark the notice and any record or docket thereof as cancelled of record.
§ 151-7. Action by Town Board following hearing.
Following the hearing referred to in § 151-5, the Town Board may vacate or
modify the Building Commissioner's order or cause or direct the building
or structure to be repaired, made safe or secure or removed, and any
excavation in connection therewith filled.
§ 151-8. Actions to abate immediate hazards.
If, as a result of the inspection required under § 151-3, the Commissioner
determines that the condition found dangerous or unsafe constitutes an
immediate hazard to persons or other property, he may:
§ 151-9. Action to be taken upon order to vacate; penalty for
noncompliance.
When the Commissioner orders a building or structure vacated, a copy of
his order shall be posted thereon. Thereafter, use or occupancy of said
building or structure prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy
or other failure to comply with any order made by him pursuant to § 151-8
shall be violation of this chapter constituting an offense punishable for each
day's violation by a fine not exceeding $150 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. Order the building or structure involved vacated, in which event it shall
not thereafter be occupied until a new certificate of occupancy with
respect thereto has been issued as provided in the Zoning Ordinance
and Building Code.24
B. Close any street or sidewalk abutting the land involved or within the
area of immediate peril.
C. Erect or cause to be erected temporary barricades, warning devices or
other temporary enclosures or structures.
D. Take such other action as he may deem necessary for the protection of
persons and other property from the risk of immediate injury.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning, and Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration.
§ 151-6 AMHERST CODE § 151-10
1:360
§ 151-10. (Reserved)
§ 151-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-10
1:361

ARTICLE III
Excavated Lands
§ 151-11. Public hearing to be held on hazardous excavations.
Whenever it appears that, due to cessation or undue delay in construction
or otherwise, any excavated lands or property are or are about to become
a hazard to public safety, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing prior
to ordering the filling or covering thereof. If, after a public hearing, the
Board finds that the condition of the lands or property as so excavated
does constitute a hazard to public safety, it shall order those lands or
property to be filled in or graded or the excavation to be otherwise covered
as it determines to be appropriate. Any building permit or other permit
previously issued pursuant to which or in connection with which the
excavation was created shall thereby be revoked. If it finds that the
condition does not constitute a hazard to public safety, it shall dismiss the
proceeding.
§ 151-12. Notice of public hearing. [Amended 8-16-1982 by L.L. No.
7-1982]
Notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the official newspaper
and be served personally upon the owner of record or mailed to him by
certified mail directed to his address as shown on the last preceding Town
assessment roll at least five days prior to its date. Notice of the hearing may
also be given to other persons having or claiming an interest in the lands or
property as occupant, mortgagee or otherwise.
§ 151-13. Order requiring excavation to be filled or graded; failure
to comply. [Amended 8-16-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982]
An order directing lands or property to be filled or graded or an excavation
to be otherwise covered shall be served upon the owner of record personally
or mailed to him by certified mail in the same manner as provided for in
the foregoing section. A copy of the order shall be served upon or mailed
by certified mail to the last known address of any persons other than the
owner appearing at the hearing having or claiming an interest in the lands
or property. If the work so ordered is not accomplished by or on behalf of the
owner within 30 days following service or mailing of the order, the Building
Commissioner shall cause it to be done or completed.
§ 151-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-13
1:363

ARTICLE IV
Lot Maintenance
§ 151-14. Order to abate nuisances.
Whenever it appears that any lands or property contains such quantity of
brush, grass, rubbish or weeds as to constitute a fire or health hazard or
poisonous shrubs or weeds, the Town Board may order the owner of the
lands or property to cut, trim, remove or spray the brush, grass, rubbish,
weeds or poisonous shrubs or weeds. A copy of the order shall be personally
served upon the owner or mailed to him by certified mail at his address as
shown by the records of the Town Assessor. A copy of the order may also
be served upon or mailed by certified mail to the last known address to
any other person having or claiming an interest in the lands or property as
occupant, mortgagee or otherwise.
§ 151-15. Failure to comply.
In the event that the order is not complied with within 10 days following
personal service or 14 days following mailing of the order, the Building
Commissioner shall cause the work therein required to be done or
completed.
§ 151-16. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any lands or highway
easements owned by another municipal corporation or political subdivision
of the state.
§ 151-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-16
1:365

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Administrative Provisions
[Amended 8-16-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982]
§ 151-17. Assessment of costs.
The expense of any action subsequent to preliminary inspections taken
pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed against the real property
involved. Those expenses shall be reported to the Assessor within 20 days
following completion of the proceedings herein authorized. The Assessor
shall cause a notice to be given of the time and place where he will assess
the expense against the property. A copy of the notice shall be served
upon or mailed by certified mail to the owner and other persons having
or claiming any interest in the real property who has appeared in any
proceeding under this law. Except as hereinafter provided, personal service
shall take place at least eight days before the hearing.
§ 151-18. Conduct of hearings by Assessor.
At the time and place specified in the notice, and upon any adjourned
dates, the Assessor shall hear all interested parties. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Assessor shall complete the assessment, stating therein
the name of the owner, the account number of the amount assessed to
each parcel of real property. Thereafter, he shall return the assessment to
the Town Clerk, who shall present it to the Town Board. The Town Board
shall certify the assessment to the County Legislature, which shall cause
the amount stated therein to be levied against the property. The amount
assessed shall be a lien on the real property until collected. It shall be levied
and collected at the same time and in the same manner as other Town taxes
and shall be paid to the Town Supervisor to be applied in reimbursing the
fund from which the expenses were paid.
§ 151-19. Service of notice.
Any notice directed to a corporation may be served upon it at its principal
place of business, upon a duly designated agent within the Town or upon
the Secretary of State. The time for service shall be extended by four days
for any notice served on the Secretary of State.
§ 151-20. Extension of deadlines.
Any period of time fixed for performance hereunder may be extended by the
Building Commissioner for a period not exceeding 14 days.
§ 151-21. Repealer.
This chapter supersedes and repeals Subdivision 1-24, Section 1, of Chapter
3 (Building Code)25 of the Town Ordinances, adopted May 11, 1936, as
25.Editor's Note: This Building Code was repealed in its entirety 7-5-1977. See now Ch. 83,
Building Construction Administration.
§ 151-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-21
1:367
amended February 19, 1951. This chapter shall not otherwise limit the
power of the Town or its officers to act with respect to buildings, structures,
lands or property as authorized by law.
§ 151-22. Definition of terms.
In addition to their usual meanings, or instead of where the context so
indicates, words used herein shall be defined as provided for in the State
General Construction Law.
§ 151-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 151-24. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any person or lands is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall
not affect other sections, clauses or provisions nor the application thereof
which can be sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or
provision or application, and to this end the various sections, clauses and
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 151-21 AMHERST CODE § 151-24
1:368
ARTICLE VI
Damaged Buildings
[Added 12-2-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
§ 151-25. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Damaged Building
Code" and shall be Article VI of the Property Maintenance Code enacted as
Local Law No. 5-1976, as amended.
§ 151-26. Purpose.
There exists or may hereafter exist in the Town of Amherst buildings which
are or tend to be substandard because of deteriorating conditions resulting
from fire or explosion. They are injurious to the public health, safety and
welfare and may constitute a nuisance. To preserve the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Amherst, protect the value of
neighboring properties, prevent blight and provide means and methods of
inspecting and correcting these buildings where they do or may hereinafter
exist, this code is enacted.
§ 151-27. Definitions.
Words in this article are normally used in their ordinary English usage.
Certain terms shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior and party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property; a mobile home.
LAW — Includes laws, statutes, ordinance codes, rules or regulations.
PERSON — The owner, occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession,
operator, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or
any other person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a
residence building or part thereof.
§ 151-28. Procedures after fire or explosion.
A. When a building is hereafter damaged by fire or explosion so as to be
incapable of being occupied or used according to the standards set
forth in § 151-36, the owner of such building shall, within 72 hours after
such occurrence, seal said building against access by unauthorized
persons. The owner shall clear the site of debris incident to the
occurrence within two weeks after the occurrence.
B. This article shall apply to buildings damaged by fire or explosion to the
extent of being incapable of occupancy or use according to the
standards set forth in § 151-36 prior to its effective date and which, on
that date, remain in that condition. As to those buildings, the owner
shall seal the building against access by unauthorized persons and clear
§ 151-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-28
1:369
§ 151-29. Notice of intent.
Within 60 days after an occurrence described in § 151-28A or, as to
buildings described in § 151-28B, within 15 days after this article takes
effect, the owner or his agent shall notify the Building Commissioner, in
writing, of his intent to pursue one of the following courses of action:
§ 151-30. Demolition of structure.
In the event that the owner elects to demolish the building, he shall secure
a demolition permit within two weeks after filing the notice of intent. The
building shall be demolished, and the site shall be cleared of all debris
within 30 days of the issuance of said permit. Site clearance shall include
the removal of all debris from the foundation and backfilling with clean
inorganic fill.
§ 151-31. Rebuilding of structure.
In the event that the owner elects to demolish the building and rebuild, he
shall file plans with the Building Commissioner and apply for a demolition
permit and a building permit within 90 days after filing the notice of intent.
The building shall be demolished and the site cleared of all debris within
30 days and rebuilding completed within six months of the issuance of the
building permit.
§ 151-32. Repair of structure.
In the event that the owner elects to repair the building, he shall apply for
a building permit within 90 days after filing the notice of intent and shall
clear the site and begin construction within 30 days and complete all repairs
within six months of the issuance of the building permit.
§ 151-33. Review by Building Commissioner.
On receipt of a notice pursuant to § 151-29, the Building Commissioner
shall review the matter and determine whether authorization of the Zoning
Board of Appeals is required in the case of any proposed construction,
reconstruction or repair. He shall notify the owner if authorization is
all debris incident to the fire or explosion from the site within three
days following the effective date of this article.
A. To demolish the building and not rebuild.
B. To demolish the building and rebuild a new building on a new
foundation.
C. To demolish the building and rebuild a similar building on the same
foundation.
D. To repair the building.
§ 151-28 AMHERST CODE § 151-33
1:370
required. In such event, the owner shall make application to that Board
within 30 days of the Commissioner's determination.
§ 151-34. Action by Town Board; lien.
§ 151-35. Designation of unfit buildings.
The designation of buildings as unfit for occupancy or use and the
procedure for the condemnation shall be carried out by the Commissioner
of Building in compliance with the requirements set forth in this code.
§ 151-36. Condemnation of buildings.
Any building which shall be found by the Commissioner of Building to have
any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for occupancy or
use after due notice pursuant to this code:
A. Where the owner shall not have notified the Building Commissioner as
provided in § 151-29 or where said owner shall not have taken action to
secure necessary permits and undertake demolition or repair pursuant
to the appropriate section or sections of this article, the Building
Commissioner shall notify the Town Board. The Board shall review the
matter, including the reports of the Building Commissioner and the
appropriate Fire Chief. The Town Board shall make a finding as to
whether the building is unfit for use or occupancy under the standards
set forth in § 151-36, and, in the event of such finding, it shall notify the
property owner, who shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
B. If, after hearing the owner, the Town Board confirms its finding that the
building is unfit for use or occupancy under the standards set forth in
§ 151-36, it shall continue the proceedings under this code. If it
determines that it is fit for such use and occupancy, the proceedings
shall be terminated.
C. In the event that the property owner shall not have taken action to
secure permits pursuant to this code or commence work under an
issued permit within two weeks of notification under this section or of
hearing before the Board, whichever shall be later, the Town Board
shall institute action to demolish the building or take other action as
may be necessary to secure compliance with this code.
D. The costs of proceedings under this section, including costs of surveys,
appraisals, notices and other assignable costs and interest thereon,
shall be assessed against and become a lien on the property, as
provided in Article V of this chapter.
A. One which is so damaged due to fire or explosion that it creates a
serious hazard to the health or safety of occupants or of the public.
B. One which, due to fire or explosion, lacks illumination, ventilation,
sanitation facilities or structural integrity sufficient for use and
occupancy under applicable law.
§ 151-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-36
1:371
§ 151-37. Vacation of unfit buildings.
Any building condemned as unfit for occupancy or use and so designated
shall be vacated within reasonable time as ordered by the Commission of
Building.
§ 151-38. Reuse of condemned buildings.
No building which has been condemned as unfit for occupancy or use shall
again be used until written approval is secured from the Commissioner of
Building.
§ 151-39. Inspections; access to premises.
The Commissioner of Building or any duly designated inspector in the
Department is hereby authorized and directed to make all inspections
necessary to determine whether compliance with the provisions of this code
exists. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Commissioner of
Building is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times fire- or explosion-damaged buildings and their premises. The owner
or occupants of every such building or the person in charge thereof shall
give the Commissioner of Building and designated inspectors free access to
such building and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of such a building
shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part
of such building unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose
of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this code or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted
or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this code.
§ 151-40. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Commissioner of Building determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this code, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
C. One which, due to fire or explosion, is so damaged that the cost of
repairs necessary to make it fit for use and occupancy will exceed its
value after those repairs.
A. Be in writing.
B. Allow seven days for the performance of any act it requires.
C. Be served upon the owner or agent, and occupant as the case may
require. The notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner or agent or occupant if a copy thereof is served personally; a
copy is sent by certified mail to the last known address of such owner or
agent or occupant and another copy is posted within 24 hours
§ 151-36 AMHERST CODE § 151-40
1:372
§ 151-41. Emergency action.
Whenever the Commissioner of Building finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, he may issue an order in writing to the owner, agent or occupant
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action
be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding
the other provisions of this article, his order shall be effective immediately.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately. If such person does not respond with sufficient promptness
to meet the emergency, then the Commissioner of Building shall have the
power to correct the emergency, and any expense incurred by the Town of
Amherst shall be assessed against and become a lien on the property, as
provided in Article V of this chapter.
§ 151-42. Continued violations.
Whenever the Commissioner of Building finds that there are or have been
recurring, repeated or continuing violations of any of the provisions of
this code, he may, with respect to the recurring, repeated or continuing
violations, institute immediate appropriate legal action to eliminate such
violation or violations.
§ 151-43. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who, having been served with a notice or order under this code
to remove or cease any violation thereof, fails to comply therewith within
the time fixed by the Commissioner of Building shall be guilty of an offense
against this code, punishable for each offense by a fine not exceeding
$150 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment for each offense.
§ 151-44. Civil penalty.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person who, having
secured a demolition permit pursuant to this code, does not demolish the
building and clear the site within the time limited by this code shall be in
violation of this code and shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each day
that such violation continues, which penalty shall be a civil penalty and in
addition to that provided in § 151-43.
§ 151-45. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this code be
declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder shall not
be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end
the provisions of this code are declared to be severable.
thereafter in a conspicuous place in or about the building affected by
the notice; or a copy is served by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state.
§ 151-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-46
1:373
§ 151-46. Effective date.
This article shall take effect January 1, 1986.
§ 151-46 AMHERST CODE § 151-46
1:374
ARTICLE VII
General Maintenance Regulations
[Added 3-20-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 151-47. Title; scope; intent.
§ 151-48. Applicability; referenced standards; other requirements.
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Property Maintenance
Code of the Town of Amherst, New York, hereinafter referred to as "this
article."
B. Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing and future
residential and nonresidential structures and all premises that contain
structures or occupied or unoccupied buildings. The provisions
contained herein shall constitute minimum requirements and standards
for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation,
space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety,
safety from fire and other hazards and for safe and sanitary
maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants;
the occupancy of existing structures and premises and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
C. Intent. This article shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare and to prevent and
remedy blighted conditions with respect to all occupied and unoccupied
structures, buildings and premises. Existing structures and premises
that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to
provide a minimum level of health, safety and reasonable condition as
required herein.
D. Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article is, for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
A. General. The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in § 151-47. Where,
in a specific case, different sections of this article specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
B. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this article or a previous regulation or code under which the structure
or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. The requirements of this article are not intended to
provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety
systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise
specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
C. Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
§ 151-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-48
1:375
§ 151-49. (Reserved)
§ 151-50. Code official; powers and duties.
the procedures and provisions of NFPA 70 and the Building, Plumbing
and Mechanical Codes that are in effect on the date of issuance of any
required permit.26 Nothing in this article shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of Chapter 203, Zoning, any local law
or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the Town of Amherst.
D. Existing remedies. The provisions in this article shall not be construed
to abolish or impair existing remedies of the Town of Amherst or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any
structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
E. Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this
article shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
F. Historic buildings. The provisions of this article shall not be mandatory
for existing buildings or structures designated by the federal, state or
local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures
are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of
health, safety and welfare.
G. Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced
in this article shall be those that are defined in § 151-58 and considered
part of the requirements of this article to the prescribed extent of each
such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this
article and the referenced standards, the most restrictive provisions
shall apply.
H. Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this article shall be determined by the code
official.
A. General. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Rule-making authority. The code official shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and
implement the provisions of this article; to secure the intent thereof;
and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving
structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration.
§ 151-48 AMHERST CODE § 151-50
1:376
§ 151-51. Conditions and modifications of approval.
this article or of violating accepted engineering methods involving
public safety.
C. Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections
or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
signed by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such
expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
D. Right of entry. The code official is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused
or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.
E. Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under
this article.
F. Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with this article.
G. Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all
business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of
this article. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long
as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in
existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
H. Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of this
article or another code or ordinance the responsibility of more than one
code official of the Town of Amherst is involved, it shall be the duty of
the code officials involved to coordinate their inspections and
administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and
occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous
inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector
from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual
violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within
the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the
findings to the code official having jurisdiction.
A. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this article, the code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided that the
code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this article impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements.
§ 151-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-51
1:377
§ 151-52. Penalties for offenses.
The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the department files.
B. Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
article are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
article, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An
alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where
the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this article and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least
the equivalent of that prescribed in this article in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
C. Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with the provisions of this article, or evidence that a material or method
does not conform to the requirements of this article, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code
official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of
compliance to be made at no expense to the Town of Amherst.
(1) Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this article or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and
accepted test methods, the code official shall approve the testing
procedures.
(2) Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
(3) Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official
for the period required for retention of public records.
D. Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned and tested
when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and
approved.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or
order in accordance with § 151-53.
C. Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in
violation of the provisions of this article or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto.
§ 151-51 AMHERST CODE § 151-52
1:378
§ 151-53. Notices and orders.
D. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local
laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person, occupant,
operator or owner who violates any provision of this article or any
regulation contained herein is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days,
or both.
E. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the code official of the Town of Amherst
from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises. If the owner of a premises fails to
comply with an abatement or correction order within the time
prescribed, the code official shall cause the violation to be corrected or
abated, either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such correction or
abatement shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
violation is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. The
assessment of costs shall be administered in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article V of this chapter.
A. Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the
code official determines that there has been a violation of this article or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefor in the
manner prescribed in Subsections B and C. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with § 151-54C.
B. Form. Such notice prescribed in Subsection A shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued; and
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally;
§ 151-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-53
1:379
§ 151-54. Unsafe structures and equipment.
(2) Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
(3) If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
D. Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be
as set forth in § 151-52D.
E. Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed
and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
A. General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to
be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful as defined in Subsection A(4), such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(1) Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to
protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such
structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.
(2) Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that
such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the
public or occupants of the premises or structure.
(3) Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is
unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is
in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin- or ratinfested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation,
§ 151-53 AMHERST CODE § 151-54
1:380
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential
equipment required by this article, or because the location of the
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or
to the public.
(4) Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or
in part to be occupied, used or maintained or was erected or
altered contrary to law.
B. Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as
not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up
the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official
shall cause the premises to be closed through any available public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the real property upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real property. The
assessment of costs shall be administered in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article V of this chapter.
C. Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this subsection, notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for
the structure or equipment in accordance with § 151-53C. If the notice
pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned
equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 151-53B.
D. Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall
post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the
word or words "condemned," "unsafe" or "restricted use," as deemed
appropriate by the code official, and a statement of the penalties
provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or
removing the placard.
E. Prohibited occupancy. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any
person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for
the penalties provided by this article.
F. Removal of placard. The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person
who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval
of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this
article.
§ 151-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-55
1:381
§ 151-55. Emergency measures.
§ 151-56. Demolition.
A. Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there
is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or
vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to
vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This
structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the code
official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required
repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
B. Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article,
whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger
due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary
work to be done, including the boarding-up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be
taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
C. Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the code official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places
adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being
utilized.
D. Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the Town of Amherst. The code official
of the Town of Amherst shall institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for
the recovery of such costs. The assessment of costs shall be
administered in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article V of
this chapter.
F. Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon
petition directed to the Town Board, be afforded a hearing as described
in this article.
§ 151-55 AMHERST CODE § 151-56
1:382
§ 151-57. (Reserved)
§ 151-58. Definitions and word usage.
A. General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment is
so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of
being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to
demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more
than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.
B. Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with § 151-53.
C. Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real property upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real property. The assessment of costs shall be
administered in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article V of
this chapter.
D. Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said
contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition
and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
A. General.
(1) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in
this section.
(2) Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular.
(3) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
article and are defined in the Building, Fire Prevention, Zoning,
§ 151-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-58
1:383
Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Codes,27 ASME A17.1 and
NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
in those codes.
(4) Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined, through the
methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have
ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
(5) Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises,"
"building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in
this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed
by the words "or any part thereof."
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPROVED — Approved by the code official.
AREA OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Includes a building or a portion of
a building used for the gathering together of 50 or more persons
for amusement, athletic, civic, dining, educational, patriotic, political,
recreational, religious, social or similar purposes, the entire area of
which it is a part, and the means of egress therefrom.
ASME A17.1 — The Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, as
referenced in the Building Code.
ASSEMBLY SPACE — A room or space whose primary use is classified
as Group C5 occupancy (as defined in the Building Code), regardless of
the number of persons.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above
the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BATHROOM — A room containing plumbing fixtures, including a
bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM — Any room or space used or intended to be used for
sleeping purposes.
BUILDING CODE — The approved Building, Mechanical, Electrical,
Plumbing and Fire Prevention Codes as designated in Chapter 83 of the
Code of the Town of Amherst.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade, which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to
ceiling, below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
CHAPTER 83 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF AMHERST — Local
Law No. 3-1977 (as amended) of the Town of Amherst. This local law is
also known as the "Building Construction Administration Code."28
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration.
§ 151-58 AMHERST CODE § 151-58
1:384
CODE OFFICIAL — The Commissioner of Building of the Town of
Amherst. In accordance with Chapter 83, Building Construction
Administration, of the Code of the Town of Amherst, the Commissioner
of Building shall be assisted by the Assistant Commissioner of Building
and other code enforcement personnel assigned to the Building
Department.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for occupancy or use.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for living,
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family.
ELECTRICAL CODE — The electrical code as designated in Chapter 83
of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rats or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison
spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit who are related by blood, marriage or adoption
or although not related by blood, marriage or adoption, whose living
arrangements are the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE — The approved fire prevention codes as
designated in Chapter 83 of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Restaurants for employees and
occupants, kitchens serving them and kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet
rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas shall
not be deemed to be habitable space.
IMMINENT HAZARD — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
LABELED — Devices, equipment, appliances or materials to which
has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a
nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
28.Editor's Note: L.L. No. 3-1977 was repealed 1-20-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009, the provisions of
which are included in Ch. 83, Building Construction Administration.
§ 151-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-58
1:385
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose
label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally
recognized standards.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession
or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building,
premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of
record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or
license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract
for the sale of land.
MECHANICAL CODE — The approved Mechanical Code as designated
in Chapter 83 of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
NFPA 70 — The National Electrical Code (NEC) as referenced in the
Building and Electrical Codes.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the
building, and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between
stories.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having
possession of a space within a building.
OCCUPIED SPACE — Space within a building wherein persons normally
work or remain for a period of time.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PLUMBING CODE — The approved Plumbing Code as designated in
Chapter 83 of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures
thereon.
§ 151-58 AMHERST CODE § 151-58
1:386
§ 151-59. General requirements.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with
or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or twofamily
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or
living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof
or an assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.
TOILET ROOM — A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
TOWN ATTORNEY — The Town Attorney of the Town of Amherst.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Amherst.
TOWN OF AMHERST — The Town of Amherst, New York.
VENTILATION — The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any
space.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 203 of the Code of the Town of
Amherst, as amended.[Amended 5-1-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
A. Scope. The provisions of §§ 151-59 through 151-64 shall govern the
minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures
and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as
otherwise provided for in §§ 151-63 and 151-64. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do
not comply with the requirements of this article. Occupants of a
§ 151-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-59
1:387
§ 151-60. Exterior property areas.
dwelling unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition that part of the dwelling unit or premises which they occupy
and control.
C. Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition.
B. Grading and drainage. Surface and subsurface water shall be
appropriately drained to protect buildings and structures and to
prevent ponding. Exception: approved retention areas, reservoirs,
lakes, ponds and creeks.
C. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Stairs shall
comply with the requirements of §§ 151-61J and 151-84I.
D. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches [254 millimeters (mm)].
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, that this term shall not include cultivated flowers
and gardens. Exceptions:
(1) Farmland, vacant lots containing no structures, undeveloped
portions of land zoned SA or NCD-MOS, designated open space
areas, wetlands, conservation easement areas and any other area
intended to be maintained in a natural state.
(2) Rights-of-way, lands or highway easements owned by another
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state.
E. Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will
not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent
reinfestation.
F. Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other
gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.
§ 151-59 AMHERST CODE § 151-60
1:388
§ 151-61. Exterior structure.
G. Accessory structures.
(1) All accessory structures, including detached garages, sheds, fences
and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
(2) Gates which are required to be self-closing and self-latching in
accordance with the Building Code shall be maintained in proper
working condition.
H. (Reserved)
I. Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on
any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving
or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
J. Yards, courts and vacant lots. Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept
clean and free of hazards.
K. Ground cover. Ground cover shall be properly established to prevent
undue soil erosion due to the elements. When vehicles are parked on
lawns, all ruts and other damage caused by vehicular traffic shall be
promptly filled and ground cover shall be reestablished and maintained.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
B. Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to
doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim, shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay
by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding
and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and
the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained
weather-resistant and watertight.
C. (Reserved)
D. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
E. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so
as to prevent the entry of rodents.
§ 151-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-61
1:389
F. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose
or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly surfacecoated
where required to prevent deterioration.
G. Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not
have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. A tarp may be
placed on the roof of the property to provide temporary protection to
the roof of the structure for an amount of time not to exceed sixty (60)
days. [Amended 4-23-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012]
H. Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
I. Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions
shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be
kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal
or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust
by periodic application of weathercoating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
J. Stair and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch, deck or
other walking surface shall comply with the provisions of § 151-84I.
K. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
L. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
M. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
N. Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
(1) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
§ 151-61 AMHERST CODE § 151-61
1:390
§ 151-62. Interior structure.
§ 151-63. Rubbish and garbage.
(2) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
O. (Reserved)
P. Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units,
rooming units and guest rooms shall tightly secure the door.
Q. Basement or cellar hatchways. Every basement or cellar hatchway shall
be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface
drainage water.
R. Guards for basement or cellar windows. Every basement or cellar
window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm
windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
A. General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Every occupant shall keep that part of the structure which
such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a
dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential
occupancies shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared
or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
B. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
C. Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including ceilings, walls, floors,
windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean, sound and
sanitary condition.
D. Stairs and railings. All interior stairs and railings shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair.
E. Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch, deck or
other walking surface shall comply with the provisions of § 151-84I.
F. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
G. Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended
by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
§ 151-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-63
1:391
§ 151-64. Extermination.
A. Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. In addition to the requirements
contained herein, the collection, storage and disposal of rubbish and
garbage shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 169, Solid
Waste, Article I, Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of
Amherst, otherwise known as the "Solid Waste Local Law" of the Town
of Amherst (L.L. No. 10-1992, as amended).
B. Disposal of rubbish.
(1) Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
(2) Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the
owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of
rubbish.
C. Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an
approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
(1) Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each
dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure
available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved
leakproof, covered, outside garbage container.
(2) Containers. The operator of every establishment producing
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized,
approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers
for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises
for disposal.
A. Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious
to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken
to prevent reinfestation.
B. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the
structure.
C. Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a singletenant
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination
on the premises.
§ 151-63 AMHERST CODE § 151-64
1:392
§ 151-65. General light, ventilation and occupancy limitations.
§ 151-66. Light.
D. Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the
public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If
infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupants shall be responsible for
extermination.
E. Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent- and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception:
Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the
owner shall be responsible for extermination.
A. Scope. The provisions of §§ 151-65 through 151-68 shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for
occupying a structure.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit
another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this section.
C. Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation
herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying
with the Building Code shall be permitted.
A. Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection A(1) and (2):
(1) Habitable space shall have natural light provided by means of one
or more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or
any combination thereof, that face directly on open space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with electric light appropriate
for the intended use.
B. Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway, other
than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with
at least a sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for
each 200 square feet (19 square meters) of floor area, provided that the
spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm).
Every exterior means of egress stairway, other than in one- and twofamily
dwellings, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one footcandle
(11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
C. Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
§ 151-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-66
1:393
§ 151-67. Ventilation.
§ 151-68. Occupancy limitations; accessibility and use limitations.
conditions and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
A. Habitable spaces. Habitable space shall have natural ventilation
provided by means of openable parts of windows or other openings in
exterior walls that face directly on open space or through openable
parts of skylights.
B. Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required by Subsection A, except that a window shall not be required in
such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air
exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet
room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
C. Cooking facilities.
(1) Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall
not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a
cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in
a rooming unit or dormitory unit. Exception: where specifically
approved, in writing, by the code official.
(2) Kitchens and kitchenettes without windows shall be provided with
mechanical ventilation.
D. Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes,
gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air
shall be exhausted to the exterior and shall not be recirculated to any
space.
E. Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with
the stricter of the manufacturer's instructions or the Building Code.
A. Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units
shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other
adjoining spaces.
B. Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of
access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the
only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
C. Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least
one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least
§ 151-66 AMHERST CODE § 151-68
1:394
§ 151-69. General plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.
§ 151-70. Required facilities.
one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom
or an adjacent story.
D. Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and cellars shall
not be used for sleeping purposes.
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
G. Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare
and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities
and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage. It shall be prohibited to
prepare meals in hotel units, lodging units and dormitory units which
have no kitchens or kitchenettes.
H. Habitable space located partially below grade shall conform to the
definition of a basement, with the floor level of such space not more
than four feet below the average finished grade or as otherwise
permitted in the current Building Code.
A. Scope. The provisions of §§ 151-69 through 151-75 shall govern the
minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be
provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this article.
A. Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close
proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water
closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the
required lavatory.
B. Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
C. Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower
having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each 10
occupants.
§ 151-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-70
1:395
§ 151-71. Toilet rooms.
§ 151-72. Plumbing systems and fixtures.
D. Employees' facilities.
(1) A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking
facility shall be available to employees.
(2) Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain,
water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not
constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all
common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
B. Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units shall have access by traversing not more than
one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
C. Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access
from within the employees' regular working area. The required toilet
facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the
employees' regular working area, and the path of travel to such
facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee
facilities shall either be separate facilities or public customer facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the
same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of
500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the
facilities.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which
such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
B. Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
C. Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
§ 151-70 AMHERST CODE § 151-73
1:396
§ 151-73. Water system.
§ 151-74. Sanitary drainage system.
§ 151-75. Storm drainage generally.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas
on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
§ 151-76. General mechanical and electrical requirements.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to
either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall
be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance
with the Plumbing Code.
B. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets,
janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently
attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
C. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
the fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
D. Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility at a temperature of not more than 120° F. (49° C.). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet
room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless
adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination
temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe
shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
A. Scope. The provisions of §§ 151-76 through 151-82 shall govern the
minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be
provided.
§ 151-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-76
1:397
§ 151-77. Heating facilities.
§ 151-78. Mechanical equipment.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply
with the requirements of this article.
A. Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as
required by this section.
B. Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
C. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guest room on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from the 15th day
of September to the 31st day of May of the following year to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68° F. in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms.
D. Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from the 15th day of September to
the 31st day of May of the following year to maintain a temperature of
not less than 68° F. during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
(1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(2) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
E. Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet above the floor and two feet and more
inward from the center of each exterior wall.
A. Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment, fireplaces and solid
fuel-burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a
safe working condition and shall be capable of performing the intended
function.
B. Cooking and heating equipment.
(1) All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in
every heating, cooking and water-heating device shall be
maintained free from leaks and obstructions.
§ 151-76 AMHERST CODE § 151-78
1:398
§ 151-79. Electrical facilities.
§ 151-80. Electrical equipment.
(2) Cooking equipment. Cooking appliances shall not be used to
provide space heating to meet the minimum requirements of
§ 151-77C.
C. Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
Exception: fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled
for unvented operation.
D. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
E. Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be
maintained in effective operation.
F. Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and
for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall
be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
G. Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel
supply line thereto or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall
not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.
A. Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section
and § 151-80.
B. Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with NFPA 70. Every dwelling and structure shall be served by a main
service that is sized properly and is installed in a manner that provides
safe electrical power to all of the electrical appliances and equipment in
use therein.
C. Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system
in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar
reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.
A. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least
two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
§ 151-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-80
1:399
§ 151-81. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
§ 151-82. Duct systems generally.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of all obstructions and shall be
capable of providing the required function.
§ 151-83. General fire safety requirements.
§ 151-84. Means of egress.
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a
ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least
one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground
fault circuit interrupter protection.
C. Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall
contain at least one electric lighting fixture.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to
sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly and to be free from
physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection
shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the
escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator.
B. Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building
is occupied. Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall
be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing
or servicing.
A. Scope. The provisions of §§ 151-83 through 151-87 shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures
and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to
be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this article.
A. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
B. Exit capacity. The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be sufficient
for the occupant load thereof as determined by the Building Code.
C. Number of exits. In nonresidential buildings, every occupied story more
than six stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two
§ 151-80 AMHERST CODE § 151-84
1:400
independent exits. In residential buildings, every story exceeding two
stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two
independent exits. In stories where more than one exit is required, all
occupants shall have access to at least two exits. Exception: a single
exit is acceptable under any one of the following conditions:
(1) Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system and an automatic fire detection system with
smoke detectors located in all corridors, lobbies and common
areas.
(2) Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire
detection system and the exit is an approved smoke-proof
enclosure or pressurized stairway.
(3) Where an existing fire escape conforming to the Building Code is
provided in addition to the single exit.
(4) Where permitted by the Building Code.
D. Arrangement. Exits from dwelling units, rooming units, guest rooms
and dormitory units shall not lead through other such units or through
toilet rooms or bathrooms.
E. Exit signs. All means of egress shall be indicated with approved "exit"
signs where required by the Building Code. All "exit" signs shall be
maintained visible, and all illuminated "exit" signs shall be illuminated
at all times that the building is occupied.
F. Corridor enclosure. All corridors serving an occupant load greater than
30 persons and the openings therein shall provide an effective barrier
to resist the movement of smoke. All transoms, louvers, doors and other
openings shall be closed or shall be self-closing. Exceptions:
(1) Corridors in occupancies, other than high-hazard occupancies,
which are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system.
(2) Patient room doors in corridors in health-care occupancies where
smoke barriers are provided in accordance with the Fire
Prevention Code are not required to be self-closing.
(3) Corridors in educational occupancies where each room that is
occupied for instruction or assembly purposes has at least 1/2 of
the required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior
of the building at ground level.
(4) Corridors that are in compliance with the Building Code.
G. Dead-end travel distance. All corridors that serve more than one exit
shall provide direct connection to such exits. The length of a dead-end
corridor shall not exceed 35 feet (10,668 mm) where the building is not
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. The dead-end
§ 151-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-84
1:401
travel distance limitation shall be increased to 70 feet (21,336 mm)
where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system. Exception: dead ends that are in compliance with the Building
Code.
H. Aisles. Arrangements of chairs or tables and chairs shall provide for
ready access by aisle accessways and aisles to each egress door. The
minimum clear width of each aisle in assembly, educational and health
care occupancies shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Building Code. In all other occupancies, aisles shall
have a minimum required clear width of 44 inches (1,118 mm) where
serving an occupant load greater than 50, and 36 inches (914 mm)
where serving an occupant load of 50 or less. The clear width of aisles
shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or other objects.
I. Stairways, handrails and guards. Every exterior and interior flight of
means of egress stairs serving any building or portion thereof and
having more than four risers shall have a handrail on at least one side of
the stair. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck,
ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be
less than 30 inches (762 mm) nor more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high,
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished
floor of the landing or walking surface. Guards shall not be less than 30
inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch,
deck, ramp or other walking surface. Exceptions:
(1) Guards are not required at any location where guards are
exempted by the Building Code.
(2) Stairways, handrails and guards that are in compliance with the
Building Code.
J. Stairway identification. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in
all interior stairways more than three stories above grade, designating
the floor level above the floor of exit discharge. All elevator lobby call
stations on all floor levels shall be identified by approved signs in
accordance with the requirements for new buildings in the Building
Code. Exception: The emergency sign shall not be required for
elevators that are part of an accessible means of egress complying with
the building code.
K. (Reserved)
L. Emergency escape. Every sleeping room located below the third story
in residential and group home occupancies shall have at least one
openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or
rescue or shall have access to not less than two approved independent
exits.
(1) Security. Bars, grilles or screens placed over emergency escape
windows shall be releasable or removable from the inside without
§ 151-84 AMHERST CODE § 151-84
1:402
§ 151-85. Accumulations and storage.
§ 151-86. Fire-resistance ratings.
§ 151-87. Fire-protection systems.
the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required
for normal operation of the window.
A. Accumulations. Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not be stored
or allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows,
fire escapes or other means of egress.
B. Hazardous material. Combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or
combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be
accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the applicable
requirements of the Building Code and the Fire Prevention Code.
A. General. The fire-resistance rating of floors, walls, ceilings and other
elements and components required by the Building Code shall be
maintained.
B. Maintenance. All required fire doors and smoke barriers shall be
maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for
the proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall not be held open by door
stops, wedges and other unapproved hold-open devices.
A. General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an
alarm or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
Fire Prevention Code.
B. Fire-suppression system. Fire-suppression systems shall be maintained
in proper operating condition at all times. Fire-suppression systems
located in vacant spaces of partially occupied structures shall be
maintained in proper operating conditions at all times or as otherwise
approved by the code official.
C. Standpipe systems. Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Hose connections shall be
unobstructed. Standpipe systems located in vacant spaces of partially
occupied structures shall be maintained in proper operating conditions
at all times or as otherwise approved by the code official.
D. Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible,
provided with ready access thereto and maintained in an efficient and
safe operating condition. Extinguishers shall be of an approved type.
E. Smoke detectors.
§ 151-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-87
1:403
(1) Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with all applicable New York State codes, rules, regulations, laws,
ordinances, etc.
(2) Tampering. Anyone tampering or interfering with the effectiveness
of a smoke detector shall be in violation of this article.
F. Fire alarm systems. Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times.
§ 151-87 AMHERST CODE § 151-87
1:404
Chapter 152
PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal opioid cost recovery and public
nuisances — See Ch. 153.
§ 152-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be called entitled "Town of Amherst Public Nuisance
Abatement Law."
§ 152-2. Intent.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that a small percentage of
persons who own or control real property in the Town of Amherst have
allowed their property to be used for illegal purposes, or have otherwise
failed to properly maintain their property in accordance with the Town
Code of the Town of Amherst and/or the New York State Uniform
Building and Fire Code. Where the violations are habitual, these
properties interfere with the comfort, health, solitude and quality of life
of the individuals residing in the neighborhood; they have created a
significant impact upon the living conditions in the Town's
neighborhoods; and, they have raised justifiable concerns about public
safety. Chronic public nuisance activities have been found to contribute
to the general decay of affected neighborhoods, which result in a
lowering the value of surrounding properties.
B. As a result of the activities occurring at these properties, and/or the
conditions in which they are maintained, these properties tend to
receive and require more than the general, acceptable level of Police
and Code Enforcement services. As a result they place an undue and
inappropriate burden on the Town of Amherst taxpayers. The Town
Board of the Town of Amherst has determined that existing laws do not
sufficiently encourage such property owners to take reasonable steps to
abate the nuisances that their property is creating, and has determined
that enhanced penalties will give such property owners additional
incentives to ameliorate the said problems, and help to compensate the
Town for the increase in Code Enforcement services.
C. This local law is enacted to encourage property owners to recognize
their responsibility to ensure that activities occurring on their property
conform to the law and do not adversely affect their neighborhoods,
unduly burden the Town's Code Enforcement resources and to provide
a mechanism for the Town to take action against property owners who
fail to ensure property they own does not require a disproportionate
level of Code Enforcement resources to be devoted to such property.
§ 151-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:405
§ 152-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Amherst Police Department
or any person designated by the Chief of Police as his or her designee in the
enforcement of this Chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, company,
corporation, or entity capable of owning or using property in the Town of
Amherst.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes, but shall not be limited to:
This Chapter is not intended to discourage crime victims or a person
in legitimate need of police services from requesting them. This section
does not affect a property owner's duty to comply with all other laws
governing residential tenancies which are contained in the New York
State Statutes.
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal
use, possession or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
the New York State Penal Law.
(1)
Any building, structure or real property used for the purposes of
prostitution as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
(2)
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of indecency,
obscene performances and/or promotion of obscene material as defined
by the New York State Penal Law and this Code.
(3)
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of illegal
gambling activity as defined in the New York State Penal Law.
(4)
Any building, structure or real property used for the purpose of illegal
sale, manufacture or consumption of alcohol beverages as defined by
the New York State Alcohol Beverage Control Law.
(5)
Any building, structure or real property wherein there exists or has
occurred a criminal nuisance as defined by the New York State Penal
Law.
(6)
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of loitering
as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
(7)
Any building, structure or real property wherein an occupant, guest or
business invitee commits criminal activities, including but not limited
to, assault, harassment or disorderly conduct, as said criminal activities
are defined by the New York State Penal Law.
(8)
§ 152-2 AMHERST CODE § 152-3
1:406
§ 152-4. Nuisance forbidden.
No owner, operator, manager, agent in control, tenant, lessee or other
occupier of a building, structure or real property shall knowingly conduct,
maintain, permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance at the building,
structure or real property.
§ 152-5. Presumption of knowledge.
Notice by first class mail, or personal service, of activities entailing a public
nuisance to the property owner, operator, manager, agent in control, tenant,
lessee or other occupier of a building, structure or real property shall be
prima facie evidence of knowledge of the public nuisance.
§ 152-6. Criminal convictions as presumption of the existence of a
public nuisance.
The existence of two (2) or more criminal convictions for any of the activities
set forth in the definition of a public nuisance in § 152-3 at any building,
structure or real property within a two (2) year period prior to the
commencement of a civil action shall be prima facie evidence of the
existence of a public nuisance. A criminal conviction shall be defined as the
entry of a plea of guilty to or a verdict of guilty for one (1) or more counts
set forth in an accusatory instrument.
§ 152-7. Other evidence of prohibited conduct as presumption of
the existence of a public nuisance.
The existence of two (2) or more incidents of the following activities at any
building, structure or real property within a two (2) year period prior to
the commencement of a civil action shall be prima facie evidence of the
existence of a public nuisance.
Any building, structure or real property used for purposes of a business,
activity or enterprise which is not licensed as required by federal, state
or local law and/or ordinance.
(9)
(1) Arrest for any of the activities set forth in the definition of a "public
nuisance" in § 152-3 occurring on or near the property.
(2) Service of an accusatory instrument charging any of the activities set
forth in the definition of a "public nuisance" in § 152-3 occurring on or
near the property.
(3) Service of a search warrant on the building, structure or real property
where controlled substances and/or weapons are seized.
(4) Finding of illegal controlled substances or illegal firearms or weapons
on the building, structure or real property.
(5) Investigative purchases of illegal controlled substances on the building,
structure or real property by law enforcement agencies or their agents.
§ 152-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-8
1:407
§ 152-8. Summons and complaint for civil action.
§ 152-9. Civil penalty.
If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for
summary judgment, a finding is made that defendants have conducted,
maintained, permitted or allowed a public nuisance, a penalty may be
awarded in an amount not to exceed One Thousand Dollars and Zero Cents
($1,000.00) for each day it is found that defendants conducted, maintained,
permitted or allowed the public nuisance after notice to abate had been
given by the Town. Upon recovery, such penalty shall be paid into the
General Town Fund.
§ 152-10. Permanent injunction.
(a) The Town Attorney may bring and maintain a civil action in the name of
the Town to abate a public nuisance and shall commence the civil action
by the filing of a summons and complaint in the manner required by
New York State Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
(b) The summons and complaint or petition shall name as defendants the
building, structure or real property by describing it by Tax Map Number
and/or street address and shall name as defendants at least one (1) of
the owners of some portion of, or having some interest in the property.
(c) Any owner, operator, manager, tenant, lessee or other occupier of the
building, structure or real property may also be named as a defendant.
(d) The complaint shall allege the facts constituting the public nuisance.
(e) The complaint shall be accompanied by affidavits for purposes of
showing that the owner or his/her agent had notice of the nuisance and
had an opportunity to abate the nuisance.
(f) The venue of the action shall be Supreme Court, Erie County.
(g) In the case of a summons and complaint, in rem jurisdiction over the
building, structure or real property shall be completed by affixing the
summons to the building, structure or real property and by mailing the
summons and complaint by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the person in whose name the real property is recorded at
the office of the Town Assessor.
(h) Defendants other than the building, structure or real property shall be
served with the summons and complaint in the manner required by the
New York State Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
(i) With respect to any action commenced or to be commenced, the Town
Attorney may file a notice of pendency pursuant to the New York State
Civil Practice Laws and Rules.
(a) If, upon the trial of an action for a public nuisance or upon a motion for
summary judgment, a finding is made that defendants have conducted,
§ 152-8 AMHERST CODE § 152-10
1:408
§ 152-11. Closing of the building, structure or real property.
maintained, permitted or allowed a public nuisance, a permanent
injunction may be granted.
(b) A permanent injunction may prohibit defendants from conducting,
maintaining, permitting or allowing the public nuisance.
(c) A permanent injunction may authorize agents of the Town to remove
and correct any conditions in violation of this Code. The judgment may
order that the costs of removing and correcting the violations, plus a
charge of fifty percent (50%) as compensation to the Town for
administering, supervising and handling such work, shall be charged
against defendants and awarded to the Town. The judgment may
further order that the costs of removing and correcting the violations,
plus a charge of fifty percent (50%) as compensation to the Town for
administering, supervising and handling such work, shall constitute a
lien against the real property and shall be collected in the same manner
provided by law for the collection of real property taxes within the
Town.
(d) A judgment ordering a permanent injunction may direct the closing of
the building, structure or real property by the Amherst Police
Department, to the extent necessary to abate the nuisance.
(e) A judgment awarding a permanent injunction shall provide for all costs
and disbursements allowed by the Civil Practice Laws and Rules and for
the actual costs, expenses and disbursements of the Town in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action.
(a) If the judgment directs the closing of the building, structure or real
property, the Amherst Police Department shall serve the judgment upon
defendants in the manner required by the Civil Practice Laws and Rules
and shall post a copy of the judgment upon one (1) or more of the doors
at entrances of the building, structure or real property, or in another
conspicuous place on the building, structure or real property.
(b) In addition, the Amherst Police Department shall affix upon one (1) or
more of the doors at entrances of the building, structure or real
property or in another conspicuous place on the building, structure or
real property, a printed notice stating "CLOSED BY COURT ORDER" in
block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone intending to
enter the premises. Mutilation or removal of such posted judgment or
notice while it remains in force will be considered a separate violation
and shall be punishable as contempt of court.
(c) After posting, the Amherst Police Department may then command all
persons present in the building, structure or real property to vacate the
property forthwith. After the building, structure or real property has
been vacated, the Amherst Police Department may secure the premises.
§ 152-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-11
1:409
§ 152-12. Preliminary injunction.
Upon a motion or order to show cause from the Town Attorney and pending
an action for a permanent injunction, a preliminary injunction enjoining
the public nuisance may be granted for any of the relief obtainable by a
permanent injunction.
§ 152-13. Temporary restraining order.
Pending a motion or order to show cause for a preliminary injunction, a
temporary restraining order or a temporary closing order may be granted,
without notice to defendants, for any of the relief obtainable by a permanent
injunction.
§ 152-14. Administrative hearing.
Whenever there is prima facie evidence of a public nuisance at any building,
structure or real property within the Town, the Town Attorney may initiate
an administrative process before a hearing panel as stated herein.
(d) The closing directed by the judgment shall be for such period as the
court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be for a period of
more than a year from the posting of the judgment.
(e) A closing by the Amherst Police Department shall not constitute an act
of possession, ownership or control by the Town.
(1) Service of notice. A notice of the hearing shall be served on all owners
of the building, structure or real property and may also be served on
any known tenants or lessees or other occupiers of the building. The
notice shall be served in the manner required by New York State Civil
Practice Laws and Rules.
(2) Content of notice. The notice shall allege the facts constituting the
public nuisance. The notice shall further contain a time and place for a
hearing to be held before a panel.
(3) Hearing panel. The panel shall consist of a member to be appointed by
the Town's Building Commissioner, a member to be appointed by the
Chief of Police and a member to be appointed by the Town Supervisor
who shall preside at such hearing. Each appointing authority shall be
authorized to appoint himself/herself or any member of his/her staff to
the hearing panel.
(4) Hearing. At the time and place designated in the notice, the Town
Attorney or his/her designee shall present all relevant evidence as to
the existence of a public nuisance at the building, structure or real
property, and as to appropriate remedies. The owners of the building,
structure or real property, or their representatives, shall have the right
to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the Town Attorney or his/
her designee. The owners of the building, structure or real property, or
their representatives, may present any relevant evidence in their
§ 152-11 AMHERST CODE § 152-14
1:410
§ 152-15. Administrative remedies.
The Town Supervisor, or the Town Supervisor's designee, upon receipt of a
finding of fact and recommendation from the panel, shall have the following
powers in regards to the abatement of public nuisances:
Chapter 153
MUNICIPAL OPIOID COST RECOVERY AND PUBLIC
NUISANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisance abatement — See Ch. 152.
§ 153-1. Title.
This Chapter shall be called entitled "Municipal Opioid Cost Recovery and
Public Nuisance."
§ 153-2. Intent.
Addiction to and abuse of opioids is a significant challenge facing the
Town. A cause of this increasing crisis is the overabundance of prescription
opioids. The selling, distributing and prescribing of large amounts of opioids
within the Town has created a public health and safety hazard affecting
the residents of the Town. As a result of the opioid epidemic, costs related
to healthcare, community services, criminal justice, addiction and
rehabilitation and many other areas have significantly increased. Many of
these costs are paid by the Town.
defense. The Town Attorney, or his/her designee, shall have the right to
cross-examine any witnesses presented by the owners of the building,
structure or real property, or their representatives.
(5) The panel's finding and recommendation: within five (5) days of the
hearing, the panel shall provide a finding of fact to the Town Supervisor
or the Town Supervisor's designee. The finding of fact shall state
whether there is prima facie evidence of the existence of a public
nuisance at the building, structure or real property. The panel shall
further provide a written recommendation of remedies to abate the
public nuisance.
(1) To suspend or revoke, for a period not to exceed one (1) year, the
certificate of occupancy for the building, structure or real property.
(2) To order the closing of the building, structure or real property by the
Amherst Police Department, to the extent necessary to abate the
nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth above in § 152-11.
§ 152-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:411
§ 153-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COSTS — All expenditures related to the opioid epidemic that directly or
indirectly arise from the Town's response to a responsible party's action or
inaction.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person or entity whose negligent, intentional,
or otherwise wrongful conduct causes the incident resulting in the Town
incurring costs or who is found liable or made responsible by a court for the
costs incurred by the Town in the form of damages, regardless of the cause
of action.
§ 153-4. Governmental Function Cost Recovery.
The Town may recover the costs of governmental functions related to
opioids marketed, sold, manufactured, dispensed, prescribed and/or
distributed by the responsible party. If a responsible party fails to pay
the costs demanded, the Town may initiate and recover costs through
administrative, civil and/or criminal action against the responsible party. In
that case, the Town may also recover attorney's fees, interest and any other
payment or type of damages the court deems proper.
§ 153-5. Effect of Criminal or Civil Proceedings on Governmental
Function Cost Recovery.
The initiation of administrative or civil proceedings for governmental
function cost recovery does not bar the criminal prosecution of a
responsible party for any associated violation. Similarly, criminal
prosecution does not bar civil collection of costs for the violation giving rise
to the criminal prosecution.
§ 153-6. Public Nuisance.
The Town hereby finds and declares the following:
1. That addiction to and abuse of opioids is a significant challenge facing
the Town;
2. A cause of this increasing crisis is the overabundance of prescription
opioids. Vast amounts of prescription opioid pain pills have been and
continue to be sold, distributed and prescribed in the Town
3. There is evidence showing that heroin users began their addiction by
first using and then misusing prescription pain medications containing
opioids;
4. The selling, distributing, and prescribing of large amounts of opioid
pain pills in the Town has created a public health and safety hazard
affecting the residents of the Town, resulting in devastation to Town
§ 153-3 AMHERST CODE § 153-6
1:412
§ 153-7. Retroactive Application.
This legislation applies retroactively.
Chapter 155
RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 155-1. Fees to be charged for land development.
In order to ensure appropriate and adequate recreation and open space
facilities within the Town of Amherst, it is determined that a fee shall be
charged in connection with all land developments to provide funds for those
purposes. The fee shall consist of two elements: one relating to recreation
and the other to open space facilities. The amount of the fee imposed relates
to the effect the proposed development will have upon the need for such
facilities.
families, a negative effect on the Town economy, wasted public
resources and narcotic dependence by some of its residents;
5. That selling, distributing and prescribing of prescription opioid pain
pills is a hazard to public health and safety, which has created a public
nuisance to the citizens of the Town and that nuisance remains
unabated;
6. That, in addition to all other powers and duties now conferred by law
upon the Town, the Town is authorized to enact ordinances, issue
orders and take other appropriate and necessary actions for the
elimination of hazards to public health and safety and to abate or cause
to be abated anything which the commission determines to be a public
nuisance;
7. That manufacturers of prescription opioids and those in the chain of
distribution have wrongfully abused the privilege of selling and/or
providing medication to the Town's residents and must be held
accountable; and
8. That it is the duty of the Town to take action to abate this public
nuisance.
§ 153-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:413
§ 155-2. Effect on statutory provisions.
This chapter supersedes that part of Subdivision 1 of § 277 of the Town
Law of the State of New York which provides for showing a park or parks
on subdivision plats for playground or other recreational purposes when
required by the Planning Board and which further authorizes the Planning
Board to require as a condition to approval of any such plat a payment to the
Town of a sum to be determined by the Town Board in lieu of the location of
a suitable park or parks within one area of any such plat.
§ 155-3. Fees established. [Amended 2-23-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
The following fees for recreation and open space purposes are established:
Fees for Recreation and Open Space
Use Open Space Recreation
Detached dwellings, per unit $230 $500
Lot area 11,500 square feet or
larger
Lot area from 8,450 square feet to
11,499 square feet
$195 $350
Lot less than 8,450 square feet $130 $250
CR3A lots $130 $350
Mobile homes $195 $350
Attached dwellings, per unit
Senior citizen $130 $65
Other $130 $200
Industrial
RD, ST, OB $0.13 per
square foot
*
GI $0.195 per
square foot
*
Commercial $0.156 per
square foot
*
Community facilities $0.104 per
square foot
*
NOTE:
* The open space element of the fee is based on the gross floor area
of each building on a lot. No recreation element of the fee is charged
since these developments do not generate any demand for recreational
facilities.
§ 155-4. Imposition and collection of fees.
§ 155-2 AMHERST CODE § 155-4
1:414
§ 155-5. Dedication of land in lieu of fees.
An applicant for site plan or subdivision approval may propose the
dedication of a parcel of land within or without the area for which
development approval is being sought for open space or recreation
purposes in lieu of the payment of the fees herein established. If the
Planning Board determines that the land offered for dedication to the Town
is suitably located for open space or recreation purposes and that the value
thereof is at least equal to the amount of the recreation and open space
fees which would otherwise be due, it can recommend to the Town Board
that it accept an offer of dedication. If the Town Board accepts the offer
of dedication, the open space and recreation fees otherwise required shall
be waived. The Planning Board may recommend to the Town Board the
establishment of conditions in connection with the acceptance of the offer of
dedication. The Town Board shall have the right, in any event, to establish
conditions in connection with such dedication as it deems appropriate.
§ 155-6. Disposition of collected fees.
The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a trust fund to
be used by the Town exclusively for the acquisition of land for and equipping
of open space and recreation facilities.
§ 155-7. Modification of fee schedule.
The fee schedule established by this chapter may be modified by the Town
Board from time to time by resolution.
§ 155-8. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any person or lands is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall
A. The fees established in § 155-3 shall be imposed on all developments of
the types enumerated approved by the Planning Board through the site
plan or subdivision process after the effective date of this chapter. The
Town Clerk shall collect the fee as building permits are issued following
site plan or final subdivision plat approval. Those fees are also imposed
on the development of lots not subject to site plan or subdivision review
and shall be collected by the Town Clerk upon the issuance of a building
permit for a principal structure. [Amended 2-27-1989 by L.L. No.
2-1989]
B. The fees established in § 155-3 shall apply to development of lands for
which building permits are issued on and after January 1, 1990,
pursuant to site plan or final subdivision plat approvals granted prior to
the effective date of this chapter, and the Town Clerk shall collect the
fees at the time such building permits are issued. The amount of any
recreation fee paid prior to the effective date of this chapter pursuant to
§ 277 of the Town Law with respect to the lands then being developed
shall be allowed as a credit against those fees.
§ 155-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-8
1:415
not affect other sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof
which can be sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or
provision or application, and to this end the various sections, clauses and
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 155-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 157
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling, soliciting, transient businesses and
mobile food vending — See Ch. 148.
§ 157-1. Definitions.
DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other
entity and any principal, employee, agent or servant thereof engaged in
or conducting business for the purchase, sale, barter, exchange or pawn
of junk, antiques, secondhand articles and personal property, gold, silver,
platinum and other precious metals, gems and precious and semiprecious
stones or secondhand automotive vehicles.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any dealer who, either wholly or in part,
engages in or operates the trade or business of buying, selling, trading,
bartering or exchanging secondhand personal property, including
household goods and appliances, gold, silver and other precious metals, any
tools, fixtures, electrical devices and bric-a-brac.
§ 157-2. Certain Goods to be Held Before Sale; Exemptions.
A. Every secondhand dealer in jewelry, diamonds, watches, rings, furs,
gold, silver and plated ware shall hold said goods for a period of twenty
one (21) days from the time of purchase and shall not resell the same
until the expiration of said period. Every secondhand dealer in clothing
and tools shall hold said goods for twenty one (21) days and shall not
resell the same until the expiration of said period.
B. Dealers in jewelry and kindred merchandise who buy, sell or deal
principally in new merchandise and who occasionally acquire
secondhand jewelry, diamonds, watches, rings, gold, silver and plated
ware in the course of their business shall hold said good for twenty one
(21) days and shall not resell the same until the expiration of said
period.
§ 155-8 AMHERST CODE § 157-2
1:416
Chapter 158
SEWER RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
C. Any goods in this section which are acquired by an authorized licensed
dealer from another authorized licensed dealer who has held them for
the required twenty-one-day period shall be exempt from this holding
period.
D. Any person who violates or causes or participates in the violation of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not
exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or to imprisonment
for not more than fifteen (15) days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment. Notwithstanding the penalties herein provided, the
Town of Amherst may enforce obedience to this chapter or any part
thereof by injunction to restrain the violation thereof.
§ 157-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:417

ARTICLE I
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 9-17-1979 by L.L. No. 5-197929]
§ 158-1. Establishment of scale of annual charges.
A scale of annual charges is hereby established and imposed in all sanitary
sewer districts of the Town of Amherst for the use of the district's sanitary
sewer system or any part or parts thereof.30
§ 158-2. Computation of charges.
Such charges shall be computed annually, shall be based upon the
consumption volume of water on premises connected with and served by
the district sewer system or such part thereof.
§ 158-3. Collection.
Sewer rents, except as may be otherwise provided, shall become due and
payable and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
general Town taxes, as provided by law.
§ 158-4. Power to modify scale.
The Town Board, by resolution, shall have the power to change or modify
the scale of sewer rents.
§ 158-5. Effective date.
This article shall take effect January 1, 1980.
29.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Sanitary Sewer District No. 1,
adopted 4-6-1959, effective 4-20-1959.
30.Editor's Note: L.L. No. 1-1981, adopted 1-19-1981, established sanitary sewer rent rates
for the year 1981. Said local law and all local laws adopted subsequent thereto are on file
in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:419

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Drainage District Nos. 4, 6 and 26
[Adopted 10-18-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971]
§ 158-6. Persons affected.
This article shall apply to and affect all persons, firms, partnerships,
corporations or associations hereinafter referred to as "person," owning
real property in the Town of Amherst and located in Stormwater Drainage
Districts No. 4, 6 or 26.
§ 158-7. Rates established. [Amended 9-29-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975]
All said owners shall be charged storm drainage rentals at the time of
applying for a building permit according to the following schedules.
A. Residential structures. No charge for accessory structures.
(1) Detached units: $120 each unit.
(2) Attached units: $80 each unit.
B. All other structures. The charge shall be based upon land area covered
by structures, including areas paved for parking, drives and other
purposes.
Area
(square feet)
Charge
(per square foot)
First 5,000 $0.035
(minimum charge $70)
Next 5,000 (5,001 to 10,000) $0.030
Next 15,000 (10,001 to 25,000) $0.025
Next 25,000 (25,001 to 50,000) $0.020
Next 25,000 (50,001 to 75,000) $0.015
Next 25,000 (75,001 to 100,000) $0.010
Next 100,000 (100,001 to 200,000) $0.005
Area in excess of 200,000 No additional charge
C. Additions. No charge shall be imposed for additions to residential
structures or paved areas in connection therewith. For additions to
other types of structures and paved areas for parking, drives or other
purposes in connection therewith, the charge shall be based upon the
land area covered by the existing structures and paved area plus those
to be constructed according to Subsection B less the amount
attributable to the existing land area covered.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-8
1:421
§ 158-8. Date rates apply. [Added 9-29-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975]
The rental rates established under § 158-7, as amended, shall apply to all
building permits applied for on and after June 1, 1974. The owner of any
land with respect to which a building permit was applied for on or after June
1, 1974, may apply for a refund of that portion of any rental rate charged
which exceeds the amount established under § 158-7, as amended. The
application for the refund must be made to the Building Commissioner prior
to January 1, 1976. Upon approval by the Commissioner, the Comptroller is
authorized to pay the refund and charge it to the drainage district involved.
§ 158-9. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 158-8 AMHERST CODE § 158-9
1:422
Chapter 160
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Industrial cost recovery system — See Ch.
126.
Sewer rates — See Ch. 158.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 172.
§ 158-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-9
1:423

Part 1
[Adopted 1-17W-1a9st9e5wBatyeLr .CL.o lNleoc. t1io-1n9 A9n5d; ATmreeantmdeedn Itn Its Entirety
6-19-2017 By L.L. No. 15-2017]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 160-1. Purpose and policy.
This Part 1 sets forth requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works of the Town of Amherst and enables the Town to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act
(United States Code, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (Code of Federal Regulations, 40 CFR 403). It is further the
explicit purpose of this Part 1 to achieve the following:
§ 160-2. Applicability and interpretation of provisions;
administration.
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment
works inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works.
C. To protect publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment
and the general public.
D. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works.
E. To establish fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works.
F. To enable the Town of Amherst to comply with its state pollutant
discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
G. To eliminate the discharge of unpolluted waters into the POTW.
A. This Part 1 shall apply to all direct and indirect dischargers of wastes
into the facilities of the Town of Amherst, including those users outside
the Town who are by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the
Town's facilities. This Part 1 also authorizes the issuance of wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:425
§ 160-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this Part 1, shall have the
designated meanings:
BAD Bioaccumulative and Durable Substances
BMP Best Management Practices
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, Oils and Grease
GI Grease Interceptor
GT Grease Trap
GPD Gallons per day
IU Industrial user
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
OS Oil Separator
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
SSO Sanitary Sewer Overflow
TSS Total suspended solids
ug/1 Micrograms per liter
U.S.C. United States Code
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
B. The Town Engineer and the Commissioner of Building, as provided
herein, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
Part 1. The Town Engineer shall supervise the operation of the POTW
and the pretreatment program.
C. The provisions of this Part 1 shall be interpreted in accordance with the
definitions set forth in § 160-4 hereof.
§ 160-2 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:426
§ 160-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this Part 1 shall be as follows:
ABNORMAL-STRENGTH SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER — Sewage which,
when analyzed, shows, by concentration, a daily average greater than the
following, which may be acceptable into a sanitary sewer under terms of
this Part 1:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — A fee established by the Town of Amherst and
levied against a user as a result of a violation(s) against provisions of
this local sewer use law. Administrative fees are used to compensate the
Town of Amherst for costs incurred for rectifying a situation which causes
a blockage or interference with the sewer system, as well as for any
additional inspection, follow-up, sampling, monitoring, lab analysis and/or
other administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director of the State of New York
Pretreatment Program or the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
A. Biological oxygen demand (BOD5): 200 mg/l.
B. Total suspended solids (TSS): 250 mg/l.
C. Total phosphorous (P): 4.4 mg/l.
D. Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN): 21.7 mg/l.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2)
A.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his/her
designee.
C.
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:427
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Schedule of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(1) and
(b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
BOD5 — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING COMBINED DRAIN — A building drain which conveys both
sewage and stormwater.
BUILDING COMBINED SEWER — A building sewer which conveys both
sewage and stormwater. The building storm sewer terminates at the public
sewer.
BUILDING (HOUSE) DRAIN — That part of the lowest piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge of soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys such discharges to the building
sewer.
BUILDING (HOUSE) SEWER — That part of the drainage system which
extends from the end of the building drain and conveys its discharges to
a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other
approved point of disposal.
BUILDING SANITARY DRAIN — A building drain which conveys sewage but
does not convey stormwater.
BUILDING SANITARY SEWER — A building sewer which conveys sewage
but does not convey stormwater. The building storm sewer terminates at the
public sewer.
BUILDING STORM DRAIN — A building drain which conveys stormwater
but does not convey sewage.
BUILDING STORM SEWER — A building sewer which conveys stormwater
but does not convey sewage. The building storm sewer terminates at the
public sewer.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the Town.
D.
§ 160-4 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:428
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Private establishments such as
restaurants, hotels, stores, automotive service stations, laundromats or
recreational facilities and all other nonresidential occupancies. Private
nonprofit entities such as churches, schools, hospitals or charitable
organizations are considered to be commercial establishments.
COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — The Commissioner of Building of the
Town of Amherst or his assigns.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A combination of individual grab samples of a
waste stream collected within a twenty-four-hour period. For all pollutants
subject to composite sampling requirements, twenty-four-hour flow
proportional composite samples shall be obtained when feasible. If twentyfour-
hour flow proportional composite samples are not feasible, the Town
Engineer may allow the collection of time proportional composite samples.
In no case may a composite sample be composed from fewer than four grab
samples. In all cases the individual grab samples must be adequately spaced
so as to ensure a sample that is representative of the user's daily operations.
CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS FOR AMHERST SEWER DISTRICTS
— The standard list of materials, specifications and standard details of
construction as provided by the Town of Amherst Engineering Department
and approved by the Amherst Town Board.
DISTRICT — A service area within or outside the boundaries of the Town of
Amherst which is tributary to the Amherst wastewater facilities.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations that are discharged to or otherwise enter a sewage treatment
works.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of
said Agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to
such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG) — Any substance such as vegetable or
animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food
preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidify with
change in temperature or other condition.
FLOW VOLUME — The quantity of wastewater or liquid over a specified
period of time.
FOOD GRINDER — Any device installed in the plumbing or sewer system
for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for
the purpose of disposing of it in the sewer system.
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:429
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR (GI) — A device, usually located underground and
outside between an establishment and the connection to the sewer system,
designated to collect, contain and remove food waste and grease from
the process waste stream while allowing the remaining wastewater to be
discharged to the collection system. To be effective, these devices must be
cleaned, maintained, and have FOG removed and disposed of in a proper
manner on regular intervals.
GROUNDWATER — All subsurface water, that part which is in the zone of
saturation.
HIS — The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular
shall include the plural unless indicated otherwise.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The solid and liquid wastes from industrial
processes, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastewaters.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURCHARGE — A financial charge levied on
industrial users of the wastewater system for the additional cost of treating
abnormal strength wastewater.
INFILTRATION — Water entering the sewer system, including sewer system
connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections or manholes.
INFLOW — Water entering a sewer system through a direct storm water/
runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost
immediate increase in wastewater flows.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Town's SPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405
of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;
the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
§ 160-4 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:430
MANIFEST — That receipt or form which is retained by the generator of
wastes for disposing recyclable wastes, hazardous wastes, or liquid wastes
as required by the Town of Amherst. For purposes related to FOG control,
manifest generally means, the receipt from disposal of FOG waste from a
grease interceptor.
MAY — Is permissive.
MEDICAL WASTE — Any red-bag wastes, including but not limited to
isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet that is present in and produced by nature.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:431
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
NYSUFPBC — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
OIL SEPARATOR (OS) — A device, usually located underground and outside
between an establishment and the connection to the sewer system,
designed to collect, contain and remove waste oil from the process waste
stream while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the
collection system. To be effective, these devices must be cleaned,
maintained and have FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on
regular intervals.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the Town's SPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERMITTEE — A person who has received a permit to discharge
wastewater into the Town of Amherst sewer system subject to requirements
and conditions established by the Town of Amherst.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in moles per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
§ 160-4 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:432
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — An employee of the Town of Amherst
who oversees the pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 160-6 of this Part 1.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned
by the Town. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which the Town controls.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water into which
treated or untreated wastewater is discharged.
RECOMMENDED STANDARDS FOR SEWAGE WORKS — The
recommended design, review and approval standards for wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, as published by the Great Lakes Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers.
RESIDENTIAL — A property type not commercial or industrial in
classification containing a single family, multi-family or apartment building.
SAMPLE POINT — A location approved by the Town Engineer or
Pretreatment Coordinator from which wastewater can be collected that is
representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater
being sampled.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries wastewater and to
which stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO) — An overflow of untreated
wastewater from the sanitary sewer system.
SEPTAGE — The contents of a septic tank, cesspool or other nonpublic
wastewater treatment facility which receives sanitary sewage or waste.
SERVICE AREA — Any area contributing wastewater to the Town of
Amherst wastewater facilities.
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:433
SEWAGE (DOMESTIC) — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
activities that is discharged to or otherwise enters a POTW.
SEWAGE (NON-DOMESTIC) — Waste and wastewater from a commercial
or industrial process that is discharged to or otherwise enters a sewage
treatment POTW.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER LATERAL — Sewer Lateral (or Building Sewer) shall mean that
part of the generally horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends
from the end of the Building Drain and which receives the discharge of the
Building Drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, individual
sewer disposal system or other point of disposal. The Sewer Lateral begins
at the way or point of connection with the public sewer, private sewer,
individual sewer disposal system or other point of disposal and terminates
at the point of connection to the Building Drain two feet outside the building
wall.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SLUG or SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch
discharge, which has reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass
Through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.
SPILL POTENTIAL USER — Any user who uses or stores substances that
may inadvertently be spilled into the Town of Amherst sewer system and
A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(1)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(2)
Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3)
B.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection B(2) has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may
at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.
C.
§ 160-4 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:434
which potentially have an adverse impact on the sewer system and/or the
Town's wastewater facilities.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
(SPDES) — A permit issued by the State of New York to discharge directly
to surface water.
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling waters.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and such solids are removable
by laboratory filtration.
TAMPER — To interfere with or bring about an improper situation or
condition, which includes, without limitation, covering or concealing a
sanitary manhole cover, or any other practice which hinders access to the
same.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Amherst and shall include
the members of the Town Board acting in their capacities as Commissioners
of the sewer districts.
TOWN ENGINEER — The Town Engineer of the Town of Amherst or his
assigns.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in any regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE — Shall include, but not be limited to, drainage
from any catch basin, lake, swamp, pond, swimming pool, outlet for surface
runoff or groundwater, which contain no wastes or wastewaters.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous substance that might be discharged
or discarded into a public sewer.
WASTE HAULER — Any person carrying or engaged in vehicular transport
of waste as part of or incidental to, any business for that purpose.
WASTE MINIMIZATION PRACTICE — Plans or programs intended to
reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve house
water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping
practices, inventory control, employee education, and other steps to
minimize wastewater produced.
WASTEWATER — A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:435
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and
stormwaters that may be present.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters,
including volume and flow rate and such parameters that serve to define,
classify or measure quality and quantity of wastewater.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit to discharge industrial
waste into any sanitary sewer under jurisdiction of the Town or, in a
contracted service area, under the jurisdiction of the Town and the
contracted service area.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
that collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
disposes of the waste residuals.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 160-4 AMHERST CODE § 160-4
1:436
ARTICLE II
General Sewer Use Requirements
§ 160-5. Use of public sewers; installation of sanitary drains.
A. Use of public sewers required. [Amended 11-19-2018 by L.L. No.
25-2018]
(1) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Town of Amherst any sewage or polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1, and except where an appropriate New
York State pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit
has been applied for and been received. A valid copy of such a
permit and any modifications thereof must be filed with the Town
Engineer.
(2) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein as specified in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1
provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the premises
on which the building is located, measured along a street in the
case of one- or two-family dwellings and within 500 feet for
premises containing any other occupancies, and provided that a
connection may be made lawfully thereto.
(3) Buildings constructed in areas of the Town without public sewers
may be connected to a private septic system complying with all
laws and regulations of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and the Erie County Department of
Health. Such private septic tank systems shall be constructed,
maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner and in
compliance with all rules and guidelines of the aforementioned
agencies. Construction, alterations and maintenance shall be
performed in conformance with the appropriate County health
codes and other applicable regulations and only after obtaining
necessary permits.
Within 90 days from the date an available public sewer is located
within the limits described in subsection 2 above, the owner of said
property served by a private septic system shall directly connect
structures and discharge points on the property to the public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Town of
Amherst Plumbing Code, and any private septic tank system shall
be abandoned and filled in accordance with Erie County and Town
Building Department requirements.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:437
After the public sewer becomes available, no person shall
construct, alter or improve a private septic tank system. The Town
shall not issue a permit for such work. The Town shall notify all
owner or occupiers of the property when the public sewer service
is available, and the times prescribed in this section shall run from
the date of the notice. In no event shall a property with a private
septic tank system be transferred before connection to a public
sewer, if available, at time of sale.
(4) Owners of buildings constructed under these provisions shall,
when making application for a building permit, sign an agreement
to immediately connect to a public sewer when available. Such
agreement is to run with the land.
B. Installation of sanitary drains, sump pumps, and storm drains.
(1) The main sanitary drain for any building shall be hung below the
first floor and exit through the foundation wall to allow six inches
between the basement floor and the pipe invert. All devices
producing wastewater and installed in cellars shall discharge into
the main sanitary drain at a point within the building above the
level of the exterior finished grade.
(2) All buildings having cellars shall have an adequate sump and sump
pump to which any interior or exterior perimeter drain tile and
floor drains shall discharge. The sump pumps shall discharge into a
storm sewer. Weepers located above cellar floor level and through
the cellar walls are not permitted.
(3) All buildings shall have adequate roof gutters and downspouts
connected to storm drains, which also receive the discharge from
sump pumps and from courts, yards and paved areas on the
property. Such storm drains shall discharge into an existing
stormwater sewer, otherwise it may discharge into an existing road
or ditch or other general drainage ditch if approved by the Town.
Where such points of discharge are not available, the
Commissioner of Building will decide the manner in which the
stormwater shall be collected and disposed.
(4) The building sewer shall not be connected to the building drain
until all foundation wall backfill has been made and the roof
construction of the building completed.
(5) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Town of Amherst from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
(6) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building except where special permission is received from
the Commissioner of Building.
§ 160-5 AMHERST CODE § 160-5
1:438
(7) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Commissioner of Building, to meet all requirements of this Part 1.
(8) Septic or holding tanks, which are abandoned, shall be required to
be removed or filled with select fill, concrete or other material
approved by the Commissioner of Building. Commercial and
industrial facilities may need to be sampled and tested prior to
abandonment, in accordance with New York State or Erie County
regulations. Abandoned septic or holding tanks may be converted
for use in a stormwater disposal system approved by the
Commissioner of Building.
(9) The following items and/or operations shall comply with the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, Town specifications and/or recommended standards
for sewage works:
(a) Building and sewer materials.
(b) Slope of building sewers.
(c) Angle, grade and bedding for building sewers.
(d) Pipe laying and backfilling.
(e) Connection of the building sewer to the sanitary sewer.
(10)No footing drains, roof drains or other drains carrying surface
water or groundwater shall be connected to the building or sanitary
sewer. A sump pump shall be provided wherever required to carry
groundwater and surface water to a natural outlet or storm sewer.
(11) The use of a main house trap to buildings shall be required. The
main trap must be provided with a fresh-air inlet to ventilate the
system in which plumbing fixtures are to be placed. The main trap
may be placed either within the cellar or outside of the building. If
an outside trap is used, a wye with a cleanout must be provided
inside the building. A fresh-air pipe must be carried to gradeline
and provided with a suitable vent cap. If an inside trap is used, the
fresh-air vent must connect to the top of the trap with a wye and
one-eighth bend and must run to the outside of the building above
grade. The fresh-air vent shall be at least four inches in diameter.
The fresh-air vent on a trap shall not be placed within 10 feet of an
openable window or door. Traps must be placed at a minimum
depth of 36 inches, or frost protection must be provided.
(12) Saddle-type connections to the main sewers shall be made in a
smooth, round hole, machine drilled. The fitting used shall be made
to ensure that it will not protrude into the main sewer. The fitting
shall fit the contour of the inside of the main sewer and be designed
for the size of pipe into which construction is being made. One-
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:439
eighth-inch clearance shall be provided between the fitting and
the hole and between the shoulder of the fitting and face of the
main pipe. These spaces shall be completely filled with waterproof
joint material capable of withstanding any stress or strain likely
to be encountered in normal sanitary sewer construction or
maintenance. The fitting shall be manufactured of either cast
aluminum alloy, vitrified clay pipe or other material acceptable to
the Town Engineer and shall be capable of receiving all types of
pipe normally used for house service connections.
(13) All excavations for building or sanitary sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the Town Engineer. Ditches and culvert
pipes for storm and surface water or other utilities disturbed
during the installation of sewers shall be replaced to their original
condition. All driveways and parking areas shall be backfilled with
select fill.
(14) Before commencing work in a highway right-of-way, the
appropriate highway department shall be notified and a permit
taken out. Utility companies, as appropriate, shall also be notified.
(15)No connection of sanitary sewer extensions shall be permitted to a
main sewer of the district until infiltration, deflection or other tests
and final inspections have been made and approved by the Town
Board, in writing. The allowable rate of infiltration shall not exceed
200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of sewer per day.
Sewers may be connected to the main sewer system when they are
found upon examination and test to comply with Town
specifications.
(16) Whenever pipe laying is not in progress, the end of the pipe shall be
securely closed with a tight-fitting cover or plug. Any earth or other
material entering the main sewer due to operations of the plumber,
contractor or building owner shall be removed at his expense. All
trenches must be protected by sufficient sheeting and bracing or
other acceptable methods as required by the Town specifications.
(17)Within the highway right-of-way, backfilling and restoration of the
surface shall be in accordance with requirements of the highway
agency having jurisdiction.
(18) An earthen dam made of suitable clay material shall be installed in
the trench of the building sewer per Town specifications. The dam
shall be 24 inches in length and located midway between the main
sewer and the house trap. The purpose of this dam is to prevent the
conduction of the groundwater through the stone trench of the
building sewer. Additional dams as ordered by the Plumbing
§ 160-5 AMHERST CODE § 160-5
1:440
§ 160-6. Prohibited discharges.
Inspector may be required where poor ground conditions or high
groundwater elevations exist.
A. General prohibitions.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or uncontaminated cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
(2) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to
other approved drainage facilities. Industrial noncontact cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Town Engineer, to a storm sewer or other drainage
facilities. It must be strictly understood that where approval is
given for discharge, a New York State SPDES permit may be
required.
(3) No user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, either directly
or indirectly to any public sewers, any substance or wastewater
which causes pass-through or interferes with the operation or
performance of the Town's wastewater facilities. In addition, no
user shall discharge any substance which will cause the Town to
violate its SPDES permit, receiving water quality standards, or
contaminate the Town's sewage sludge to an extent which restricts
sludge disposal options. These general prohibitions also apply to all
nondomestic users of the Town's facilities whether or not the user
is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following substances and wastewater are
specifically prohibited from discharge into the Town's facilities:
(1) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.5,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel involved with the
Town's wastewater facilities.
(2) Any liquid or vapor containing heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment facility and cause
interference with the treatment process, but in no case shall heat
be in such quantities that the temperature at the Town's
wastewater treatment works influent exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
(3) Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at 0° C. (32° F.); also,
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-6
1:441
(4) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(5) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(6) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(7) Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size, capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in
interference, but in no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
(8) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Town's SPDES
permit.
(9) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
(10) Volumes of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs.
(11) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Town Engineer in accordance with § 160-15 of
this Part 1.
(12) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
(13) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Town
Engineer in a wastewater discharge permit.
(14)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(15) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(16) At the point of discharge into the POTW, wastewater causing two
readings on an explosion hazard meter of more than 10% or any
single reading over 20% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
(17)Wastes that do not require separation (i.e. urinals, toilets, catch
basins, etc.) to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor/grease
trap services.
§ 160-6 AMHERST CODE § 160-6
1:442
§ 160-7. National categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 160-8. State pretreatment standards.
(Reserved)
(18) Any additives into the Town of Amherst wastewater system for the
purpose of emulsifying FOG or biologically/chemically treating
FOG for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor
maintenance, unless a specific written authorization from the Town
Engineer or Pretreatment Coordinator is obtained.
(19) Any waste, including FOG and solid materials, removed from the
grease control device or solids interceptor to the sewer system.
(20) Any grease trap or interceptor with direct discharge to the Town of
Amherst sewer collection system without the approval of the Town
of Amherst Plumbing Department and the Town of Amherst
Engineering Department.
A. Any promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Part 1 if
more stringent than these limitations for sources in a particular
industrial category. The Town Engineer shall notify all affected users of
the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
B. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated. As new
categorical pretreatment standards are promulgated or existing
categorical standards modified, the Town Engineer, within 30 days of
publication in the Federal Register, shall seek Town Board approval for
incorporation into this Part 1.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Town Engineer may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Town Engineer shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment
standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
§ 160-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-9
1:443
§ 160-9. Local limits.
Local limits will be based on a mass allocation system contained in the
Town of Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual approved
by the Town Board of the Town of Amherst. Mass-based local limits shall
be included in all wastewater discharge permits, for all users required
to be permitted. Discharges, which exceed mass-based local limits, are
prohibited. In addition any user which discharges a pollutant greater than
the unallocated reserve for that pollutant, shall be considered to be in
violation of this Part 1. Further, concentration-based local limits based
on worker health and safety are contained in the Town of Amherst Mass
Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual and shall be included in all
wastewater discharge permits for all users required to be permitted. In
addition, concentration-based local limits applicable to unpermitted
industrial users are contained in this Manual. Discharges, which exceed
concentration-based local limits, are prohibited. The Town of Amherst Mass
Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual and any limits developed through
the use of such Manual are duly enforceable by this Part 1. Any changes
to the Manual must comply with all applicable requirements of 40 CFR
403. The Town of Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual is
available at the Town of Amherst Engineering Department.
§ 160-10. Right of revision.
The Town reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to its wastewater facilities if deemed necessary
to comply with the objectives set forth above.
§ 160-11. Dilution.
A. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement.
B. The Town may impose mass discharge limits on users who are using
dilution to meet any requirement of this Part 1 or in other cases where
the imposition of mass limits is appropriate.
§ 160-9 AMHERST CODE § 160-11
1:444
ARTICLE III
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 160-12. Pretreatment facilities.
The user shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with the provisions of this Part 1, any applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standards, and all other applicable federal, state and local
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the
applicable pretreatment standards, whichever is more stringent. All
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to an applicable level acceptable
to the Town shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Town Board for review, and shall be
approved by the Town Engineer, subject to the requirements of applicable
codes, ordinances and laws, prior to construction of the facility. The
approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the Town under the provisions of this
Part 1. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and approved by the Town Engineer prior to
the user's initiation of the changes.
§ 160-13. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Town Engineer may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams and such other conditions as may be necessary
to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the
requirements of this Part 1.
B. The Town Engineer may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on his/her property and at his/her expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow.
A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
C. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, replaced and
maintained by industrial and commercial users to service all discharges
containing sand, fats, grease or oils as required by the Town Engineer.
All proposed interceptors shall be sized in accordance with specific
sizing criteria established by the Town of Amherst, based on a minimum
detention time of 30 minutes under calculated loads. The installation of
the unit must be installed in accordance with the applicable plumbing
codes and standards. All proposed interceptor installations, including
§ 160-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-13
1:445
retrofits and replacements, must be approved by the Town of Amherst
Engineer.
(1) A food waste grinder is not permitted to discharge into a grease
interceptor unless the interceptor has been designed for such an
application, or unless a solids interceptor has also been installed
upstream of the grease interceptor device.
(2) The interceptor units shall be so located outside of the building to
be easily accessible for cleaning, inspecting and sampling. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, by
the user at his/her expense, to the satisfaction of the Town. If, in the
opinion of the Town Engineer, any existing interceptor units are
undersized or in need of repair, the Town Engineer can order the
industrial or commercial user to replace the existing unit with a
new interceptor meeting the town's requirements.
(3) New and existing grease interceptors and oil separators shall be
maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of
the full contents of the interceptor which includes wastewater,
accumulation FOG, flooding materials, sludges and solids from
interceptor walls, baffles and floors.
(4) All existing and newly installed grease interceptors and oil
separators shall be maintained in a manner consistent with
maintenance frequency approved by the Pretreatment Coordinator
pursuant to this section.
(5) No FOG that has accumulated in the grease interceptors or oil
separator shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer
system, storm drain, or public right of way during maintenance
activities.
(6) If the grease interceptor or oil separator, at any time, contains FOG
and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements
described in this local law, the user shall be required to have the
grease interceptor or oil separator serviced within five (5) business
days such that all fats oils, grease, sludge, and materials, including
water are completely removed from the grease interceptor or oil
separator. If it is determined that an overflow or blockage situation
exists, the interceptor or oil separator shall be serviced
immediately. If deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator
may also require an increase in the maintenance frequency of the
grease interceptor.
(7) Waste water, containing accumulated FOG, floating materials,
sludge/solids and other materials removed from the grease
interceptor, oil separator, grease trap, or other pretreatment device
shall be properly disposed in accordance with federal, state and/or
local laws.
§ 160-13 AMHERST CODE § 160-13
1:446
§ 160-14. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
At least once every two years, the Town Engineer shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The Town Engineer may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Town Engineer may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall address, at a minimum, the following:
§ 160-15. Hauled wastewater.
(8) Rules and regulations regarding the monitoring, reporting,
notification and inspection requirements for grease trap/
interceptor maintenance are available on the Town's website and
shall be followed by users with grease trap/interceptor
installations.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
B. Description of stored chemicals.
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the Town Engineer of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 160-36 of this Part 1.
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include but are not limited to inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
A. All waste haulers and generators must use the Town of Amherst
wastewater discharge permit application and Treatment Schedule
Manual for Hauled Wastewater.
B. All hauled waste shall be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Town Engineer and at such times as are established
by the Town Engineer. Such waste discharge shall not violate any
provision of this Part 1 or any other requirements established by the
Town. The Town Engineer may also prohibit the disposal of hauled
waste at any time for any operational, environmental or safety reason.
C. The Town Engineer shall require all haulers and generators of hauled
waste to obtain Town of Amherst wastewater discharge permits.
D. The Town Engineer may collect samples, and analyze such collected
samples, of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
standards and charge the hauler or generator, all costs attributed to
such sampling and analysis. The Town Engineer may require the waste
hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
§ 160-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-15
1:447
E. All waste haulers must obtain a NYSDEC waste transporter permit.
F. Prior to discharge to the Town, all hauled, nondomestic wastewater
must be certified in writing to be nonhazardous under RCRA by both
the generator and the hauler.
G. If a user located within another municipality hauls wastewater to the
POTW, the Town Board shall enter into a contract with the user. The
contract shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions:
(1) A provision ensuring the Town Engineer the right to enter the users
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting the
entire premises, sampling, examining and copying records, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Town Engineer; and
(2) A provision specifying that the user will be subject to the Town
Board's enforcement powers, as set forth in the Town of Amherst
Local Sewer Use Law.
H. The Town of Amherst will inspect those IUs which are generators of
wastewater hauled to the Town's POTW at a minimum frequency of
once per year.
§ 160-15 AMHERST CODE § 160-15
1:448
ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
§ 160-16. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the Town Engineer, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request. The Town Engineer is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require users to update this information.
§ 160-17. Wastewater discharge and sewer connection permit
requirements.
§ 160-18. Existing connections.
All existing users connected to or contributing to the Town's wastewater
facilities shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days
A. Building sewer connection permits. No unauthorized person shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Town. The owner or his agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the Town,
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Town. Such plans are
required for single, multiple dwellings, commercial, industrial or public
buildings. The application becomes a permit when signed by the Town
Board or its designated representative. The application is to be made by
the contractor, who must show authorization from the owner. The
contractor must show coverage with such insurance as may be required
by the Town Board.
B. Wastewater discharge permits.
(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from
the Town Engineer, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to § 160-18 of this Part 1 may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
(2) The Town Engineer may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Part 1.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Part 1 and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles
X through XII of this Part 1. Obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or
with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
§ 160-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-18
1:449
after notification by the Town Engineer. After review and evaluation of the
industrial user's application, the Town may issue that user a wastewater
discharge permit. At a minimum, all significant industrial users, all
industrial users hauling or generating hauled wastewater introduced to the
Town's POTW and spill potential users shall be issued permits.
§ 160-19. New connections.
All new industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
Town's wastewater facilities shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
before connecting to or contributing to these facilities.
§ 160-20. Application contents.
§ 160-21. Application signatories and certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 160-22. Approval or denial of application.
The Town Engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 14 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Town Engineer will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Town Engineer
may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. Any denial or
approval will be given in writing to the applicant.
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The Town Engineer may require all users to
submit, as part of an application, the following information:
(1) All information required by this Part 1; and
(2) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Town
Engineer to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
§ 160-18 AMHERST CODE § 160-22
1:450
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
§ 160-23. Duration of permit.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three
years. A permit may not be issued for a period less than one year. The user
shall apply to renew his permit a minimum of 180 days prior to expiration
of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Town during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions
in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as
determined by the Town Engineer.
§ 160-24. Permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Town Engineer to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed three years.
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable in accordance with § 160-27 of this Part 1.
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and
local law.
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain but need not be limited to
the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
§ 160-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-24
1:451
§ 160-25. Permit appeals; effect of other regulations.
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works.
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices, necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges.
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town Engineer to
ensure compliance with this Part 1, and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.
A. An industrial user may petition the Town Engineer to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 14 days of notice of its
issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the industrial user must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the Town Engineer fails to act within 14 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
§ 160-24 AMHERST CODE § 160-25
1:452
§ 160-26. Permit modification.
The Town Engineer may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
§ 160-27. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation.
§ 160-28. Permit suspension or revocation.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this Part 1 and all other applicable ordinances,
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Town.
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Town's POTW, Town personnel or the receiving waters.
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
A. Suspension.
(1) The Town Engineer shall suspend a wastewater discharge permit
when such suspension is necessary in order to stop a discharge
which violates any provision of this Part 1 or causes the Town to
violate any condition of its SPDES permit. This suspension will
normally be given in writing; however, in an emergency, the
suspension shall be verbal.
§ 160-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-28
1:453
(2) Any discharger notified of a suspension of his permit shall
immediately stop such discharge. In the event of a failure of the
discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Town Engineer shall take all steps necessary to ensure compliance.
(3) The Town may reinstate the permit upon written proof of
satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements of this Part
1.
B. Revocation.
(1) Any user who violates any of the following conditions of this Part 1,
or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his
permit revoked.
(2) The Town Engineer may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Town Engineer of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge.
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the Town Engineer of
changed conditions pursuant to § 160-35 of this Part 1.
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application.
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(f) Refusing to allow the Town Engineer timely access to the
facility premises and records.
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(h) Failure to pay fines.
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility.
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Part 1.
(3) Wastewater discharge permits shall be deemed null and void upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that
§ 160-28 AMHERST CODE § 160-28
1:454
§ 160-29. Permit reissuance.
§ 160-30. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
user. The Town may reinstate the permit upon written proof of
satisfactory compliance with this Part 1.
A. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application within a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
B. The Town may deny or condition any new or increased discharge to its
system or discharges which have changed with respect to their physical
or chemical character if, in the opinion of the Town, such discharge
would not be in compliance with applicable federal or state or local
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such discharge
would cause the Town to violate its SPDES permit, inhibit or interfere
with the operation and maintenance of the Town's collection and
treatment facilities or concentrate in the sludge and interfere with its
disposal by approved methods.
C. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file an application with the Town Engineer.
A. If another municipality contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Town
Board shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the
contributing municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection A above,
the Town Board shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality.
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW.
(3) Such other information as the Town Board may deem necessary.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection A above, shall
contain the following conditions:
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Part 1 and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 160-9 of
this Part 1. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the
Town's local law or local limits.
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis.
§ 160-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-30
1:455
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be
conducted by the Town Engineer; and which of these activities will
be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the Town
Engineer.
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Town Engineer with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities.
(5) Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW.
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge.
(7) A provision ensuring the Town Engineer access to the facilities of
users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other
duties deemed necessary by the Town Engineer.
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement.
§ 160-30 AMHERST CODE § 160-30
1:456
ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
§ 160-31. Baseline monitoring reports.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Town Engineer a report
which contains the information listed in Subsection B below. At least 90
days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Town
Engineer a report which contains the information listed in Subsection B
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information: the name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations: a brief description of the nature, average
rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement: information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants:
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Town Engineer, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum
and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where
required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative
§ 160-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-31
1:457
§ 160-32. Compliance schedules and progress reports.
of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 160-40 of this Part 1.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in §§ 160-40 through 160-43 of this Part 1.
(6) Certification: a statement, reviewed and signed by the user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to
meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule: if additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant
to this section must meet the requirements set out in § 160-32 of
this Part 1.
(8) Signature and certification: all baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 160-21 of this Part 1.
A. Compliance schedules. If any industrial user is required to install and
operate a pretreatment or control system for any requirement of this
Part 1, the industrial user shall develop and submit a compliance
schedule in accordance with the compliance schedule requirements in
this section.
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to compliance schedules required by Article VI, § 160-31B(7), of
this Part 1:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. (Such
events include but are not limited to hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction and
beginning and conducting routine operation.)
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the Town Engineer no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay
§ 160-31 AMHERST CODE § 160-32
1:458
§ 160-33. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and/or requirements shall submit
to the Town Engineer a report containing the information required by
§ 160-31B(1) through (6) of this Part 1. For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 160-21 of this Part 1.
§ 160-34. Periodic compliance reports.
§ 160-35. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the Town Engineer of any planned significant changes
to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to
the established schedule.
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Town Engineer.
A. All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Town Engineer but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 160-21 of this Part 1.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the Town Engineer,
using the procedures prescribed in §§ 160-40 through 160-43 of this
Part 1, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
§ 160-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-35
1:459
§ 160-36. Reports of potential problems.
§ 160-37. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Town Engineer as the Town Engineer may
require.
§ 160-38. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Town Engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Town Engineer within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Town
Engineer monitors at the user's facility at least once a month or if the Town
Engineer samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
§ 160-39. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
A. The Town Engineer may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including
the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application.
B. The Town Engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify
an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include but are
not limited to flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of an accidental discharge or slug discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the Town
of Amherst Wastewater Treatment Plant of the incident. [The Treatment
Plant telephone number during the day is (716) 691-9771 or (716)
691-9776 at any other time.] The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions being taken. Within five days following an accidental/slug
discharge, the user shall submit to the Town Engineer a written report
describing the cause of discharge and the measures which will be taken
by the user to prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
B. Compliance with this section of this Part 1 shall not relieve the user of
other liability or expense for damage to the Town of Amherst facilities
or other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may
be imposed by this article or other applicable law. For facilities with
multiple outfalls to the sewer, the slug restriction applies to each
individual outfall.
§ 160-35 AMHERST CODE § 160-39
1:460
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch
or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms (220 pounds)
of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent that such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification
of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of
the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream
discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of other changed conditions must
also be submitted under § 160-35 of this Part 1. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 160-31, 160-33 and 160-34 of
this Part 1.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms (33 pounds) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Town
Engineer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Part 1, a permit issued
thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
§ 160-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-40
1:461
§ 160-40. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. All analysis must be done by a laboratory certified by the New
York State Department of Health for the specific parameters analyzed.
If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
§ 160-41. Sample collection.
§ 160-42. Monitoring facilities.
§ 160-43. Sampling.
All sampling shall be performed at the control manhole provided. In the
event that no special manhole is available, the Town Engineer may consider
the control manhole to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
A. Except as indicated in Subsection B below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event that flow proportional sampling is infeasible,
the Town Engineer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling
or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
A. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes or wastes from commercial establishments shall, if
required by the Town Engineer, install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible and safely located and
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town Engineer.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and shall
be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. If the source of a discharge in violation of this Part 1 cannot be
differentiated due to limited sampling locations, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to provide an adequate sampling
location(s), as designated by the Town Engineer, in order to determine
the source of the violation. The associated expenses shall be the burden
of the property owner.
§ 160-40 AMHERST CODE § 160-43
1:462
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. The Town
Engineer must approve this sample point in writing. All measurements,
tests and analysis shall be performed by a Town-approved laboratory at the
expense of the user.
§ 160-44. Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 160-45. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Part 1 shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Part 1
and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques
or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Town, or where the Town Engineer has specifically notified the
user of a longer retention period.
§ 160-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-45
1:463

ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
§ 160-46. Right of entry for inspection and sampling.
Authorized representatives of the Town of Amherst and representatives
from the USEPA and NYSDEC bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and review and copying of records,
analytical data and charts related to wastewater discharge monitoring in
accordance with the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 160-47. Search warrants.
If the Town Engineer has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Part 1, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the Town of Amherst designed to verify compliance with this Part 1 or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Town Engineer may seek
issuance of an order or warrant from a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Town Engineer will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
B. The Town Engineer shall have the right to set up on the user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
C. The Town Engineer may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum
of once per year to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Town Engineer and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town Engineer access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this Part 1.
§ 160-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-47
1:465

ARTICLE VIII
Confidential Information
§ 160-48. Availability of information to public; restrictions.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs and from the Town Engineer's inspection and
sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state or federal law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
SPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 160-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-48
1:467

ARTICLE IX
Significant Noncompliance
§ 160-49. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
A. The Town Engineer shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper delivered in the municipality where the POTW is located, a
list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
B. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed a numeric Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, for the
same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria [1.4 for
BOD, TSS (unless approved as surchargeable by the Town
Engineer), fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH];
(3) Any other discharge violation that the Town Engineer believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Town Engineer's exercise of his emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 160-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-49
1:469
(8) Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Town Engineer determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
§ 160-49 AMHERST CODE § 160-49
1:470
ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 160-50. Notification of violation.
When the Town Engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Town Engineer may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.
Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Town
Engineer. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town Engineer to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 160-51. Consent orders.
The Town Engineer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as any other administrative orders issued pursuant to
§§ 160-53 and 160-54 of this Part 1 and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 160-52. Show-cause hearings.
The Town Engineer may order a user which has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
to appear before the Town Board and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user or its
representative or representatives show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 20 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show-cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 160-53. Compliance orders.
When the Town Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
§ 160-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-53
1:471
the Town Engineer may issue an order, to the user responsible for the
discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 160-54. Cease-and-desist orders.
When the Town Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Town Engineer may
issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to immediately comply with all requirements and
take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease-and-desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
§ 160-55. Administrative fines.
A. When the Town Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town Engineer may fine such user in an amount not to
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000). Such fines shall be
assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or
other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for
each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 15 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 9% per month. A lien against
the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and
penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
Town Engineer to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within 15 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the Town Engineer may convene a hearing on the matter. In the
event that the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with
§ 160-53 AMHERST CODE § 160-55
1:472
§ 160-56. Emergency suspensions.
§ 160-57. Termination of discharge.
any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Town
Engineer may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
E. In determining the amount of the above fines, the Town Engineer may
consider factors such as, but not limited to, the nature of the violations;
the magnitude of impact on human health, the environment and/or the
Town's collection and treatment operations caused by the violation; the
user's past violation record; and other relevant factors.
F. Each day on which a violation is found to occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. A day shall consist of a twentyfour-
hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending the following
12:01 a.m.
A. The Town Engineer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
oral, telephone or other notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons. The Town Engineer may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of an immediate suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Town Engineer may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, at no cost to the Town, to prevent or minimize damage
to the POTW or its receiving stream or endangerment to any
individuals. The Town Engineer may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Town Engineer that the period of endangerment has passed and
payment is made for all damages resulting from the discharge.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Town
Engineer prior to the date of any show-cause hearing.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 160-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-57
1:473
A. In addition to the provisions in § 160-28 of this Part 1, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this Part 1.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause, under § 160-52 of this Part
1, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Town Engineer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
§ 160-57 AMHERST CODE § 160-57
1:474
ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 160-58. Injunctive relief.
When the Town Engineer finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Town Engineer may commence an action in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction through the Town Attorney for the issuance of a temporary
or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by this Part 1 on activities of the user. The Town
Engineer may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/
or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 160-59. Civil penalties.
§ 160-60. Criminal prosecution.
Any person who shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the wastewater facilities shall be subject to prosecution and
a penalty not to exceed $1,000 per day of violation or imprisonment for not
more than one year, or both, in addition to civil damages incurred with such
acts.
A. A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Part
1, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the Town
for a civil penalty of up to twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000) per
day of violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of
the violation.
B. The Town Engineer may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the Town.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 160-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-61
1:475
§ 160-61. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this Part 1 are not exclusive. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town's
enforcement response plan. The Town Engineer may take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
§ 160-61 AMHERST CODE § 160-61
1:476
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
§ 160-62. Performance bonds.
The Town Engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
Part 1, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first
files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Town of Amherst, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Town Engineer to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
§ 160-63. Liability insurance.
The Town Engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this Part
1, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
§ 160-64. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the Town Engineer. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance
shall be liable to the Town of Amherst for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying said nuisance.
§ 160-65. Contractor listing.
Users, which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the Town. Existing contracts for the sale
of goods or services to the Town held by a user found to be in significant
noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be
terminated at the discretion of the Town Engineer.
§ 160-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-65
1:477

ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Action to Discharge Violations
§ 160-66. Upsets.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C below are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset.
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures.
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Town
Engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
§ 160-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-66
1:479
§ 160-67. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 160-6A of
this Part 1 or the specific prohibitions in § 160-6B of this Part 1 if it can
prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause passthrough
or interference and that either:
§ 160-68. Bypass.
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town
was regularly in compliance with its SPDES permit and, in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Notice to Town Engineer.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Town Engineer, at least 10 days before the date
of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the Town Engineer of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
§ 160-66 AMHERST CODE § 160-68
1:480
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Town Engineer may waive the written report on a case-by-case
basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
D. Conditions for bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited and the Town Engineer may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The Town Engineer may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Town Engineer determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of
this section.
§ 160-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-68
1:481

ARTICLE XIV
Wastewater Treatment Rates
§ 160-69. Manual of charges and fees.
The Town Board may adopt a manual of service, tap-in and pretreatment
charges and fees from time to time by resolution.
§ 160-70. District charges.
§ 160-71. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The Town may adopt charges and fees, which may include:
A. Annual district charges for the Consolidated Sanitary sewer District
and all other districts and areas tributary to the consolidated Sanitary
Sewer District are to be composed of a frontage charge, an assessed
valuation charge and water consumption charge. These charges may be
varied and revised annually.
B. The water consumption shall be the last annual amount reported by the
Erie County Water Authority. If the source of the water is other than
that from mains of the Erie County Water Authority, the owner shall
install a meter as directed by the Town Engineer, and the amount shall
be read and certified by the Town Engineer or his representative at
intervals not to exceed one year.
C. When there is no previous annual record, the amount of water
consumption shall be determined by the Town Engineer and the
assessment adjusted on the next tax roll to cover actual water
consumption and discharge into the public sewer.
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs for establishing, operating and
maintaining the Town's pretreatment program.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
D. Fees for filing appeals.
E. Fees for consistent removal (by the Town) of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards.
F. Fees for industrial wastewater discharge permits.
G. Fees for the acceptance of trucked-in waste.
H. Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
§ 160-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-72
1:483
§ 160-72. Industrial agreements.
No statement contained in this Part 1 shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby abnormal industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial user. However, in no event will a waiver be
granted which could result in a violation of any federal, general or
categorical standard or prohibition.
§ 160-73. Deleterious or surchargeable waste.
If any water or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain abnormal-strength sewage or which, in
the judgment of the Town Engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities or receiving waters, or which may otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Town Board may:
A. Reject the wastes;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. BOD, TKN, TSS
and phosphorous may be considered as surchargeable parameters, if
prior approval is given by the Town Engineer. When the Town Engineer
determines the volume and character of such wastes to otherwise be in
compliance with all pertinent federal, state and local regulations and all
other provisions of this Part 1, and not to cause overloading of the
Town's facilities, then approval for such discharge may be granted
subject to payment of a surcharge determined by the Town Engineer.
§ 160-72 AMHERST CODE § 160-73
1:484
ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 160-74. Liability for expenses, damages and loss.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 1 shall become liable
to the district for any expense, loss or damage occurred by the district due
to such violation.
§ 160-75. Excessive sewer maintenance expenses.
Sewer or sewerage maintenance expenses, which result from a user
violation of any of the prohibited or limited discharge requirements in
this Part 1, will be charged to the user in violation. Such maintenance
may include but shall not be limited to stoppage, plugging, breakage, any
reduction in sewer capacity or any other damage to sewers or sewerage
facilities of the Town. The costs charged to the user in violation may include
the costs and expenses for complete restoration of the impaired facilities to
a functional condition.
§ 160-76. Unpaid sewer charges.
Unpaid sewer charges, including fines, shall become a lien upon the real
property upon which or in connection with which sewer services were
provided as of and from the first day fixed for payment of such charges.
Interest shall be due and payable in the same manner as other county taxes.
§ 160-77. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this Part 1 or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this Part 1 are declared to be severable.
§ 160-78. Conflicts with other regulations.
In the event of a conflict between any portion of this Part 1 and any other
Town regulation or local law now in effect, the more restrictive portion shall
apply.
§ 160-79. When effective.
This Part 1 shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
§ 160-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-79
1:485

ARTICLE XVI
Sewer Remediation Trust Fund
§ 160-80. Purpose.
Pursuant to a directive from the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) the Town of Amherst is required to
reduce the infiltration and inflow (I&I) of water into the sewage system on a
4:1 (4 gallons/day I&I to 1 gallon/day peak sewage flow) ratio for each new
sewer connection (>2,500 gallons/day) into the Town's POTW. The Town's
initial response to the directive from the NYSDEC was the establishment
of a private sewer lateral replacement program. In an effort to develop a
more flexible program to suit the Town's wide ranging I&I reduction efforts,
the Town is requiring that applicants proposing new sewer connections
pay a one-time fee for I&I reduction. In accordance with this concept, the
Town is establishing a Sewer Remediation Trust Fund into which applicants
proposing new sewer connections will pay a fee for which the Town will use
on I&I reduction projects.
§ 160-81. Establishment of Funds.
There is hereby established the Town of Amherst Sewer Remediation Trust
Fund.
§ 160-82. Responsibilities of new sewer system users.
Prior to establishing a new sewer connection to the Town sewer system,
new users shall commit to projects reducing I&I on a 4:1 ratio and pay into
Town of Amherst Sewer Remediation Trust Fund.
§ 160-83. Credit for remediation efforts.
Credit for remediation efforts shall be based on the Town of Amherst Sewer
Remediation Trust Fund Fee Schedule, which the Town Board may amend
by resolution. The schedule can be located on the Town's website.
§ 160-84. Payment rate.
Payments into the Town of Amherst Sewer Remediation Trust Fund shall
be at a rate established in the Fee Schedule for new projects, based on the
Town's cost to remediate.
§ 160-85. Trust Fund Administration.
The Town Engineer shall administer the policies and procedures relative to
this trust fund including the expenditure of fees collected in response to
new sewer connections.
§ 160-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-85
1:487

ARTICLE XVII
Transfer of Title; Time of Sale Inspections
[Amended 6-19-2017 by Res. No. 2017-762; 11-19-2018 by L.L. No.
25-2018]
§ 160-86. Purpose.
No person shall transfer title to another person, nor accept from any other
person the transfer of title to any structure or parcel of land upon which a
residential structure, constructed prior to 1965, is located within the Town
of Amherst Consolidated Sanitary Sewer District unless and until a duly
authorized representative of the Town Engineering Department, shall have
inspected the sump pump system, interior floor drains, footing drains, yard
drains, roof drains and downspouts, catch basins and parking lot drains
on said structure or parcel of land and that the same is found to be in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, specifically § 160-5(B) and
160-6(A), restricting the discharge of unpolluted waters into the sanitary
sewer system in the Town of Amherst Consolidated Sanitary Sewer District;
and the Town Engineer has issued a certificate of compliance stating
likewise. This section shall not apply to transfers of property by gift,
intestacy or testamentary disposition; transfers pursuant to the Federal
Bankruptcy Act; transfers under Erie County in rem property tax
foreclosures; transfers for which consideration is $100 or less; and transfers
in connection with a partition.
§ 160-87. Time of sale inspections.
§ 160-88. Waiver of certificate of compliance for time of sale
inspection.
A. The property owner shall request a time of sale inspection by filing an
application at the Town's Engineering Department when said structure
or parcel of land is placed for sale and prior to the sale of said property.
The fee required for this inspection shall be based upon resolution by
the Town Board. Upon successful inspection, the Town Engineer will
issue a certificate of compliance. If the inspection fails, the Town
Engineer will issue a notice of violation to the property owner(s)
describing prohibited discharges and recommendations to remedy such
discharges. When required, all permits necessary to remedy violations
must be obtained from the Town's Building Department. The fee
required for such permits shall be based upon resolution by the Town
Board.
A. The Town Engineer may temporarily waive the requirement of a
Certificate of Compliance as a prerequisite to transfer of title, as
specified in the preceding section, provided that the waiver is
requested no later than 10 working days prior to the expected closing
for said transfer:
§ 160-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-88
1:489
§ 160-89. Implementation of this article.
Article XVII of this Local Law shall take effect immediately.
(1) The seller makes a written request to the Town Engineer and such
request includes a written, itemized quote from a plumber licensed
in the Town of Amherst which provides for correction of all
identified discharges and addresses all recommendations specified
in the notice of violation; and
(2) The seller and purchaser shall have filed with the Town Engineer a
Waiver of Certificate of Compliance to correct any deficiencies to
the sump pump system, interior floor drains, footing drains, yard
drains, roof drains and downspouts, catch basins and parking lot
drains on said structure or parcel of land within 90 days after
closing of sale or a period of time specified by the Town Engineer;
and
(3) The purchaser shall have provided a sum equal to $1,500. Such
sum shall be payable by personal check, certified check or bank
draft payable to the Town of Amherst at closing; such sum will be
returned to the purchaser if the corrections are completed within
the time specified in the guaranty, but which sum will be forfeited
to the Town of Amherst if needed corrections are not completed
within the timeframe specified.
B. In the event that the needed corrections are not completed within the
time specified in the written guaranty, the temporary waiver issued by
the Town Engineer shall immediately expire, and the purchaser shall be
subject to the penalties as determined by the Town Engineer.
§ 160-88 AMHERST CODE § 160-89
1:490
Chapter 163
SEX OFFENDERS, REGISTRATION OF
§ 163-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Sexual Offenders Registration Act."
§ 163-2. Legislative findings and intent.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that one of the highest
priorities of local government is the protection of the health and safety
of its citizens. This is especially true for children and other vulnerable
members of society. The Town Board further finds that convicted sex
offenders pose a significant continuing risk to society. Moreover, as the
tragic murder of Jessica Lunsford in Florida in spring 2005 and other
such events have shown, recidivism among convicted sexual offenders
is a continuing problem.
B. Recently, residents of the Town have been advised that there are
residing in Town a number of convicted sex offenders. At least some of
these sex offenders have registered as required by Article 6-C of the
Correction Law of the State of New York, commonly known as "Megan's
Law." Some of these individuals have been categorized by the state
Department of Corrections as Level II sex offenders who have been
determined to be of moderate risk of committing another sex crime.
Some of these individuals have been categorized as Level III sex
offenders who have been determined to be of a high risk to commit
another sexual crime. However, the Town Board finds that some sex
offenders fail to register or fail to update their registration information
when they move from one location to another.
C. The Town Board finds that the protection of the victims and potential
victims of sexual offenders in Amherst is a matter of unique local
concern not fully and adequately addressed by state law. The Town
Board finds that the disclosures required and the limitations contained
herein will protect the citizens of Amherst and will provide to employers
who contract with Amherst information that will assist these employers
in protecting children who may come into proximity with a sex offender
in the scope of employment.
D. The Town Board finds that the Town of Amherst has not assessed and
can not assess the risk of recidivism of any particular sex offender or
class of sex offenders and has made no determination of dangerousness
of any particular sex offender or class of sex offenders. Rather, the
Board finds that this chapter is remedial in nature and designed to fill
certain gaps in state law as well as to provide protections for residents
of the Town who receive certain services from the Town. The Board
further finds this chapter to be the most narrowly tailored means of
fulfilling its compelling interest in the safety of its citizens. Finally, the
§ 160-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-2
1:491
§ 163-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
APD — The Amherst Police Department.
CHILD or CHILDREN — Persons under 18 years of age. The singular and
plural shall include one another. If the applicable statute defining a crime
against a child refers to a child younger than 18, the younger age shall
control.
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS — The New York State Department of
Corrections.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
business trust, legal representative or organized group of persons paying
wages or any form of compensation to any person for services that directly
or indirectly benefit the individual, partnership, association, corporation,
business trust, legal representative or organized group of persons.
EXTENDED-STAY ESTABLISHMENT — Any hotel, motel, rooming house,
inn, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast, residence inn, country inn, motor
court, R-V park or motor lodge that lets or provides any space for occupancy
by any person. Any place of business that provides services or utilities to
motor homes, recreational vehicles, trucks with campers or any other motor
vehicle in which an individual does or may sleep overnight is an extendedstay
establishment under this chapter.
HIS — His or her.
HOMELESS ADULT — Any adult who has been in the Town of Amherst for
more than 24 hours or intends to be in Town for more than 24 hours without
a residence or place of lodging.
HOMELESS SHELTER — Any structure that provides temporary housing to
a homeless adult.
INTERNET — An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system or access software provider that provides or enables
computer access by multiple users to a computer server and includes,
but is not limited to, an information service, system or access software
provider that provides access to a network system commonly known as the
"Internet," or any comparable system or service and also includes, but is not
limited to, a World Wide Web page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list,
or chat area on any interactive computer service or system or other on-line
service. The APD website shall mean any Internet site made available by the
APD to the public, including any link to the website of the Town of Amherst.
board does not intend for any person to use the information required by
this chapter to harm or injure any registrant under the law.
§ 163-2 AMHERST CODE § 163-3
1:492
OUTSIDE NEW YORK — Anywhere outside the geographical borders of the
State of New York or any federal enclave, Indian trust lands or reservations
located inside the geographical borders of New York.
REGISTRANT — Any person required to register under this chapter.
REGISTRATION YEAR — One year from the date of first registration under
this chapter.
RESIDENT — Any person who lives in the Town of Amherst in any
apartment or home, has a usual place of abode in the Town, is domiciled
in the Town or temporarily present in the Town and staying at a homeless
shelter or an extended-stay establishment.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — An adult who is not a sex offender.
SCHOOL — A licensed or accredited public, charter, private or religious
school that offers instruction to students in kindergarten through any grade
up to grade 12.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — In or on or within any building, structure, school
bus, as defined in § 142 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, athletic playing
field, playground or land contained within the real property boundary line
of a public or private elementary, parochial, intermediate, junior high,
vocational or high school.[Added 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
SENIOR CITIZEN RESIDENCE — Any multiunit residential facility,
containing more than two units, that is occupied by senior citizens over
the age of 62 years and provides care and/or assisted living services to its
residents.[Added 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
SEX OFFENDER — Shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in
§ 168-a, Subdivision 1, of the Correction Law of the State of New York.
SEX OFFENDER VIOLATION — A violation of any law defined as a sex
offense in § 168-a, Subdivision 2, of the Correction Law of the State of New
York.
SEX OFFENSE — Shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in
§ 168-a, Subdivision 2, of the Correction Law of the State of New York.
§ 163-4. Registration requirements.
A. Sex offenders who reside in the Town of Amherst and who are required
to register with the Department of Corrections pursuant to Article 6-C
of the Correction Law of the State of New York must register with the
APD.
B. A sex offender must register with the APD within 10 days after being
released from incarceration, or 10 days from the date of sentencing if
not incarcerated, for a sex offender violation. A registrant under this
section must provide the APD with the following information:
(1) His legal name, any other names or aliases he has used or is using
and any new names he has applied for in the last year.
§ 163-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:493
§ 163-5. Additional registrant regulations.
(2) His date of birth.
(3) His social security number.
(4) His current address, the address of any other residences he owns
or the address of any other real property he owns or leases and the
address of any other locations or places of lodging where the sex
offender intends to stay or does in fact stay for more than three
consecutive days at any time or an aggregate of 10 or more days in
a registration year. Homeless shelters and extended-stay
establishments must be included in the disclosure required
pursuant to this subsection. Pursuant to this subsection, the
registrant must provide a description and location of any and all
rented or owned spaces to which the registrant claims a right to
privacy or a right to exclude others, including, but not limited to,
storage buildings.
(5) His place of employment and the name and telephone number of a
contact person who knows his location at any and all times during
employment hours or other times he performs work in the scope of
his employment duties.
(6) His driver's license number and the license plate number, vehicle
identification number and description by make and model of all
vehicles registered to him, owned by him, driven by him during
employment or otherwise available to him with regularity by
consent from another.
(7) A list of any and all sex offense violations of which he has been
convicted or to which he has entered a plea of guilty.
C. As an alternative to the registration information to be gathered in
Subsection B above, the APD may rely on such information as is
gathered and provided by the State of New York to the Town of Amherst
pursuant to Article 6-C of the Correction Law of the State of New York.
A. Any sex offender who provides inaccurate information to the APD
commits a separate violation of this chapter.
B. In the event of any change in registration information or addition of
new information that would have been required in the initial or
subsequent registration other than a change of address or employment
governed by Subsection C or D below, the registrant must notify the
APD and provide new valid information within three days of the time the
new information becomes known or should be known by the registrant.
C. A sex offender who is required to register under this chapter and elects
to change the address of any place of lodging including but not limited
to, a residence, extended-stay establishment or homeless shelter, must
notify the APD of the prospective change before the change occurs.
§ 163-4 AMHERST CODE § 163-5
1:494
§ 163-6. Posting of information on Internet.
The APD shall maintain a local registry of sex offenders registered under
this chapter. The Town of Amherst will maintain a data base of sex offenders
distinct from any registry of sex offenders maintained by the State of New
York. Registration under any registration program maintained by the State
of New York does not exempt a sex offender from registration under this
chapter. The Town of Amherst will make available and disseminate sex
offender registration information as authorized by New York law on the
APD's own website on the Internet for any sex offender classified as a Level
II or Level III sex offender by the state Department of Corrections. Inclusion
D. A sex offender who is required to register under this chapter and
changes his place of employment must notify the APD 10 days before
the voluntary change occurs or five days after the change is forced or
compelled. Sex offenders must provide the name and telephone number
of a new contact person within 10 days of the time new work begins.
E. When a sex offender registers under this chapter, the APD may take and
retain his photograph and a set of fingerprints. Additionally, the APD
may record and retain the person's shoe size, a DNA sample, dental
imprints and a description of tattoos, scars and other identifying
features that would assist in identifying the sex offender, as determined
by the APD. As an alternative, the APD may rely for DNA and other
identifying information on data bases provided by the State of New
York.
F. Following the initial registration, registrants, except homeless adults,
are required to annually renew the registration before December 31 of
each subsequent calendar year for 20 years. Homeless adults residing
from time to time in homeless shelters must verify registration data in
writing every 90 days as long as they are in Town on a form provided by
the APD. Sex offenders who have been convicted of two or more sex
offenses must register for life.
G. If any person receives a deferred sentence from any court for a sex
offense that would otherwise trigger registration under this chapter,
that person must register as if convicted unless he obtains an order
from a court of competent jurisdiction which, after an evidentiary
hearing on the issue, rules that registration is not required on the
grounds that registration would grossly prejudice his rights. If the
charges are dismissed against the person at the completion of the
deferred sentence, the person does not have to renew registration in
subsequent registration years.
H. Any sex offender currently incarcerated in a correctional institution and
temporarily at large and free to move about in the Town is required to
register under this chapter 10 days before each release date. This
subsection includes but is not limited to persons on probation, parole,
furlough, work release or any similar program that results in or causes
the person to be outside the confines of the institution for any reason.
§ 163-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-6
1:495
of a sex offender in the APD's database and website is based solely on the
fact of a prior conviction and not based on any assessment of the current
degree of dangerousness posed by any particular sex offender. The website
will conspicuously include the following statement: "The Town's decision to
post sex offenders on this website is based on the fact that the sex offender
was convicted of a sex offense in the past. The Town of Amherst has not
assessed the specific risk posed by any particular individual sex offender or
class of sex offenders and has made no determination regarding the current
dangerousness or degree of dangerousness of any individual sex offender
or class of sex offenders. The main purpose of providing this data on the
Internet is to make the information more easily available and accessible, not
to warn about any specific individual."
§ 163-7. General provisions and offenses.
A. Town contractors. All persons or entities that enter into contracts with
the Town and employ any person that may be alone with a child within
the scope of the performance of the contract shall conduct a
background search of any and all such employees and compare the
background search to any applicable registration information available
on the APD's website and the sex offender hotline maintained by the
State of New York. Any failure by the contractor to comply is a material
breach of the contract and entitles the Town to terminate the contract.
This subsection includes but is not limited to 501(c)(3) entities and
charitable entities. Any person or entity to which this subsection applies
shall notify the APD immediately if that person or entity has or obtains
any information about any registrant that does not conform with the
information the registrant provided to the Town pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Address certification checks. The APD may conduct address verification
checks to substantiate that registrants are living where they claim to
live. The check shall verify that the claimed address exists and that the
registrant in fact lives at the claimed address. If the APD is unable to
verify the address, the registrant may be contacted by mail or otherwise
and ordered to submit a sworn affidavit to the APD that the registrant in
fact lives at the claimed address. The APD may contact and interview
any person living or located near the claimed address. The provisions of
this subsection are in addition to any other lawful investigation the APD
may undertake.
C. Sex offender location. After the effective date of this chapter, sex
offenders shall not newly occupy any real property, acquire any real
property by lease or otherwise or establish a place of lodging within 1/4
mile of a school, day-care center, playground, park or senior citizen
residence. [Amended 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
D. Within five days from the effective date of this chapter, a sex offender
employed by an employer located in the Town of Amherst shall notify
his current employer that he is a registered sex offender. At the time a
sex offender applies for or receives an offer of employment by an
§ 163-6 AMHERST CODE § 163-7
1:496
§ 163-8. Liability of Town.
Nothing in this chapter creates or shall create a cause of action against
the Town of Amherst not already authorized under existing law. Without
limitation, the Town is not liable to any person harmed who claims that
notice under this chapter may have prevented the harm.
§ 163-9. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this chapter by a sexual offender shall be punishable by
a fine of $250 and/or 10 days in jail. Each day that a registrant should
have registered or supplemented his registration but failed to do so shall
constitute a separate offense. It is the intent of this Board that violations of
this chapter should not be treated by the courts as lesser included offenses
that merge into a violation of Article 6-C of the Correction Law of the State
of New York. The Town shall also be entitled to injunctive relief to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 166
SNOWPLOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
employer where the sex offender will be working substantially within
the Town of Amherst, the sex offender shall notify the employer that he
is a registered sex offender. All sex offenders shall provide the employer
or prospective employer with the current conditions of probation in
writing including, if applicable, any conditions of probation that require
the sex offender to stay away from vulnerable populations or conditions
the sex offender's contact with vulnerable populations.
E. Loitering. No sex offender shall loiter or remain in or about a senior
citizen residence, as defined herein, school grounds, a college or
university building or grounds, or a children's overnight camp, as
defined in § 1392 of the Public Health Law, or a summer day camp as
defined in § 1392 of the Public Health Law, or loiter, remain in or enter a
school bus, as defined in § 142 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, not having
any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
pupil or student, or any other specific, legitimate reason for being
there, and not having written permission from anyone authorized to
grant the same, or loiter or remain in or about such children's overnight
camp or summer day camp in violation of conspicuously posted rules or
regulations governing entry and use thereof. [Added 6-1-2009 by L.L.
No. 6-2009]
§ 163-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:497
§ 166-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk found in the right-of-way along a public
road, whether adjoining public or privately owned property or any sidewalk
on private land subject to an easement in favor of the public.[Added
10-4-1999 by L.L. No. 6-1999]
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, licensed to operate on the highways of the State of New
York and used to plow snow, but the term shall not include a vehicle used
solely by a person, firm or corporation to plow snow within the confines of
his or its own property, whether owned or leased.
§ 166-2. Permit required. [Amended 9-26-2011 by L.L. No. 22-2011]
No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow or cause or allow same to
be plowed by the use of any vehicle within the Town of Amherst outside the
Village of Williamsville unless a permit therefore as hereinafter prescribed,
issued by the Town Clerk, is in full force and effect and such permit is
prominently displayed by affixing it to the vehicle so as to be readily visible
from the exterior thereof. Each snowplowing season shall be identified by a
permit sticker of a different color.
§ 166-3. Application procedure; fee. [Amended 9-26-2011 by L.L.
No. 22-2011; 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 32-2011]
Application for such permit shall be made to the Town Clerk by the owner
of the vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by said Town Clerk,
which shall contain the owner’s name and address, the vehicle identification
number, the New York State license number attached thereto and such
additional information as the Town Clerk shall require. The Town Clerk may
require such documents and information as may be reasonably necessary
to verify the facts stated in such application. The applicant shall, at the
time of the filing of his application, pay a permit fee of fifteen ($15.00) for
each vehicle. If such application or applications shall be approved by the
Town Board, a permit or permits shall be issued by the Town Clerk to the
applicant. Such permit shall be valid for the period commencing September
1st and expiring the next August 31st and shall be in such form as the
Town Clerk shall prescribe. Any permit previously issued for the 2011-2012
season shall be extended to August 31, 2012. Such permit shall not be
transferable to another owner.
A list of all of the permitted snowplowing company vehicles that have been
issued permits shall be listed on the Town of Amherst’s website.
§ 166-1 AMHERST CODE § 166-4
1:498
§ 166-4. Regulation of snow removal. [Amended 10-4-1999 by L.L.
No. 6-1999]
No person or private entity shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or
other materials in or beyond the right-of-way of any street or public highway
or upon any public sidewalk, or cause such to be done so as to interfere with
the safety and convenience of public travel.
§ 166-5. Enforcement. [Amended 9-26-2011 by L.L. No. 22-2011]
This chapter shall be enforced by the members of the Amherst Police
Department, the Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Amherst, the
Refuse Department, the Building Department and such other persons as he
shall designate.
§ 166-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 166-7. Severability.
If any article, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter is
adjudged to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such portion
thereof so expressly adjudged invalid, and the remainder of this chapter
shall be deemed to be in all respects valid and effective.
§ 166-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1973.
Chapter 167
SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 138.
A. The Town Board may, following a hearing before such Town Board,
revoke the permit or permits granted to any person, firm or corporation
under the authority of this chapter or any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to snowplowing or snow removal.
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this
chapter, any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both.
C. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this chapter
shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 166-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-0
1:499
§ 167-0. Title.
The title of this law shall be "Social Host Liability."
§ 167-1. Legislative Intent.
A. The Town Board, pursuant to the police powers delegated to it by the
New York State Municipal Home Rule Law, has the authority to enact
laws which promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
residents;
B. The occurrence of loud or unruly gatherings on private property where
alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage persons is
harmful to the underage persons themselves and a threat to public
health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property and general
welfare;
C. Underage persons often obtain alcoholic beverages at gatherings held
at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises
that are under the control of a person who knows or should know of the
underage service and/or consumption. Persons responsible for the
occurrence of loud or unruly gatherings on private property over which
they have possession or control have failed to ensure that alcoholic
beverages are neither served to nor consumed by underage persons at
these parties;
D. Landlords have failed to prevent the occurrence or reoccurrence of
loud or unruly gatherings, including those where alcoholic beverages
are served to or consumed by underage persons, on private property
they lease to tenants, which seriously disrupts the quiet enjoyment of
neighboring residents;
E. Problems associated with loud or unruly gatherings at which alcoholic
beverages are served to or consumed by underage persons are difficult
to prevent and deter unless the Amherst Police Department has the
legal authority to direct the host to disperse the gathering;
F. Control of loud or unruly gatherings on private property where
alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage persons is
necessary when such activity is determined to be a threat to the peace,
health, safety or general welfare of the public;
G. Persons responsible for abetting or tolerating loud or unruly gatherings
will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such conduct at
gatherings held on property under their possession or control;
H. In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services personnel have and are required to respond,
sometimes on multiple occasions, to loud or unruly gatherings on
private property at which alcoholic beverages are served to or
consumed by underage persons, and responses to such gatherings
result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources by
§ 167-0 AMHERST CODE § 167-1
1:500
§ 167-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter are:
§ 167-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which
contains 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with
other substances.
JUVENILE — Any person under sixteen (16) years of age.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING —
the Town of Amherst and delays police responses to regular and
emergency calls to the rest of the Town;
I. The intent of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety, quiet
enjoyment of residential property, and general welfare, rather than to
punish. An ordinance that imposes strict liability on property owners
and other responsible persons for the nuisances created by loud and
unruly gatherings is necessary to deter and prevent such gatherings.
Persons who actively and passively aid, allow or tolerate loud or unruly
gatherings shall be held strictly liable for the nuisances created by such
gatherings and the costs associated with responding to such
gatherings.
A. To protect public health, safety and general welfare;
B. To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcoholic
beverages by underage persons; and
C. To reduce the costs of providing police, fire and other emergency
response services to loud or unruly gatherings, by imposing a civil fee
against social hosts and landowners (including landlords) for the
recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement, fire and
other emergency response services to loud or unruly gatherings,
including those where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed
by underage persons.
A party or gathering of two (2) or more persons at or on a residence or
other private property upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such
loud or unruly conduct includes but is not limited to:
(1) Excessive noise;
A.
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:501
RESIDENCE OR OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY — A home, yard, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis,
whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation.
RESPONSE COSTS — The cost associated with responses by law
enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly
gatherings, including but not limited to:
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person, agent, operator, firm, association,
organization, partnership, company, corporation, beneficiary, trust, trustee,
and all other persons having a legal or equitable interest in the residence or
other private property or recorded in the official records of the state, county
or municipality as holding title to the property or otherwise having control
of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
(2) Excessive traffic;
Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public
streets;
(3)
Public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or
alcoholic beverages;
(4)
Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any
underage person, except as permitted by state law;
(5)
Harassments, assaults, fights, domestic violence or other
disturbances of the peace;
(6)
(7) Vandalism;
(8) Litter; and
Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health,
safety, quiet enjoyment, of residential property or general welfare.
(9)
B. A loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance.
Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency
response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings, and
the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);
A.
The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or
other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining
at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering;
B.
The cost of repairing any Town equipment or property damage, and the
cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at
or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering;
C.
§ 167-3 AMHERST CODE § 167-3
1:502
possession of real property by a court, on which a loud or unruly gathering
is conducted.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON —
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
§ 167-4. Penalties for offenses.
A person or persons with a right of possession in the residence or
other private property on which loud or unruly gathering is conducted,
including, but not limited to:
(1) An owner of the residence or other private property;
(2) A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property;
(3) The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering; and
The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or
controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting
responsibility for such a gathering.
(4)
A.
If a responsible person for the gathering is a juvenile, then the parents
or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and
severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter.
To incur liability for response costs imposed by this Chapter, the
responsible person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be present
at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition
of response costs. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as
direct liability upon a responsible person.
B.
A. It shall be a violation for any responsible person or party to conduct,
aid, allow, permit or condone a loud or unruly gathering at a residence
or other private property.
B. Fines.
(1) A first violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by a Two
Hundred-Fifty Dollar ($250) fine and shall be required to complete
a substance abuse education program provided by a certified
prevention agency within ninety (90) days of the offense.
(2) A second violation of this Chapter, at the same residence or other
private property or by the same responsible person or party, within
a twelve-month period shall be punishable by a fine of Five
Hundred Dollar ($500).
(3) A third or subsequent violation of this chapter, at the same
residence or other private property or by the same responsible
person or party, within a twelve-month period shall be punishable
by a fine of One Thousand Dollar ($1,000).
§ 167-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:503
§ 167-5. Recovery of Response Costs.
C. The fines prescribed at Subsection B above are in addition to any
response costs that may be assessed pursuant to this Chapter.
D. The fine schedule prescribed at Subsection B above is a "rolling
schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable, the Town
Attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the most recent
loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly
gatherings have taken place at the residence or other private property
in question during the statutory twelve (12) month period.
E. In addition to the fine schedule prescribed in Subsection B above, a
violation of this Chapter subjects the responsible person or party to the
fines and penalties of Chapter 138 (Noise) of the Code of the Town of
Amherst.
F. A responsible person or party charged with a violation of this Chapter is
entitled to a summary hearing in Amherst Town Court without a jury
and the Court must receive any relevant evidence not legally privileged.
Hearsay is admissible. The responsible person or party may crossexamine
witnesses and may present evidence on his/her/their behalf. A
finding that the responsible person or party has violated any provision
of this Chapter must be based upon a preponderance of the evidence.
A. When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
responds to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private
property within the Town of Amherst within a twelve (12) month period
of a warning given to a responsible person or party for a loud or unruly
gathering, all responsible persons or parties shall be jointly and
severally liable for the Town's costs of providing response costs for that
response and all subsequent responses during the warning period.
B. When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
official makes an initial response to a loud or unruly gathering at a
residence or other private property within the Town of Amherst, the
official shall inform any responsible person or party for the gathering at
the scene that:
(1) The official has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists;
and
(2) The responsible person or party will be charged for any response
costs required for subsequent responses to the scene for a loud or
unruly gathering within a twelve (12) month period.
C. Only one warning will be given to a responsible person or party
pursuant to this section before the Town assesses response service
costs pursuant to this Chapter. If a responsible person or party cannot
be identified at the scene, the official may issue a warning to one or
more persons identified in this Chapter or subsequently return to the
residence or other private property and issue the warning to a then-
§ 167-4 AMHERST CODE § 167-5
1:504
§ 167-6. Billing and collection.
present responsible person or party. Warnings given to responsible
persons or parties who do not reside at the residence or other private
property in question shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
D. With the acceptance of this ordinance, recovered funds are to be made
available to cover the cost of this ordinance as calculated at the end of
each year based on costs expended by the Town of Amherst Police
Department. The recovered funds are to be earmarked to the trust in
agency account for safety education programs.
A. The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the Town
of Amherst by the responsible person or party held liable in this
Chapter for the loud or unruly gathering and, if a juvenile, by the
juvenile's parents or guardians. The amount of response costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, shall also be a lien against the
property concerned and shall be assessed, levied, and collected like
other taxes and assessments; provided, however, that the responsible
person or party, including the owner and all other persons having an
interest in the property, are provided with notice by way of certified
mail, return receipt requested, and mailed within fourteen (14) days of
the response giving rise to such costs. The notice shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name of the person or party being held liable for the payment
of such costs;
(2) The address of the residence or other private property where the
loud or unruly gathering occurred;
(3) The date and time of the response;
(4) The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who
responded;
(5) The date and time of any previous warning given pursuant to this
Chapter and/or previous responses to loud or unruly gatherings at
the residence or other private property in question within the
previous twelve (12) months; and
(6) An itemized list of the response costs for which the person or party
is being liable.
B. The responsible person or party must remit payment of the noticed
response costs to the Town of Amherst Comptroller's Office within
thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. If no payment is made within
thirty (30) days, the response costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, shall be a lien against the property concerned and shall be
assessed, levied, and collected like other taxes and assessments;
provided, however, that the responsible person or party and all other
§ 167-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-6
1:505
§ 167-7. Civil action to collect costs.
The Town of Amherst is authorized, after due demand having been made
and proper notice having been given, to commence an action at law in
any court of competent jurisdiction to collect response costs from the
responsible person or party, including the owner and any other person
having an interest in the property concerned.
§ 167-8. Severability.
§ 167-9. Effective Date.
This Chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 169
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Trees — See Ch. 179.
persons having an interest in the property are provided with notice and
an opportunity to be heard before the assessment of any lien against
the land.
A. If a provision of this chapter is found to be inconsistent with any
provision of other Chapters of the Town Code, the provision or
requirement which is the more restrictive or which establishes the
higher standard shall prevail. A greater penalty shall not be considered
as more restrictive or a higher standard.
B. If any part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph or term of this
chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, in whole or
in part, such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the
remaining ordinance, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions,
paragraphs or terms.
§ 167-6 AMHERST CODE § 167-9
1:506
ARTICLE I
Waste Management
[Adopted 8-3-1992 by L.L. No. 10-1992]
§ 169-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that:
§ 169-2. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 169-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words, terms or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL USES — The development and cultivation of the soil for
planting of trees, fruits, vegetable or flowers.
APPEARANCE TICKET — Written notice issued and subscribed to by a duly
authorized person directing a designated person to appear in a designated
local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with an
alleged commission of a designated offense. A notice conforming to such
definition constitutes an appearance ticket regardless of whether it is
referred to in some other provision of law or by any other title.
ASH RESIDUE — The noncombustible constituents of waste remaining after
combustion or incineration. (e.g., residue from a fireplace, solid-fuel stove
or incinerator).
A. Methods of waste management emphasizing source reduction,
recovery, conversion and recycling of wastes are essential to the longrange
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the public, to the
economic productivity and environmental quality of the Town of
Amherst and to the conservation of resources.
B. The New York State Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires that
municipalities adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, for
the separation of waste into recyclable, reusable or other components
for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
A. To preserve the long-range health, safety and welfare of the public and
the economic productivity and environmental quality of the Town of
Amherst by conserving resources and reducing potential pollution of
the environment.
B. To establish methods of collection, reduction and separation to
encourage efficient utilization of the waste disposal facilities and
effective reuse of wastes.
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:507
CANS — Empty containers composed of aluminum, tin, steel or any metal
alloy which formerly contained only nonaerosol edible substances, or such
empty metal containers as have been approved by recycling regulations.
CARDBOARD — Heavy paper items normally used for packaging, mailing,
shipping or containing goods, merchandise or other material but excluding
plastic, foam or wax-coated or soiled contaminated heavy paper items.
COLLECTION — The act of picking up waste material from the public rightof-
way abutting homes, businesses or industrial sites.
COMPOST — Organic material which may be reduced to humus through
organic activity.
COMPOSTING — A process through which organic materials such as grass
and leaves are reduced to humus through organic activity.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste material from
building, remodeling, repair and/or removal of homes, office buildings,
industrial plants or schools, including but not limited to wood scraps, metal,
concrete, brick, block, wires and industrial packaging material.
CONTAINER — A permanent container made of metal or vinyl which is
airtight and watertight and provided with a tight-fitting cover, or disposable
plastic or heavy paper bag which, when closed by lacing, is airtight and
watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent breakage and leakage.
EXTRACTION PROCEDURE (EP) TOXICITY TEST — A series of laboratory
tests designed to determine the level of toxicity in solid waste or landfill
material.
GARBAGE — All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from
meat, fish and foul, vegetables and fruits and parts thereof (and materials
ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or which for
any reason have been discarded), including market refuse and waste from
handling, storage or sale of produce.
GARDENING OR LANDSCAPE USES — The development and cultivation of
herbs, fruit, vegetables and flowers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored
glass containers, excluding crystal, ceramic, light bulbs, plate, window,
laminated, wired or mirrored glass and glass cookware.
LARGE HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — Large and/or bulky articles
actually used in the home which equip it for living, including but not limited
to chairs, sofas, tables, beds and carpets.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — A type of electrical storage battery commonly
used in automobiles and trucks.
MAGAZINES — Any type of magazine which would be normally delivered
through the mail or purchased at a newsstand. Excluded are large gluebound
catalogs, telephone books, periodicals or hardbound printed
material.
§ 169-3 AMHERST CODE § 169-3
1:508
MAJOR APPLIANCES — Large and/or bulky mechanisms ordinarily
operated by gas or electric current, including but not limited to
refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers and stoves.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to and known as
"newsprint" and delivered at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other
information or communication, periodicals and paper that have a shiny or
wax-coated surface.
NONRECYCLABLE REFUSE AND RUBBISH — All waste material discarded
as useless or worthless trash, including but not limited to rags, sweepings,
rubber, leather, crockery, shells, clothing, straw, dirt and ashes.
PAINT — A substance composed of solid coloring matter suspended in a
liquid medium and applied as a protective or decorative coating to various
surfaces or to canvas or other material.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers, as
defined by the recycling regulations, including but not limited to containers
used for milk, detergent, apple cider, water, soft drinks and vegetable oil.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land abutting a given premises between
the sidewalk and curb, or the land beyond the pavement or stone of the
road, street, ally or highway as surveyed or laid out in the records of the
Superintendent of Highways.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — All material specified by the Town of Amherst
for collection pursuant to this article and/or the recycling regulations
promulgated hereunder, including but not limited to cans, glass containers,
newspaper, plastic and corrugated cardboard.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — A rectangular container to store and carry
recyclable material into the public right-of-way for collection.
RECYCLING REGULATIONS — Rules pursuant to this article set forth
by the Office of Refuse Control to implement the program established
and known, pursuant to this article, as the "Town of Amherst Waste
Management Code."
REFUSE CONTROL OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Town Board
of the Town of Amherst to enforce the local law known as the "Town of
Amherst Waste Management Code."
SILVICULTURAL USES — The development, cultivation and reproduction of
trees.
SOURCE-SEPARATED — Waste material prepared for collection at the
premises of generation.
TIRES — Rings or bands of rubber, either solid or hollow and inflated,
placed over the rims of wheels to provide traction, resistance to wear or
other properties, including the following:
§ 169-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:509
TOTES — Town-authorized containers of a capacity of 95 gallons or 65
gallons for the storage and collection of household garbage.[Added
4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
USED OIL — Any motor oil previously used in machinery but not including
other petroleum fluids.
WASTE — Products and materials to be discarded after use from any
premises within the Town of Amherst.
YARD WASTE — Grass, leaves, brush, plants, weeds or dirt materials from
vegetable and flower gardens, lawns and yards or ash from fireplaces or
wood stoves.
§ 169-4. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for separation and preparation for
the collection of waste material. The program shall be under the supervision
of the Town of Amherst Office of Refuse Control, who shall make rules
and regulations for its implementation subject to the approval of the Town
Board. Such rules and regulations shall be known as the "Town of Amherst
Waste Management Law."
§ 169-5. Preparation of waste material for collection.
All waste material placed in accordance with this article for collection in a
public right-of-way shall be prepared as follows:
Passenger car: size thirteen-inch, fourteen-inch, fifteen-inch and
sixteen-inch.
A.
B. Light truck: size sixteen-inch through nineteen-inch.
C. Semitrucks: size up to and including 1124.5 Series.
A. Garbage and household solid waste shall be placed in tote units with
lids completely closed. [Amended 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
B. Recyclable material.
(1) Recyclable material shall be placed in recycling containers as
follows:
(a) Newspapers shall be placed in a recycling container or placed
in paper bags.
(b) Corrugated cardboard, including boxes, shall be disassembled,
flattened, bundled and tied.
(c) Cans, glass containers and plastic containers shall be rinsed of
original contents. Caps and rings shall be removed from glass
containers.
§ 169-3 AMHERST CODE § 169-5
1:510
(2) No materials other than recyclable material prepared in
accordance with this article shall be placed in a recycling
container.
C. Yard waste, brush and tree parts.
(1) Yard waste shall be placed out for collection on the same day as
normal garbage in the following manner: All yard waste will be
placed in solid-bottom containers or in paper yard waste bags. No
yard waste will be placed in any plastic bag for pickup.
(2) Brush and tree parts which result from work performed by the
owner or occupant of the residence may be placed for collection
with the yard waste, if it is tied in bundles that are no longer than
four feet in length, 24 inches in diameter and weigh no more than
60 pounds. Small amounts of brush may be placed in solid-bottom
containers.
(3) Nothing herein shall prevent any person from utilizing yard waste
for compost, mulch or other agricultural, silvicultural, gardening or
landscape uses.
D. Reasonable amounts of construction and demolition debris which result
from work performed by the owner or occupant of a residence may be
placed for collection in containers or tied in bundles not exceeding 60
pounds in weight.
E. Major appliances; large household furnishings.
(1) Major appliances or large household furnishings may be placed for
collection on the scheduled collection day.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or place any
refrigerator or freezer in a public right-of-way for collection unless
the latching or locking mechanism on the door or doors of the same
have been removed or dismantled.
F. All used oil and paint shall be disposed of properly. There will no
discharge of any oil or paint into any waterway or drainage system.
G. Lead-acid batteries shall not be placed in any waste container.
H. To reduce the risk of bodily harm, protruding nails, glass and/or other
sharp objects shall be rendered harmless prior to being deposited in
containers or bundled for collection.
I. All ash residue must be cool, dampened and contained so as to reduce
the risk of fire and personal injury.
J. No bundle or filled container prepared for collection shall exceed 48
inches in length, 40 gallons in volume or 60 pounds in weight.
§ 169-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-6
1:511
§ 169-6. Collection of waste material. [Amended 4-24-2006 by L.L.
No. 4-2006; 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007; 2-27-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012; 4-3-2017 by L.L. No. 12-2017; 6-19-2017 by L.L. No.
16-2017]
The Town of Amherst Refuse Control Office shall designate the days and
times for the removal of all waste from the public roads, streets, highways
and alleys in the Town of Amherst, outside the corporate limits of the Village
of Williamsville. On designated days, it shall be lawful for any person to
place within the public right-of-way abutting his or her premises waste
prepared in accordance with this article, provided that his or her premises
are subject to a garbage district fee.
A. All waste to be collected by the Town of Amherst or its designated agent
shall be placed for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection
day. The Town of Amherst hereby assumes no responsibility to collect
waste that is placed for collection after 7:00 a.m. on the designated
collection day.
B. No solid waste shall be placed within the public right-of-way earlier
than 12:00 noon of the day prior to the designated collection day.
C. All containers shall be removed from the public right-of-way or other
place of collection by the occupants of the premises where collected no
later than 7:00 p.m. of the designated collection day.
D. Move Out, Clean Up and Bulk Garbage Disposal: Residents and
property owners are only allowed to place eight (8) items in addition to
their garbage totes at the curb for pick up. If there are more than eight
(8) items, and/or such items are placed at the curb prior to 12:00 noon
on the day before the scheduled collection, property owners will be
assessed a move out fee of Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) by
way of official citation payable to the Town of Amherst.
E. All residents shall source-separate and prepare recyclables pursuant to
the provisions of this article and the recycling regulations of the Office
of Refuse Control.
F. Prohibited waste.
(1) The Town of Amherst hereby assumes no responsibility to collect,
and no person shall place in a public right-of-way, the following
waste material:
(a) Waste material generated outside the Town of Amherst or from
any property not in the garbage district of the Town of
Amherst.
(b) Waste material generated on premises which does not abut the
same public right-of-way.
§ 169-6 AMHERST CODE § 169-6
1:512
§ 169-7. Collection of recyclable material.
§ 169-8. Removal of waste generated by contractors.
(2) The fact that waste material is in a public right-of-way shall be
rebuttal prima facie evidence that such material was placed there
by the owner of the property abutting that public right-of-way.
A. Private collection programs for multiresidential complexes.
(1) The owner, manager or superintendent of every multiresidential
complex shall provide and maintain, in a neat and sanitary
condition, recycling collection areas to receive newspapers and
other designated recyclables included in the curbside collection
programs which are generated by residents of the complex. In
cases where a condominium, cooperative, homeowners' or similar
association exists, the association shall be responsible for provision
and maintenance of the recycling collection areas. Said recycling
collection areas shall be established by January 1, 1993, to include
all items presently collected in the residential portion of the
garbage and refuse district of the Town of Amherst.
(2) The owner, manager or superintendent of each multiresidential
complex above shall arrange for the collection of recyclables from
the recycling collection areas.
(3) The number and design of the collection areas required by this
section for each complex shall be consistent with guidelines
provided by the Office of Refuse Control.
B. Commercial, industrial and institutional source-separation programs.
(1) All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within
the Town of Amherst shall source-separate and arrange for the
collection of recyclable material where known markets or
secondary uses are available.
(2) The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables for
disposition hereunder shall be the responsibility of the person who
owns, manages or operates the commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment at which the recyclables are generated
("generator") or the person contractually obligated to the
generator to arrange for collection and disposal of its solid waste.
Said arrangements may include, without limitations, direct
marketing of recyclables, contracts with permitted solid waste
collectors/haulers for separate collection of any or all designated
recyclables, contracts with other persons for separate collection of
any or all designated recyclables or direct delivery to a designated
processing facility.
A. All brush and tree parts removed by commercial contractors must be
removed from premises by the contractor. Such brush and tree parts
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-8
1:513
§ 169-9. Ownership of recyclables placed for collection.
Any time a resident places any material within a public right-of-way for
collection by the Town of Amherst, that recyclable material shall become the
property of the Town of Amherst. No person, unless acting under authority
of the Town of Amherst or its authorized agent, shall collect, pick up or
remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed any recyclable
material so placed for collection; each such unauthorized collection, pickup
or removal shall constitute a separate violation of this article; provided,
however, that where the Town of Amherst has refused to collect recyclable
material because it has not been placed or prepared according to the
provisions of this article, the person responsible for initially placing that
material shall remove it from the public right-of-way.
§ 169-10. Hazardous waste.
may not be placed within a public right-of-way, except temporarily if
necessary in the course of the work which produced the brush and tree
parts.
B. All construction and demolition debris produced by a commercial
contractor must be removed from the premises by the contractor. Said
debris may not be placed within a public right-of-way, except
temporarily if necessary in the course of the work which produced said
debris.
A. The Town of Amherst shall not collect or allow to be collected
dangerous, hazardous or chemically toxic wastes, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) Dangerous wastes. Wastes that represent an immediate threat to
the safety of employees of the Town of Amherst and/or the general
public, including but not limited to waste with jagged or protruding
objects, broken glass or nails.
(2) Hazardous wastes, as defined in the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law and regulations thereto, including but not
limited to:
(a) Ignitable wastes, such as paint thinners, solvent-based
cleaners, degreasers (e.g., acetone, xylene) and gasoline.
(b) Corrosive wastes, such as containers of battery acid or metalcleaning
bath sludges (e.g., sodium hydroxide or sulfuric or
hydrochloric acid).
(c) Reactive wastes, such as cyanide metal-plating sludges or any
waste that will react violently with water or which generates
toxic gases, vapors or fumes (e.g., sodium metal).
(d) EP toxicity test wastes which produce an extract containing
contaminants such as arsenic, lead, chromium, silver or
§ 169-8 AMHERST CODE § 169-10
1:514
§ 169-11. Dumping prohibited. [Amended 7-15-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
herbicides; or industrial process wastes, contaminated soil
from a spill or other solids containing any of the metals or
organic materials in excess of the concentrations listed in state
law and regulations.
(e) Toxic wastes, such as sludges from solvent recovery, solvents
and the industry-specific wastes listed in the regulations of the
Commissioner of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
(f) Medical waste: any infectious medical waste, subject to the
provisions of the New York State Health Law as classified as
infectious waste.
B. Dangerous, hazardous or chemically toxic wastes should be disposed by
the owner or producer in a manner acceptable under all state and
federal laws and regulations. [Amended 4-16-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
A. No person shall dump, drop, deposit, abandon or otherwise dispose of
any garbage, refuse, rubbish, debris, recyclable material or other waste
in or on any public right-of-way, road, street, highway or alley in the
Town of Amherst, outside the Village of Williamsville, unless contained
and prepared as specified in this chapter.
B. No person shall dump, drop, deposit, abandon or otherwise dispose of
any garbage, refuse, rubbish, debris, recyclable material or other waste
in or upon any privately owned land in the Town of Amherst, outside of
the Village of Williamsville.
C. Dumping, dropping or depositing of clean fill consisting only of rock,
concrete, soil, stone or clay is permitted on privately owned land by the
owner or other person, having the written consent of the owner, for
grading purposes only. This requirement for written consent shall not
be applicable for filling operations being conducted in conjunction with
a valid site plan, building permit or plumbing permit. No fill shall be
deposited or graded into wetland or wetland buffer areas in violation of
state or federal law or regulation or any Town ordinance, law or
regulation. Dumping of fill material except as specifically permitted in
this subsection is a violation of this chapter.
D. No person shall dump, drop, deposit or otherwise dispose of any
garbage, rubbish, debris, yard waste, fill material or any other waste in
any waterway, Town drainage system, receiver catch basin or manhole
in the Town of Amherst, outside the Village of Williamsville.
§ 169-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-12
1:515
§ 169-12. Unsanitary conditions prohibited.
No person shall allow, permit or cause to exist any unsanitary or filthy
condition in, on or about any premises owned, used or occupied by said
person. The owner, lessee, tenant or other person having management or
control of or occupying any lot, premises, dwelling or other building in the
Town shall keep the same at all times free and clean of any accumulation
of garbage, refuse, yard waste or discarded matter of any type, except as
provided for in this article.
§ 169-13. Removal of uncollected waste.
Where the Town of Amherst has not collected waste material because it was
not placed or prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article,
the person who placed it for collection and the owner of the real property
whereon the waste material was generated shall remove such material
as soon as possible after the Town or designated contractor has refused
collection and, in any event, by 7:00 p.m. of the designated collection day.
The failure to remove any such material by 7:00 p.m. of the designated
collection day shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 169-14. Burning restrictions.
No person shall ignite or burn or cause to be ignited or burned any garbage
within the Town of Amherst, unless such is placed in an incinerator
constructed for such purpose and properly installed and equipped in
conformity with all laws, rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
§ 169-15. Maintenance of property.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of every residence,
store dwelling or other building within the Town of Amherst, outside the
corporate limits of the Village of Williamsville, to keep such residence,
store, dwelling or other building with all its appurtenances or parts thereof
occupied by such occupant clean and free from all kinds of flammable waste
or waste that is easily ignited and to keep sidewalks and all yard areas
on the occupied premises free, clear and clean of all waste of any kind or
description.
§ 169-16. Storage regulations.
A. Containers and storage.
(1) All containers or receptacles used for storing garbage or refuse
shall be of such material and so constructed as to withstand the use
for which they are intended without breaking or collapsing.
(2) Garbage shall be stored in covered rodent-proof tote units or other
watertight, metal or plastic containers that are rodent-proof and
designed for the purpose of storing all household garbage. Other
than the tote units issued by the Town, containers shall not exceed
§ 169-12 AMHERST CODE § 169-16
1:516
§ 169-17. Prevention of spills during collection.
Every person who shall engage in the business of collecting garbage and
rubbish within the Town of Amherst shall use for that purpose a box or
vessel so constructed as to prevent the escape of any such garbage or
a forty-gallon capacity nor weigh more than 60 pounds when filled.
[Amended 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(3) Plastic bags containing garbage or household solid waste may not
be placed in the right-of-way for collection unless contained in an
approved, Town-provided tote or other metal or plastic rodentproof
container designed for the purpose of storing householdgenerated
garbage. [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(4) Except as permitted hereinafter, refuse shall be stored in metal,
plastic or vinyl containers designed for that purpose or bushel
baskets with handles or in containers or bags specifically designed
for certain classifications of debris or yard waste. All tree
trimmings, logs, branches and trunks shall be cut a length not
exceeding four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two
feet thick. In no event shall any container, bag or bundle exceed 60
pounds in weight.
(5) During the months of October and November when the volume of
leaves makes it impractical to place them in containers, leaves may
be placed in piles not exceeding six feet in diameter at the curbline
but shall not be placed on the paved portion of the highway.
B. Permitted Placement. Except as hereinafter permitted, it shall be the
duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having
control or management of any dwelling or other building in the Town to
keep all garbage and refuse containers or receptacles inside the
dwelling or other building, garage or other enclosed structure
constructed according to the Building Code for that purpose or, if
stored outside, behind the front elevation of the primary building on the
property provided that the totes are at least partially obstructed from
view from the street such as along the side of the house. [Amended
2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
C. Special provisions.
(1) Holiday trees may be placed at the curbline or pavement line for
collection during December and the first 15 days of January without
being cut and bundled as otherwise herein required.
(2) Portable transfer containers designed to be transported by motor
vehicle, exceeding the capacity and weight authorized by this
section, may be used for the outdoor storage of garbage and refuse
on premises occupied for commercial, industrial, institutional and
apartment uses. Such containers shall be emptied or replaced
whenever full and, in any event, at least once a week.
§ 169-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-17
1:517
rubbish therefrom. Such a box or vessel shall at all times, when not
necessarily opened for the purpose of depositing the material collected
therein, be kept securely covered.
§ 169-18. License required for collectors.
For the preservation of the health, peace and good order of the community,
no person shall collect any garbage or rubbish within the Town of Amherst
without first procuring from the Town of Amherst, with the approval of the
Town Board of said Town, a license therefor under the following terms and
conditions:
A. Upon the issuance of a license under this article, the Town Clerk shall
collect the following fees for each truck owned or operated by the
applicants within the Town:
(1) For a truck collecting from commercial establishments only and
having four collection stops or fewer: $25.
(2) The sum of $100 for all other trucks collecting garbage and rubbish
within the Town.
B. No license shall be issued for any truck unless and until a schedule of
collecting stops or areas served for each day of the week by such trucks
or persons owning the same is filed with the Town Clerk.
C. No license shall be issued for any truck collecting garbage within the
Town unless it is closed in a box- or vessel-type vehicle so constructed
as to prevent the escape of any such garbage or offensive odors
therefrom.
(1) Such trucks or vehicles shall be subject to inspection by a
designated employee of the Office of Refuse Control at such
intervals as the Senior Refuse Control Officer shall determine.
Upon the certification of the Office of Refuse Control that any such
truck or vehicle does not comply with this article, the Town Clerk
shall immediately revoke the license issued for such truck or
vehicle.
(2) A truck or vehicle on which a license has been revoked shall not be
relicensed until the Office of Refuse Control certifies that it
complies with this article and the owner pays the license fee
prescribed by this article, plus a reissue and inspection charge of
$25.
(3) The provisions of this subsection shall be in addition to all other
penalties or punishments as prescribed in this article.
D. No license shall be issued for any such truck unless the applicant
complies with all other rules or regulations which may from time to
time be promulgated by the Town Board of the Town of Amherst.
§ 169-17 AMHERST CODE § 169-18
1:518
§ 169-19. Expiration date of licenses.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the 31st day of
December following the date of issuance.
§ 169-20. Reporting of violations.
All employees or agents of the Town of Amherst, including those under
contract to collect the waste, are hereby authorized to report each and
every violation of this article to the Refuse Control Office.
§ 169-21. Enforcement.
§ 169-22. Penalties for offenses.
E. Upon the issuance of each license, the Town Clerk shall deliver to the
applicant two license plates. The plates shall be of such material, form,
design and dimensions and shall contain or set forth such
distinguishing number as the Town Clerk shall prescribe. No person
shall operate a truck or other motor vehicle for the purpose of
collecting garbage or refuse within the Town unless such plates are
securely fastened to each side of the truck or other vehicle not less than
three feet nor more than six feet from the ground. If a truck or other
motor vehicle is operated within the Town in violation of the foregoing
provisions, the Town Clerk shall revoke the license issued therefor. The
provisions of this subsection shall be in addition to all other penalties or
punishments as prescribed in this article.
A. The Town of Amherst Refuse Control Office and such other person as
may be designated by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of
Amherst are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article, to
cause collections to be made according to this article and to cause to be
printed and distributed proper notice to each premises within the
garbage and refuse district and to notify persons governed by this
article of the dates and times for waste collection and of any rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article.
B. The Refuse Control Officers are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets and/or summonses with respect to violations of this
article. [Amended 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
A. Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of this
article shall be deemed a violation and shall be subject to the following
penalties: [Amended 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense within twelve-month period: a fine of $50 to $100.
(3) Third offense within twelve-month period: a fine of $100 to $150.
(4) Fourth offense within twelve-month period: a fine of $150 to $300.
§ 169-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-22
1:519
§ 169-23. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this article is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this article.
§ 169-24. Effective date.
This article shall take effect September 1, 1992.
(5) Any additional offense within twelve-month period: a fine of $300 to
$500.
B. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this article
shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
C. Each day that a violation of this article is committed or permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 169-22 AMHERST CODE § 169-24
1:520
ARTICLE II
Rodent Control
[Adopted 9-19-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
§ 169-25. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that:
§ 169-26. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 169-27. Rodent control measures required.
A. The improper storage and disposal of accumulated rubbish, boxes,
lumber, scrap metal, garbage and food set out for animals have created
conditions leading to an increase in the number of rodents in the Town.
B. The number of rodents in the Town creates a risk to the health, safety,
and comfort of residents of the Town of Amherst.
A. To preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the public as well as the
environmental quality of the Town of Amherst by reducing the number
of rodents in the Town.
B. To require the storage of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, tires,
animal feed, and other materials in a manner that reduces the available
habitat and food sources for rodents in the Town.
A. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of
accumulated rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, tires or any other
materials in such a manner as to prevent rodent harboring in or about
the dwelling unit. Materials shall be stacked neatly in piles elevated to a
level high enough to permit effective cleaning.
B. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
supply facilities or make provisions for the storage and disposal of
accumulated rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other materials
in such a manner as to prevent rodent harborage in or about the shared
or public areas of a dwelling or its premises. Material shall be stacked
neatly in piles elevated at a level high enough to permit effective
cleaning.
C. No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place,
or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as food or
harborage for rodents in a site accessible to rodents.
D. Storage containers used for solid waste services shall be kept secure
and closed at all times. Areas for storage shall be kept free and clear of
any and all accumulation that is not properly secured. At no time may
any garbage or trash be stored outside in plastic bags or other nonrodent-
proof containers.
§ 169-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-27
1:521
§ 169-28. Enforcement.
§ 169-29. Penalties for offenses.
§ 169-30. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this article is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this article.
§ 169-31. Effective date.
This article shall take effect November 15, 2005.
E. No person shall feed in the open any domestic or wild fowl, birds or
animals except in such manner so as to prevent scattering of feed or
seed upon the ground or ground level which can or will provide food for
rodents, insects, vermin or other pests.
F. Owners of commercial, business establishments must have a rodent
control program in effect which provides for abatement and control of
rodents by a licensed exterminator.
G. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, the applicant for the permit
must establish that a licensed exterminator has completed rodent
abatement at the site or certify that the property is free from rodents or
other vermin.
A. The Town of Amherst Refuse Control Office and such other person as
may be designated by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of
Amherst are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the article.
B. The refuse officers and such other persons as may be designated by
resolution of the Town Board are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets and/or violation summons with respect to violation
of this article.
A. First offense: written warning.
B. Second offense within twelve-month period: $50 to $100.
C. Third offense within twelve-month period: $100 to $150.
D. Fourth offense within twelve-month period: $150 to $300.
§ 169-27 AMHERST CODE § 169-31
1:522
ARTICLE III
Composting
[Adopted 2-23-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 169-32. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to composting operations located on
property that is being used primarily for residential purposes. The
composting operation shall be conducted as an accessory use to the
residential use of the property.
§ 169-33. Composting Operation and Maintenance.
A. Composting operations shall be maintained in compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) All compost material shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost
bin constructed of plastic, metal or other material acceptable to the
Commissioner of Building. For residential property larger than one
acre in area, yard waste may also be composted in an unenclosed
manner. A compost bin shall be no larger in volume than one cubic
yard. No more than three (3) compost bins shall be allowed for each
property. Compost bins must be rodent proof and five (5) feet or
less in height.
(2) All compost materials shall be maintained so as to prevent the
harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents or pests in
or near the compost bin shall be cause for the Town to issue a
violation(s) and order the compost removed.
(3) All compost bins shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant
odors or any other nuisance condition.
(4) Compost bins shall be located at a minimum of three (3) feet from
the rear or side property line and shall be located a minimum of
twenty (20) feet from any home, patio, pool or similar structure on
an adjacent property. Compost bins shall not be located between
the front of a principal residential structure and a public or private
right-of-way.
(5) No compost bin shall be located where it will impede the natural
free flow of storm water drainage.
B. Acceptable Composting Material shall be limited to the following
materials:
(1) Yard waste, including leaves, sod, and grass clippings;
(2) Untreated wood, wood chips, and sawdust;
(3) Paper;
(4) Straw;
§ 169-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-33
1:523
§ 169-34. Enforcement.
§ 169-35. Penalties for Offenses.
§ 169-36. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this article is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this article.
(5) Vegetables, fruits and their remains, including peels and rinds;
(6) Empty egg shells;
(7) Aquatic weeds;
(8) Coffee grounds and tea leaves;
(9) Evergreen needles;
(10) Hair;
(11) Dryer lint;
(12) Vacuum cleaner dust;
(13) Organic garden waste;
(14) Compost additives that aid the decomposition process,
(15) Bread, rice and pasta.
A. The Town of Amherst Refuse Control Office, Refuse Control Officers,
the Commissioner of Building, all Code Enforcement personnel in the
Building Department and such other persons as may be designated by
resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce this article.
B. The Refuse Control Officers, the Commissioner of Building, all Code
Enforcement personnel in the Building Department and such other
persons as may be designated by resolution of the Town Board are
hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets and/or
violation summons with respect to violation of this article.
C. Each week that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense punishable as such.
A. First offense: written warning.
B. Second offense within twelve-month period: $50 to $100.
C. Third offense within twelve-month period: $100 to $150.
D. Fourth or more offense within twelve-month period: $150 to $250
§ 169-33 AMHERST CODE § 169-36
1:524
Chapter 172
STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL; ILLICIT
DISCHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Reimbursement of expert fees — See Ch. 108.
Stormwater Drainage District Nos. 4,6 and
26 — See Ch. 158, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 169-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-36
1:525

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections to Separate Storm
Sewer System
§ 172-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Amherst through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES
general permit for municipal separate storm sewer systems. The objectives
of this article are:
§ 172-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this chapter, the following terms
will have meanings set forth below:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 172-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:527
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, that serves as
the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional engineer,
licensed architect, or certified professional in erosion and sediment control
(CPESC).
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including, but not limited to:
§ 172-2 AMHERST CODE § 172-2
1:528
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 172-5 of this chapter.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:529
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Amherst.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water, which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
A. Owned or operated by the Town of Amherst;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 172-2 AMHERST CODE § 172-2
1:530
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and
habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water
body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge
from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior
to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:531
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The employee duly licensed
in New York State as a professional engineer (PE), licensed architect, or
certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) designated
by the Town of Amherst to enforce this chapter. The SMO may also be
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STREAM — Includes:
A. Rivers;
B. Creeks;
C. Perennial streams or ditches;
D. Intermittent streams or ditches;
Lakes and ponds that have an outlet that discharge to any of the
foregoing streams;
E.
§ 172-2 AMHERST CODE § 172-2
1:532
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK —
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 172-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 172-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such powers granted
Culverts and other man-made or artificial conveyances that carry
stream flow from any of the forgoing; and
F.
G. Channelized streams.
Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells,
rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic
Ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New York and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal,
fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do
not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground
waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or
within its jurisdiction.
A.
Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds
or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters
of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water
which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a
disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of
the state.
B.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-4
1:533
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 172-5. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: waterline flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential
car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash
water, water from fire-fighting activities, and any other water
source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be
made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing
pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
§ 172-4 AMHERST CODE § 172-5
1:534
§ 172-6. Failing individual sewage treatment systems prohibited.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system
in areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 172-7. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 172-2, Definitions, of this chapter.
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 172-6, improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
§ 172-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-8
1:535
§ 172-8. Use of best management practices required.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 172-2 of this chapter, or activities
contaminating stormwater as defined in § 172-7 of this chapter, the
municipality may require implementation of best management
practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 172-2 of this
chapter, or an activity contaminating stormwater as defined in
§ 172-7 of this chapter, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to
reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems. In response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants where individual sewage treatment systems are contributing
to the municipality's being subject to the special conditions as defined
in § 172-2 of this chapter, the owner or operator of such individual
sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee;
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives;
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals;
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items; and
(e) Inspect the tank for cracks, leaks and blockages by the septage
hauler at the time of pumping of the tank contents.
§ 172-8 AMHERST CODE § 172-8
1:536
§ 172-9. Suspension of access to MS4.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) A design professional licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that
involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the municipality at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system.
A. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such
suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the reasons
for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize
danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
§ 172-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-10
1:537
§ 172-10. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 172-11. Access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready and safe access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records as may be required to
implement this article.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this article is a violation of this chapter. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this chapter commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
§ 172-10 AMHERST CODE § 172-11
1:538
§ 172-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of article, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 172-13. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect and/
or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
chapter, he/she may order compliance by written notice of violation to
the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore
§ 172-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-13
1:539
§ 172-14. Challenge to notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may challenge the notice in a
special proceeding commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules of the State of New York.
§ 172-15. Corrective measures after appeal.
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator; and
(6) Advise the violator that the Town of Amherst will seek civil
remedies and criminal penalties, including the imposition of a fine
as provided in Subsection B.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
violations and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to
violations shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of a judicial challenge,
within five business days of receipt by the violation of the court's order,
then the SMO shall request the owner's permission for access to the
subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
§ 172-13 AMHERST CODE § 172-16
1:540
§ 172-16. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 172-17. Alternative remedies.
§ 172-18. Violations deemed to be public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 172-19. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Stormwater Management Officer and
concurrence of the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation.
(5) The violator cooperated in the investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 172-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-19
1:541

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management; Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 172-20. Findings.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 172-21. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to
address the findings of fact in § 172-20 hereof. This article seeks to meet
those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 172-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-21
1:543
§ 172-22. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Town Board has the authority to enact local laws and
amend local laws to promote the health, safety or general welfare of the
Town of Amherst and for the protection and enhancement of its physical
environment. The Amherst Town Board may include in any such local law
provisions for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or
independent contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 172-23. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal separate
stormwater sewer systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended
or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) general permit
for construction activities, GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This article shall be applicable to all land development activities as
identified in § 172-20.
B. The municipality shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The
Stormwater Management Officer may review the plans, engage the
services of a registered professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee
schedule established by said governing board, or accept the
certification of a licensed professional that the plans conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 172-21 AMHERST CODE § 172-23
1:544
§ 172-24. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from review under this article:
§ 172-25. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board of the Town of Amherst under site plan regulations shall
be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this article.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this
article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this article.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb fewer than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Town of Amherst on or before the effective date of this article.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this article.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family, or installing or maintaining private use sheds and
ornamental ponds.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be approved until the
appropriate board has received an acceptable stormwater pollution
§ 172-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-25
1:545
prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the
specifications in this article.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
§ 172-25 AMHERST CODE § 172-25
1:546
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in Article I, § 172-2, and
meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity
and water quality controls (post-construction stormwater runoff
controls) as set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1) of this section.
§ 172-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-25
1:547
(b) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater
management practice.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms.
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with pre-development conditions.
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each post-construction stormwater management practice.
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with Article II, § 172-27,
of this chapter.
(j) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who
shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meet the requirements of this chapter. [Added
9-15-2008 by L.L. No. 13-2008]
C. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this chapter.
D. (Reserved)31
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Other environmental permits, was repealed 9-15-2008
by L.L. No. 13-2008.
§ 172-25 AMHERST CODE § 172-25
1:548
§ 172-26. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and
agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. Plan-in-hand. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the
land development activity during construction from the date of
initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
C. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in Subsection A(1) or A(2), and the SWPPP shall be prepared
by a licensed professional. [Added 9-15-2008 by L.L. No. 13-2008]
§ 172-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-27
1:549
§ 172-27. Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.
A. Maintenance during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 172-2 and meeting
Condition A, B, or C in § 172-25B(2), the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5
inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook. [Amended 9-15-2008 by L.L. No.
13-2008]
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Town of Amherst to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the counsel
for the Town of Amherst.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management appurtenances installed in accordance with
this article shall be operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this
article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as a minimum,
the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Town of Amherst shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding
§ 172-27 AMHERST CODE § 172-27
1:550
§ 172-28. (Reserved)
§ 172-29. Construction inspections.
on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and
conditions of Schedule B of this chapter, entitled "Sample Stormwater
Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."32 The Town of Amherst, in
lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility,
provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and
includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by
easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The Town of Amherst Stormwater Management Officer may require
such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this
article and may either approve that portion of the work completed
or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this article and the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the Town of Amherst enforcement official at
least 48 hours before any of the following as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
32.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 172-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-29
1:551
§ 172-30. Performance and maintenance guarantee; recordkeeping.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Town of Amherst
Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management
practices located on site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including, but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Town of Amherst Stormwater Management
Officer may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to
this article as are necessary to determine compliance with this article.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Town of Amherst the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Town of Amherst in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Town of
Amherst may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Town
of Amherst as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be
determined by the Town of Amherst based on submission of final design
plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The
performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released
from liability by the Town of Amherst, provided that such period shall
§ 172-29 AMHERST CODE § 172-30
1:552
§ 172-31. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facilities have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Town of Amherst. Per-annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released
from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Town of Amherst with an irrevocable letter of credit from
an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation
and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities, both during and after construction, and until the facilities are
removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly
operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities, the Town of Amherst may draw upon the
account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance,
including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Town of Amherst may require entities subject to
this article to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
article.
A. Notice of violation. When the Town of Amherst determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this article, the Stormwater Management Officer may
issue a written notice of violation to the landowner. The notice of
violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal to the SMO
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
§ 172-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-31
1:553
§ 172-32. Fees for services.
The Town of Amherst may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Town of Amherst or performed by a third party for the
B. Stop-work orders. The Town of Amherst may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land development activities, except those activities
that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stopwork
order shall be in effect until the Town of Amherst confirms that the
land development activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
violations and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to
violations shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this article,
the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the occupancy of
said building or land. The Stormwater Management Officer shall notify
the Commissioner of Building that there has been a violation of this
article and that no certificate of occupancy shall issue until the violation
is satisfactorily remediated.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Town of Amherst may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon
the property until paid.
§ 172-31 AMHERST CODE § 172-32
1:554
Town of Amherst. Fees shall be set and paid as required by Chapter 108 of
the Code of the Town of Amherst.
§ 172-33. Severability. [Added 9-15-2008 by L.L. No. 13-2008]
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
§ 172-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-33
1:555
Chapter 175
TAXATION
§ 172-33 AMHERST CODE § 172-33
1:556
ARTICLE I
Real Property Exemption for Persons Over Sixty-Five
[Adopted 4-2-1990 by L.L. No. 2-199033; amended in its entirety
2-27-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 175-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation
to the maximum extent of 50% of the assessed valuation of real property
owned by certain persons with limited income who are 65 years of age or
over.
§ 175-2. Qualifications and filing requirements.
§ 175-3. Value of M. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004;
10-1-2018 by L.L. No. 19-2018]
For the purpose of this article, M is equal to $27,000. The value of M may be
modified from time to time by the Town Board by resolution or amendment
of this article.
§ 175-4. Income limitation. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
2-2004]
Partial exemption from taxation to the extent set forth in this article is
granted to those persons having income or combined income as limited by
§ 467 of the Real Property Tax Law and not exceeding the amounts set forth
in the following schedule for the income tax year immediately preceding the
year of application for the exemption:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
M or less 50%
More than M but less than M+$1,000 45%
A. Only those persons meeting the requirements of § 467 of the Real
Property Tax Law shall be entitled to the exemption hereby provided.
Any person who will become 65 years of age on or before December 31
in the year of application shall be deemed qualified.
B. Notwithstanding the time requirements for filing required for
applications as provided in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, the
Town of Amherst Assessor is authorized to accept applications for
renewal of exemptions after taxable status date but on or before the
date for hearing of complaints.
33.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Real Property Exemption for
Persons Over Sixty-Five, adopted 12-12-1966, as amended.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-4
1:557
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
M+$1,000 or more but less than
M+$2,000
40%
M+$2,000 or more but less than
M+$3,000
35%
M+$3,000 or more but less than
M+$3,900
30%
M+$3,900 or more but less than
M+$4,800
25%
M+$4,800 or more but less than
M+$5,700
20%
M+$5,700 or more but less than
M+$6,600
15%
M+$6,600 or more but less than
M+$7,500
10%
M+$7,500 or more but less than
M+$8,400
5%
§ 175-4.1. Exclusion of veterans disability compensation. [Added
5-4-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998]
For the purpose of calculating income in computing the applicable
exemption in § 175-4 of this article, such income shall not include veterans
disability compensation, as defined in Title 38 of the United States Code.
§ 175-4.2. Renewal. [Added 4-3-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
A. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
assessing authority shall mail to each person who was granted
exemption pursuant to this section on the latest completed assessment
roll an application form and a notice that such application must be filed
on or before taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. The assessing authority shall, within three
days of the completion and filing of the tentative assessment roll, notify
by mail any applicant who has included with their application at least
one self-addressed, prepaid envelope, of the approval or denial of the
application; provided, however, that the assessing authority shall, upon
the receipt and filing of the application, send by mail notification of
receipt to any applicant who has included two of such envelopes with
the application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial
pursuant to this subsection, such notice shall be on a form prescribed
by the State Board.
B. Any person who has been granted exemption pursuant to this section of
five consecutive completed assessment rolls shall not be subject to the
§ 175-4 AMHERST CODE § 175-4.2
1:558
requirements set forth in Subsection A of this section. However, said
person shall be mailed an application form and a notice informing
them of these rights. Such exemption shall be automatically granted
on each subsequent assessment roll; provided, however, that when tax
payment is made by such person a sworn affidavit must be included
with such which shall state that such person continues to be eligible
for such exemption. Such affidavit shall be on a form prescribed by the
State Board. If such affidavit is not included with the tax payment, the
collecting officer shall proceed pursuant to § 551 of the Real Property
Tax Law.
C. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, where a renewal
application for the exemption authorized by this section has not been
filed on or before the taxable statue date, and the owner or owners
believe that good cause exists for the failure to file the renewal
application by said date, the owner or owners may, not later than the
last day for paying taxes without incurring interest or penalty, submit a
written request to the Assessor asking her or him to extend the filing
deadline and grant the exemption. Such request shall contain an
explanation of why the deadline was missed, and shall be accompanied
by a renewal application, reflecting the facts and circumstances as they
existed on the taxable status date. The Assessor may extend the filing
deadline and grant the exemption if she or he is satisfied that (i) good
cause existed for the failure to file the renewal application by the
taxable status date, and (ii) the applicant is otherwise entitled to the
exemption. The Assessor shall mail notice of her or his determination to
the owner/owners. If the determination states that the Assessor has
granted the exemption, she or he shall thereupon be authorized and
directed to correct the assessment roll accordingly or, if another person
has custody or control of the assessment roll, to direct that person to
make the appropriate corrections. If the correction is not made before
taxes are levied, the failure to take the exemption into account in the
computation of the tax roll shall be deemed a "clerical error" pursuant
to Real Property Tax Law § 467 and shall be corrected accordingly.
§ 175-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-4.2
1:559

ARTICLE II
Tax Exemption for Businesses
[Adopted 12-6-1976 by L.L. No. 8-1976]
§ 175-5. Exemption established.
Eligible business facilities located in that part of the Town of Amherst, Erie
County, New York, outside the boundaries of the Village of Williamsville,
and as defined in the New York State Commerce Law § 115,34 and certified
by the New York State Job Incentive Board shall be exempt from taxes and
special ad valorem levies imposed by or on behalf of the Town in the total
amount allowable as computed pursuant to applicable provisions of the laws
of the State of New York. Such exemption shall be granted upon application
made pursuant to the provisions of the New York State Real Property Tax
Law § 485.35 All procedures in connection with such exemptions shall be as
set forth in all applicable laws of the State of New York and of the Town of
Amherst presently in force or as subsequently amended.
§ 175-6. Agreements.
The Town Board may enter into agreements, in such cases as it deems
appropriate, for payments to be made in lieu of the taxes and special ad
valorem levies on business facilities exempt therefrom under the provisions
of § 175-5.
§ 175-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this article or the application thereof
to any person, association, corporation or other entity or real property
is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other sections,
clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be sustained or
given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or application,
and to this end the various sections, clauses and provisions of this article
are declared to be severable.
§ 175-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
34.Editor's Note: See now the Economic Development Law.
35.Editor's Note: Real Property Tax Law § 485 was repealed by P.L. 1988, c. 165, Section 5,
effective 6-27-1988.
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-8
1:561

ARTICLE III
Tax Exemption for Physically Disabled
[Adopted 1-16-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
§ 175-9. Exemption granted.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if the
improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating
the use and accessibility of the real property by a resident owner thereof
who is physically disabled, or a member of the resident owner's household
who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real property. The
exemption shall apply to improvements constructed on and after January 1,
1974.
§ 175-10. Qualification for exemption.
To qualify as physically disabled for the purposes of this article, an
individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified statement from a
physician licensed to practice in New York State, on a form prescribed
and made available by the State Board of Real Property Tax Services,
which states that the individual has a permanent physical impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such individual's major life activities. A
person who has obtained a certificate from the State Commission for the
Blind and Visually Handicapped that he or she is legally blind may submit it
in lieu of a physician's certified statement.
§ 175-11. Application.
The exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner or all
of the owners of the real property on a form prescribed and made available
by the State Board of Real Property Tax Services. The applicant shall
furnish such information as that Board or the Assessor shall require. The
application shall be filed together with the appropriate certified statement
of physical disability or certificate of blindness with the Town Assessor on
or before the taxable status date for the Town. The Assessor may require
an inspection of the property and improvements before passing upon the
application.
§ 175-12. Approval of application; continuation of exemption.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the improvement is necessary to facilitate
and accommodate the use and accessibility by a resident who is physically
disabled and that the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this
article, the Assessor shall approve the application and enter the taxable
assessed value of the parcel for which an exemption has been granted
pursuant to this article on the assessment role with the amount of the
exemption as determined pursuant to § 175-9 of this article in a separate
column. Once granted, the exemption shall continue on the real property
§ 175-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-12
1:563
until the improvement ceases to be necessary to facilitate and accommodate
the use and accessibility of the property by the resident who is physically
disabled.
§ 175-13. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, section or part of this article or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application of the remainder to other persons or
circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
section or part thereof and the person and circumstance directly involved in
the controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 175-14. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 175-12 AMHERST CODE § 175-14
1:564
ARTICLE IV
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-21-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]
§ 175-15. Increase or decrease in exemption.
§ 175-16. Applicability. [Amended 2-5-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
The exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be granted to real
property for which an exemption has been granted pursuant to § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law on the assessment roll immediately preceding
the change in level of assessment, provided that property is owned by the
veteran or by another person eligible to receive such exemption, including
a Gold Star Parent.
A. If the ratio between the exemption for veterans granted under § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law and the total assessed value of the real
property for which such exemption has been granted increases or
decreases due only to a full value assessment in the Town of Amherst,
the amount of the exemption heretofore or hereafter granted shall be
increased or decreased in the same proportion as the total assessed
value is increased or decreased.
B. Alternative veterans exemption. [Added 5-19-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997]
(1) The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that recent changes
of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York
would have the effect of reducing tax exemptions for veterans in
the Town of Amherst and wishes to increase the amount of
exemptions allowable to such veterans.
(2) In accordance with the authorization of Subparagraph (ii) of
Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 2 of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law, the maximum exemptions allowed for Paragraphs (a), (b) and
(c) of Subdivision 2 of § 458-a of such law are hereby fixed at
$36,000, $24,000 and $120,000, respectively. [Amended
4-24-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
(3) A Gold Star Parent (i.e., a parent of a child who died in the line of
duty while serving in the United States Armed Forces during a
period of war) owning qualifying residential real property shall be
eligible for exemption to the extent provided by § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law, provided that the real property is used as the
primary residence of the Gold Star Parent. Such qualifying
residential real property shall be entitled to the maximum
exemption allowed by Subsection B(2) above. [Added 11-3-2003
by L.L. No. 13-2003; amended 4-24-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
§ 175-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-17
1:565
§ 175-17. Assessor to make adjustments.
The adjustment provided for in § 175-15A shall be made by the Assessor in
the manner provided in Paragraph 3 of Subdivision 1 of § 458 of the Real
Property Tax Law. No application therefor need be filed by or on behalf of
any owner of any eligible property.
§ 175-18. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 175-18.1. Exemption for Cold War veterans. [Added 4-28-2008 by
L.L. No. 4-2008]
A. Exemption. The Town Board finds that the New York State Legislature
has enacted § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law. That section
authorizes local governments to adopt a local law granting to qualifying
Cold War veterans a real property tax exemption as authorized in
§ 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law. The Town Board hereby enacts
this section in order to ensure the benefits of this property exemption to
these qualifying veterans who served our county during the Cold War
period as defined in § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law. Any Cold War
veteran so qualifying shall be eligible for the exemption upon filing with
the Assessor a form prescribed by the Office of Real Property Services
before the first appropriate taxable status date.
(1) The exemption provided by this section of the local law shall
continue indefinitely and shall not expire so long as the real
property to which it applies continues to meet the definition of
"Qualified Residential Real Property." [Added 2-5-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018]
B. In accordance with the authorization of Paragraph 2(a) and 2(b) of
§ 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law the maximum exemptions allowed
are as follows:
(1) For exemptions under § 458-b(2)(a): 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided however, that such exemptions shall not
exceed $16,000 or the product of $16,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate of the assessing unit or, in the case of a
special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
[Amended 4-26-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
(2) For exemptions under § 458-b(2)(b): In addition to the exemption
provided by Subsection B(1) above, Cold War veterans receiving a
compensation rating for a service-related disability shall be entitled
to an exemption to the extent of the product of the assessed value
of the qualifying real property multiplied by 50% of the Cold War
veteran's disability rating; provided, however, that the exemption
shall not exceed $40,000, or the product of $40,000 multiplied by
§ 175-17 AMHERST CODE § 175-18.1
1:566
the latest equalization rate for the assessing unit or, in the case of
a special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
§ 175-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-18.1
1:567

ARTICLE V
Industrial and Commercial Exemption
[Adopted 7-21-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 175-19. Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board report.
[Amended 5-7-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001]
§ 175-20. Classification categories; eligible business types.
[Amended 3-5-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 5-7-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001;
10-17-2011 by L.L. No. 26-2011]
§ 175-21. Computation of exemption. [Amended 5-7-2001 by L.L.
No. 6-2001; 10-17-2011 by L.L. No. 26-2011]
A. The report and recommendation of the Industrial and Commercial
Incentive Board, dated January 1997, as commissioned in Chapter 25 of
the Town Code, is hereby adopted.
B. The Supplemental Report and Recommendation of the Industrial and
Commercial Incentive Board, dated April 2001 is hereby adopted.
C. The Final Report and Recommendation of the Industrial and
Commercial Incentive Board dated September 2011 is hereby adopted.
[Added 10-17-2011 by L.L. No. 26-2011]
A. Eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad valorem levies
authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b shall be available in the
following classification categories:
(1) Enhancement areas, as shown on the maps of enhancement areas
set forth in the Final Report and Recommendation of the Industrial
and Commercial Incentive Board dated September 2011 which are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article.
The maps of the enhancement areas shall be maintained on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, Town Assessor and the Planning and
Building Departments.
B. Eligibility for exemption shall be restricted to those businesses which
are found only in the designated enhancement areas and have an
eligible land use classification as delineated in the North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS).
A. The cost of construction, alteration, installation or improvement of
eligible properties must exceed $50,000 to qualify for the exemption as
computed pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 485-b of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law.
§ 175-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-22
1:569
§ 175-22. Periodic program review and report.36
The Town Board shall periodically reconvene an Industrial and Commercial
Incentive Board for the purpose of reviewing the impact of the New York
State Real Property Tax Law § 485-b program, including the defined
enhancement areas. The reconvened Incentive Board shall, upon conclusion
of its review, report back to the Amherst Town Board with
recommendations.
§ 175-23. (Reserved)
36.Editor's Note: Former § 175-22, Computation of exemption, was repealed 5-7-2001 by L.L.
No. 6-2001. See now § 175-21.
§ 175-22 AMHERST CODE § 175-23
1:570
ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 4-6-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
§ 175-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation
to the maximum extent of 50% of the assessed valuation of real property
owned by certain persons with limited income who have disabilities.
§ 175-25. Qualifications and filing requirements.
Only those persons meeting the requirements of § 459-c of the Real
Property Tax Law shall be entitled to the exemption hereby provided.
§ 175-26. Value of M.
For the purpose of this article, M is equal to $18,500. The value of M may be
modified from time to time by the Town Board by resolution or amendment
of this article.
§ 175-27. Partial exemption.
Partial exemption from taxation to the extent set forth in this article is
granted to those persons having income or combined income as limited by
§ 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law and not exceeding the amount set forth
in the following schedule for the income tax year immediately preceding the
year of application for exemption:
Annual Income
Percentage of
Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
M or less 50%
More than M but less than M+$1,000 45%
M+$1,000 or more but less than M+$2,000 40%
M+$2,000 or more but less than M+$3,000 35%
M+$3,000 or more but less than M+$3,900 30%
M+$3,900 or more but less than M+$4,800 25%
M+$4,800 or more but less than M+$5,700 20%
M+$5,700 or more but less than M+$6,600 15%
M+$6,600 or more but less than M+$7,500 10%
M+$7,500 or more but less than M+$8,400 5%
§ 175-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-27
1:571

ARTICLE VII
Assessment of Converted Condominium Units
[Adopted 5-18-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998; amended in its entirety
5-7-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 175-28. Legislative findings; nonapplicability of statutory
provisions; construal of provisions.
A. Legislative findings. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that
the State of New York has provided legislative relief to towns in New
York State with respect to the conversion of real property from other
forms of ownership into condominium ownership. Included in that relief
is the right to enact local laws that provide that converted
condominiums should not be assessed and taxed pursuant to formulas
provided for assessment and taxation of condominiums provided by
§ 339-y, Subdivision 1(a), of the Real Property Law and § 581,
Subdivision 1(a), of the Real Property Tax Law. The Town of Amherst
wishes to avail itself of this provision of law.
B. Nonapplicability of statutory provisions. Section 581, Subdivision 1(a),
of the Real Property Tax Law and § 339-y, Subdivision 1(a), of the Real
Property Law with respect to the assessment and taxation of
condominiums shall not apply to any condominiums in the Town of
Amherst that have been converted into condominium status from any
other form of ownership.
C. Nonretroactivity. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed
to modify or otherwise change the taxable status of any converted
condominium previously taxed under any previous provision of this
section.
§ 175-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-28
1:573

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Historic Property Alterations and Rehabilitation
[Adopted 11-15-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999]
§ 175-29. Purpose.
§ 175-30. Applicability.
Real property within the Town of Amherst altered or rehabilitated
subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from Town
real property and special ad valorem levies, subject to and in accordance
with the schedule set forth in § 175-31 and conditions outlined in §§ 175-32
and 175-33.
§ 175-31. Exemption schedule.
Historic property which shall be defined hereafter shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such alteration
or rehabilitation pursuant to the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
A. This real property tax exemption for historic properties is being
enacted in order to achieve the following goals: to increase incentives
for property owners in historic districts to invest in the upkeep and
rehabilitation of properties; to provide an incentive for the restoration
and rehabilitation of commercial structures which qualify as landmarks
in order to provide financial advantages, which may help to attract and
retain businesses in the Town of Amherst; to assist homeowners who
are interested in restoring their own properties but may not be able to
afford to do so when faced with potential increases in taxation as the
result of alterations which would qualify for this exemption; to provide
financial incentives for investment in low-income residential
neighborhoods which may contain landmarked buildings or districts
designated within the area; and to provide a concrete benefit for
restoring or improving historically or architecturally significant
properties which are subject to the regulations of the Historic
Preservation Law of the Town of Amherst.
B. This real property tax exemption is intended to apply to alterations or
rehabilitations of historic property as authorized pursuant to §§ 96-a
and 119-aa through 119-dd of the General Municipal Law and § 444-a of
the Real Property Tax Law and all other powers granted to the Town of
Amherst to provide such exemptions.
C. This article is intended to create a real property tax exemption that
preserves or increases the historic character of real property located
within the Town of Amherst.
§ 175-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-31
1:575
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
§ 175-32. Qualifications for exemption.
No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or rehabilitation
unless all of the following criteria are met:
§ 175-33. Filing requirements.
This exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner or owners
of such historic real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of
Real Property Tax Services. The application shall be filed with the Town
Assessor of the Town of Amherst, on or before the appropriate taxable
status date covering Town real property.
A. Such property must be historic, which shall mean that the property has
been designated as a landmark or is a property that is located in and
contributes to the character of a designated historic district, created by
a local law which was passed pursuant to § 96-a or 119-dd of the
General Municipal Law.
B. Alteration or rehabilitation of exteriors and public interiors (to the
extent that public interiors are regulated by the local preservation
law37) of historic property must meet guidelines and review standards
established in the local preservation law.
C. Alterations or rehabilitation of historic property must meet guidelines
and review standards as set forth in Chapter 121 of this Code, the
Historic Preservation Law of the Town of Amherst.
D. Alterations and rehabilitation of exteriors of historic property are
approved by the Town of Amherst Historic Preservation Commission
prior to commencement of work.
E. Alterations or rehabilitation must be commenced subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 121, Historic Preservation.
§ 175-31 AMHERST CODE § 175-34
1:576
§ 175-34. Approval; commencement of exemption; recording of
amount.
Such exemptions shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that
the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this section. The
Assessor shall approve such application, and such property shall thereafter
be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies for Town real
property taxation as provided in the schedule established in § 175-31 of this
article commencing with the assessment roll prepared on the basis of the
taxable status date referred to in § 175-33 of this article. The assessed value
of any exemption granted pursuant to this section shall be entered by the
Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property, with the amount
of the exemptions shown in a separate column.
§ 175-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
completed on or after such effective date.
§ 175-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-35
1:577

ARTICLE IX
Assessment Exemption for Certain Residential Property
Rehabilitation
[Adopted 10-1-2007 by L.L. No. 12-2007]
§ 175-36. Legislative findings.
§ 175-37. Grant of exemption.
A. The Town Board finds that a number of residential properties in the
Town of Amherst have had their assessments reduced due to damage
associated with soil subsidence, lateral soil pressure and other soilrelated
concerns. Owners of some of these distressed properties have
expressed reluctance to repair their homes because they will
immediately face increased assessments based on the value of the
rehabilitation to their property.
B. The Town Board further finds that Chapter 404 of the Laws of 2007
allows certain qualifying municipalities, upon the adoption of an
appropriate local law, to exempt assessment increases for rehabilitation
undertaken by homeowners whose assessments have been reduced as a
result of damage caused by soil-related conditions. It is the intent of the
Town Board by the adoption of this article to avail itself and its
residents of this opportunity.
A. Construction of improvements to residential real property initiated on
or after the first day of January 2007 may be exempt from Town taxation
as provided in this section.
B. Requirements.
(1) Duration of exemption.
(a) Such real property shall be exempt for a period of one year to
the extent of 100% of the increase in the assessed value
thereof attributable to such construction and for an additional
period of four years; provided, however, that the extent of such
exemption shall be decreased by 20% each year during such
additional period of four years and such exemption shall be
computed with respect to the exemption base. The exemption
base shall be the increase in assessed value due to
improvements as determined by the Assessor in the initial year
of such five-year period following the filing of an original
application.
(b) The following table shall illustrate the computation of the tax
exemption:
§ 175-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-37
1:579
Year of Exemption
Percentage of the
Exemption
2 80%
3 60%
4 40%
5 20%
(2) No exemption shall be granted unless:
(a) The value of the construction exceeds $10,000; and
(b) The construction is documented by a building permit, if
required for such improvements, or other appropriate
documentation as required by the Assessor; and
(c) Such construction takes place on a one- or two-family
residential dwelling where the Assessor has previously
reduced the assessment of the dwelling because of a decrease
in value attributed by the Assessor to physical damage to the
dwelling resulting from soil subsidence or other soil-related
condition; and
(d) The extent of such repairs eligible for the exemption shall be
limited to such construction upon a one- or two-family
residential dwelling where the Assessor has previously
reduced the assessment of the dwelling because of a decrease
in value attributed by the Assessor to physical damage to the
dwelling resulting from soil subsidence and other soil-related
conditions.
(3) Such exemption shall be granted upon application by the owner of
such real property upon a form prescribed by the state board. The
application shall be filed with the Assessor of the Town on or before
the taxable status date for that Town and within one year from the
date of completion of the improvements.
(4) If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to the
exemption pursuant to this section, the Assessor shall approve the
application and the real property shall thereafter be exempt from
taxation and special ad valorem taxes by the Town as provided by
this section commencing with the assessment role prepared after
the taxable status date referred to in Subsection B(3) of this
section. The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to
this section shall be entered by the Assessor on the assessment role
with the taxable property, with the amount of the exemption shown
in a separate column.
(5) During the term of the exemption granted pursuant to this section,
if title to the real property granted an exemption pursuant to this
section is transferred or if the property ceases to be used for
§ 175-37 AMHERST CODE § 175-37
1:580
eligible purposes, the exemption granted pursuant to this section
shall cease.
§ 175-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-37
1:581
Chapter 177
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 138. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — Any person driving a taxicab upon the public highways for hire.
OWNER — A person owning or controlling one or more taxicabs and driving
or causing any such vehicle to be driven upon the public highways for hire.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation and any other legal entity.
TAXICABS — A vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for
hire, but not operating on a fixed route.
TAXIMETER — A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for
hire of a taxicab may be mechanically calculated either for the distance
driven or waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge is indicated by
means of figures.
TOWN — The Town of Amherst, not including the Village of Williamsville.
§ 177-2. Licenses required for vehicles.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any taxicab to permit same to be
operated upon the public highways of the Town without having first
obtained and having then in force an owner's license, as hereinafter
provided.
B. Every owner's license issued hereunder shall be issued as of the first
day of January 1967, or a subsequent date of issue, which shall expire
on the 31st day of December 1967, next succeeding. [Amended
8-15-1966]
C. Every person who desires to operate a taxicab or taxicabs owned or
controlled by him upon the public highways within the Town shall file
with the Town Clerk a written application verified under oath, stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, specifying, in the case of
any unincorporated association, the names and addresses of
members thereof and, in the case of any corporation, the names
and addresses of each officer, director and stockholder thereof.
§ 175-37 AMHERST CODE § 177-2
1:582
(2) All misdemeanors or felonies of which the applicant or any member
thereof, if an unincorporated association, and any officer, director
or stockholder thereof if a corporation, has been convicted, stating
the name and location of the court and the date on which such
convictions were held and the penalty imposed therefor.
(3) The experience of the applicant and each member thereof, if an
unincorporated association, and each officer, director and
stockholder thereof, if a corporation, in the transportation of
passengers.
(4) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to provide that the
public convenience and necessity require the granting of a license.
(5) The number of vehicles to be operated by the applicant and a
description of each of such vehicles, including the make, model,
passenger capacity, year of manufacture, motor number and state
registration number thereof, and the make, type and number or
other descriptive designation of the taximeter, together with an
accurate and complete statement of the color of each taxicab.
(6) The age and citizenship of the applicant and each member thereof
if an unincorporated association, and each officer, director and
stockholder thereof if a corporation.
(7) The location of any and all depots and terminals proposed to be
used by the applicant.
D. If the Town Clerk shall find that the applicant is qualified, then the Town
Clerk, upon receipt of a certificate for each taxicab issued by the Town
of Amherst Police Department certifying that the vehicle is in proper
working condition and upon furnishing by the applicant of proof of
insurance against public liability as required by the laws of the State of
New York, which insurance shall be maintained in force during the
period covered by the license, and the payment of the proper fee, shall
issue a license stating the name and address of the applicant, the date
of the issuance thereof, the number of vehicles the applicant is
authorized to operate and the number of the license plates issued to
each vehicle.
E. Every owner licensed hereunder who shall desire to add to the number
of taxicabs he is then operating shall file with the Town Clerk a written
application, under oath, stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's owner's license number.
(3) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove the public
convenience and necessity requires such addition.
§ 177-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-2
1:583
§ 177-3. Fees for vehicle licenses.
The fee for a taxicab owner's license shall be the sum of $15 per year per
each vehicle. For replacing a lost plate, the fee shall be $5. In case of the
sale or disuse for taxicab purposes of any licensed taxicab, the owner of the
taxicab license may have the same transferred to another vehicle owned by
him with the approval of the Town Clerk and the payment of a transfer fee
of $2.50. A fleet operator may pay a license fee of $110 per year, which shall
entitle him to licenses for 10 taxicabs.
§ 177-4. Licenses required for drivers.
(4) A description of each such additional taxicab, including the make,
model, passenger seating capacity, year of manufacture, state
registration number and motor number.
(5) If the Town Clerk shall find the addition of such taxicab meets all
requirements as hereinafter set forth, then he shall issue a
supplementary owner's license, stating the name and address of
the applicant, the number of the license plate issued to each vehicle
and the date of issuance thereof.
F. Any license issued hereunder may be renewed annually for additional
periods of one year each from the date of expiration, upon the filing of
an application containing all the information required herein.
G. The owner's license issued hereunder shall not be transferable.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab upon the public highways of the Town
of Amherst unless such taxicab shall be duly licensed as herein
provided.
B. Every driver's license issued hereunder shall be issued as of the first
day of January 1967, or a subsequent date of issue, which shall expire
on the 31st day of December next succeeding. [Amended 8-15-1966]
C. Every person desiring to drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
Town of Amherst shall file an application for a license so to drive with
the Town Clerk, which application shall be in writing and verified under
oath and shall state:
(1) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(2) A full description of the applicant, including height, weight, color of
eyes and hair, scars or marks and the nature of any physical
infirmity from which he may suffer.
(3) Recommendations by two residents of Erie County not related to
the applicant who have known the applicant for a period of one
year or more and who will vouch for the applicant's sobriety,
honesty and general good character.
(4) Whether or not he is a citizen of the United States.
§ 177-2 AMHERST CODE § 177-4
1:584
(5) The names and addresses of the applicant's employers during the
last five years prior to his application.
(6) All violations of any traffic law, ordinance or regulation for which
the applicant has been arrested or convicted within 18 months
prior to the date of application and all crimes for which the
applicant has ever been arrested or convicted, stating the date and
place of each and the name and location of the court and the date
on which each such conviction was had and the penalty imposed
therefor.
(7) The number and date of issuance of the applicant's New York
chauffeur's license.
(8) Whether or not any operator's or chauffeur's license held by the
applicant has ever been revoked or suspended by the State of New
York or any other state and, if so, by what court or other authority,
on what date, for what cause and, if suspended, the period of such
suspension.
(9) Any other relevant information that the Town Clerk may require.
D. The applicant for a driver's license, at the time of submitting an
application, shall also:
(1) Submit two individual photographs of the applicant taken within 30
days prior to the date of the application, 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2
inches in size, and such pictures must be a true likeness of the
applicant and must show only the neck, shoulders and uncovered
head.
(2) Exhibit a current New York State chauffeur's license for inspection.
(3) Be fingerprinted under the direction and supervision of the Town of
Amherst Police Department.
E. Upon receipt of any application, the Town Clerk shall refer same to the
Town of Amherst Police Department for such investigation as it shall
deem necessary or desirable and report thereon.
F. Upon receipt of the report provided for, the Town Clerk shall issue a
taxicab driver's license to the applicant if he shall find that the
applicant is qualified for same.
G. At the time of the issuance of such license, the Town Clerk shall also
furnish to the applicant a numbered photograph which must be
conspicuously displayed in his taxicab.
H. The driver's license issued herein shall not be transferable.
I. The fee for a driver's license shall be the sum of $5 per year. To replace
a lost or mislaid license, the fee shall be $2.50 per year.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-5
1:585
§ 177-5. Rates to be displayed.
A copy of the rates to be charged shall at all times be displayed in each
vehicle in such a manner that it is easily visible from the rear seat of the
vehicle. Upon demand, the driver of a taxicab shall furnish to the passenger
a receipt for the fare paid, showing the name and photograph number of the
driver.
§ 177-6. Regulation of operation of taxicabs.
§ 177-7. Taxi stands. [Added 9-26-1966, effective 10-17-1966]
A. No driver shall blow his horn, shout or use a loud tone to solicit a fare.
B. No driver shall idle the motor of his car excessively at any time.
C. It shall be the duty of each driver to keep a record of the point of origin
and point of destination of all trips made and the charge made therefor
and to file same with the owner of the taxicab. Such records shall be
preserved for at least six months and shall be made available for
inspection by the Police Department during said period.
D. The numbered license plate issued to each vehicle by the Town Clerk
must be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place adjacent to the
rear license plate and cannot be transferable to another vehicle. The
certificate accompanying said license plate shall be displayed
prominently within the vehicle so as to be viewed from the rear seat.
[Amended 8-15-1966]
E. No taxicab driver shall stop to pick up any additional passengers while
proceeding to the destination of any passenger occupying the taxicab
without the consent of all the passengers.
F. No taxicab driver shall permit more persons to be carried in his taxicab
than the number for which he has seating facilities.
A. No owner or operator of any taxicab, for the purpose of securing
passengers, shall stand on any Town street, highway or place other than
those designated as taxi stands as herein provided, except that, to meet
special conditions, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate
additional places where taxicabs may stand while awaiting
employment, but the use of such stands shall be subject at all times to
the orders of said Chief of Police.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the
temporary occupation of any street in the vicinity of theaters and places
of public entertainment by any taxicab while actually engaged by one or
more passengers; provided, however, that in such case, the vehicle and
the operator shall be subject at all times to the orders of the police.
§ 177-5 AMHERST CODE § 177-7
1:586
§ 177-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not more
than $100, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs and continues. In addition thereto,
upon conviction for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Town Clerk.
§ 177-9. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon publication and
posting within the provisions of law.
Chapter 179
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscapers — See Ch. 130.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
C. Taxi stands shall be authorized by the Town Board of the Town of
Amherst after a public hearing and shall be construed as an amendment
of this chapter.
§ 177-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-9
1:587

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 179-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to:
A. The Town of Amherst hereby finds that there is a direct and important
relationship between the existence of trees in the Town and the health,
safety and welfare of the community. Trees preserve air and water
quality, provide shelter to people and property and enhance economic
and aesthetic value to property.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
1. Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
by requiring the preservation and protection of trees on public and
private property within the Town.
2. Prevent the unnecessary clearing, destruction and disturbance of
trees on public and private property within the Town.
3. Establish minimum standards and criteria for the limitation of the
removal of trees on public and private property within the Town.
4. Establish minimum standards and criteria to ensure the
replacement of trees removed from public and private property
within the Town.
5. Reduce flooding.
6. Reduce water pollution.
7. Reduce the effects of wind and air turbulence.
8. Reduce visual pollution.
9. Reduce sound pollution.
10. Reduce soil erosion.
11. Reduce levels of carbon dioxide and return oxygen to atmosphere.
12. Increase groundwater supply.
13. Provide shade.
14. Provide habitat for wildlife.
15. Conserve and protect property values and otherwise facilitate the
creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community.
16. Generally preserve and safeguard the ecological and aesthetic
environment.
§ 179-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-2
1:589
§ 179-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meaning:
DECIDUOUS TREE — A tree that sheds its leaves annually and including
ginkgo genus.
COMMUNITY TREE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed by the Tree Board which encompasses a long term vision of the
Town of Amherst needs, values and goals for its trees. The Community
Tree Management Plan is based on inventory analysis of data to assess and
address the health and longevity of the Town's trees in order to promote
diverse and sustainable tree resources for the future.
EVERGREEN — A plant or tree that retains its verdure, leaves or needles
through all seasons and including deciduous conifers such as members of
the Larix, Pseudolarux, and taxodium genus.
PARK TREES — Any and all trees, shrubs, bushes and other woody
vegetation located in Town parks and all other areas owned by the Town.
STREET TREES — Any and all trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody
vegetation on land located between property lines on either side of all
public streets, highways or rights-of-way within the Town.
TOPPING — The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. On smaller trees, topping applies
to the cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree so as
to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREE — Any woody perennial plant (deciduous or coniferous) usually
having a single main stem generally with few or no branches on its lower
part.
§ 179-2 AMHERST CODE § 179-2
1:590
ARTICLE II
Town Tree Board
§ 179-3. Town Tree Board.
A. Creation and establishment. There shall be created and established a
Town Tree Board of the Town of Amherst, New York, which shall consist
of a total of seven (7) members. Five (5) members shall be Town
residents (community members); the remaining two (2) members shall
be comprised of the Town Forester and the Town's Landscape Architect.
All community members shall be appointed by the Town Board. The
Tree Board shall annually elect a Chairperson and advise the Town
Board of the name of such Chairperson.
B. Term of office. The term of the five (5) community members appointed
by the Town Board shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be
appointed by the Town Board for the unexpired portion of the term.
C. Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
D. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Tree Board shall review, develop and administer a written
Community Tree Management Plan and create a work plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. This plan will be presented annually to the Town Board at
the second meeting of the Town Board.
(2) Every five years the Tree Board shall develop, update and
administer a written comprehensive Community Tree Management
Plan for the Town of Amherst. This plan will then be presented to
the Town Board at the second annual meeting of the Town and upon
acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive Community Tree Management Plan for the Town of
Amherst.
(3) The Tree Board when requested by the Town Board, shall consider,
investigate, advise, report and recommend upon any special matter
of question coming within the scope of its work.
(4) The Tree Board will strive to raise consciousness of the importance
of trees to the Town.
(5) Meetings of the Tree Board shall be called by the Chairperson.
(6) The Tree Board shall meet at least two (2) times in a calendar year.
(7) The Tree Board shall update and publish a schedule of cost for
trees to be planted on an annual basis.
§ 179-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-3
1:591

ARTICLE III
Division of Forestry
§ 179-4. Creation.
There is hereby created and established a Division of Forestry. This Division
shall consist of a representative from the Highway Department and the
Town's Landscape Architect. The representative from the Highway
Department shall be known as the "Town Forester."
§ 179-5. Town Forester.
The Division of Forestry shall be headed by the Town Forester. Prior to
any action, a written record documenting the need for such action shall
be prepared and reviewed by the Town's Forester. A copy of all decisions
shall be kept on file in the offices of the Town Forester and in the offices
of the Town's Landscape Architect. The Town Forester shall be directly
responsible to and under the command, direction and supervision of the
Highway Superintendent.
§ 179-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:593

ARTICLE IV
Care and Preservation
§ 179-6. Street and park trees.
The Division of Forestry shall have the right to prune, treat, maintain and
preserve any street or park tree as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public streets and
parks.
§ 179-7. Pruning by owners; street intersections.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
Town shall prune the branches of said tree so that such branches shall not
obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear
space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners,
upon notice by the Town, shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees
or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a danger and menace to the
safety of the public.
§ 179-8. Obstruction of streetlights, traffic devices and signs.
The Highway Superintendent shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device or sign.
§ 179-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-8
1:595

ARTICLE V
Removal
§ 179-9. Topping trees on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or Town department to top any
street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes or trees under utility wires or other
obstructions, where other pruning practices are impractical, may be topped
by the order of the Highway Superintendent.
§ 179-10. Stump removal.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed at least below the
surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above
the surface of the ground.
§ 179-11. Permit required; exceptions; application; review;
issuance.
A. Subject to the exceptions of Subsection B of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person or to facilitate or engage another person or
entity to cut down, kill or otherwise destroy any tree having a caliper
greater than four (4) inches, measured six (6) inches above grade,
growing on privately owned land within the Town, without a tree
removal permit issued by the Commissioner of Building. A tree removal
permit shall not be issued for any tree located in a regulated or
jurisdictional wetland as determined by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) unless approval for the tree removal is
obtained from the NYSDEC, USEPA or USACE, as applicable. No one
shall cut down, kill or otherwise destroy any street or park tree without
the permission of the Highway Superintendent.
B. The requirement of a permit in Subsection A of this section shall not
apply to the following activities:
1. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees by the owner on
any tract of land no larger than one (1) acre, improved and being
used for residential purposes, or land no larger than one (1) acre,
being developed under a valid building permit for one- or twofamily
dwellings.
2. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying any tree which has
become a danger to human life or property due to disease,
accidental causes, natural forces or other emergency
3. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees by public utility
and natural gas companies performing normal construction and
maintenance pursuant to and in compliance with the law; provided,
§ 179-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-11
1:597
however, that the Town may review the procedures employed by
such companies to determine whether they comply with all
applicable laws and meet the purposes of this chapter.
4. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees where required
by law.
C. Application for tree removal permit.
1. When tree removal is occasioned by any development or land use
or change thereof requiring Town Board or Planning Board
approval of a site or subdivision plan under Chapter 203, Zoning, or
Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of
Amherst, the approval of the site plan or final plat approval of the
subdivision shall constitute a permit to remove, cut down, kill or
otherwise destroy the trees other than those designated to be
preserved. No separate tree removal permit application shall be
required.
2. When the person seeking a tree removal permit is not required to
file a site or subdivision plan, the application shall set forth the
type, size and location of the trees sought to be cut down, killed or
otherwise destroyed and the relationship thereof to other trees and
existing and proposed uses or structures on the same lot or tract of
land.
D. Standards for permit review shall be as follows:
1. The extent to which use of the property requires cutting down,
killing or destroying trees.
2. Any hardship to the applicant which will result from a modification
or denial of the requested permit.
3. The desirability of preserving any tree by reason of its size, age or
some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or status
as a landmark or species specimen.
4. The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water
runoff and other environmental degradation due to removal of the
trees.
5. The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely
developed or densely populated areas.
6. The need for visual screening in transitional zones or relief from
glare or any other negative visual impact.
7. All the other factors enumerated in Article I of this chapter.
E. Permit issuance.
1. Tree removal permits shall be issued by the Commissioner of
Building upon approval of the application by the Division of
§ 179-11 AMHERST CODE § 179-11
1:598
Forestry. The issuance of a tree removal permit by the
Commissioner of Building is a discretionary act. The Commissioner
of Building may approve or deny an application for a tree removal
permit regardless of the approval of the application by the Division
of Forestry.
2. Review of application; time period. Except for site plan or
subdivision plan review, if the tree removal permit application is
not acted upon within thirty (30) days after receipt, it shall be
deemed approved.
§ 179-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-11
1:599

ARTICLE VI
Reforestation
§ 179-12. Right to plant.
The Town shall have the right to plant street trees and park trees as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of public streets and parks. This section shall not prohibit the
planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, provided that the
selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this section.
§ 179-13. Tree species list.
The Tree Board, with input from the Highway Superintendent and Town
Forester, shall determine the official street tree species list for the Town
of Amherst, New York, and the same shall be filed with the Town Clerk on
an annual basis. No species other than those included in this list may be
planted as street trees without written permission from the Town Forester.
§ 179-14. Planting distance requirements.
§ 179-15. Size requirements.
All deciduous trees planted shall have a minimum caliper of 1 3/4 inches,
measured six inches above the ground. All evergreen trees shall have a
minimum height of five feet above the ground.
§ 179-16. Planting required; fees.
A. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes
listed in the official street tree species list, and no trees may be planted
closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following:
(1) Small trees: two feet.
(2) Medium trees: three feet.
(3) Large trees: four feet.
(4) No trees are to be planted in a tree lawn of less than four feet.
B. Street corners.
(1) Clear vision shall be maintained on corner lots as required under
Chapter 203-2-4, Zoning.
(2) No tree shall be planted in a street right-of-way within 100 feet of
the front face of a stop sign.
C. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant.
§ 179-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-16
1:601
§ 179-17. Refund of fees.
§ 179-18. Long-term plan.
The Town Division of Forestry shall include in the Community Tree
Management Plan provisions for the maximum reforestation of the Town of
Amherst, New York, to include the planting of tree species that are unique,
hard to grow and/or slow to mature, such as oak trees.
A. Each building permit for a building having frontage on a Town highway,
street or lane or having a side or rear lot line on a Town highway, street
or lane shall be subject to the requirement of planting trees. The
number of trees to be planted shall be determined as detailed in the
annual Community Tree Management Plan.
B. At the time of filing the building permit, the Town Clerk shall collect the
cost of planting the required trees, which cost shall be determined from
time to time by Town Board resolution. The total fee collected shall be
calculated on the basis of a fee for each multiple of 40 feet of street
frontage abutting on front, side and rear property lines.
A. The Town Clerk shall refund to the applicant or owner of the premises
the tree fee collected upon certification by the Highway Superintendent
within one year following payment of the fee that suitable trees have
been planted by the applicant or the owner of the premises or that trees
already exist on the premises which are in compliance with this article.
B. The Town Clerk shall refund the tree fee if it is determined by the Town
Forrester that the site of the tree planting is not in an ideal location.
§ 179-16 AMHERST CODE § 179-18
1:602
ARTICLE VII
Dutch Elm Disease
§ 179-19. Exercise of statutory powers.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 169 of the New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law, the Town Board of the Town of Amherst elects to exercise
and enjoy, through its appropriate officers and employees, the powers and
immunities prescribed and granted in §§ 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law with respect to the Dutch Elm disease
within the limits of said Town.
§ 179-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-19
1:603

ARTICLE VIII
Christmas Trees
§ 179-20. Permit required; application procedure; information; fee
and deposit.
§ 179-21. Removal of debris; Town removal; costs.
The applicant and/or the owner of premises upon which Christmas trees
are stored for sale shall remove all Christmas trees and other rubbish and
debris created by or from the placing, storing and sale of said trees from
said premises within a period of six days immediately following Christmas
Day of the year in which said trees are so stored for sale; and in the
event that the applicant or owner of said premises shall fail to remove
from said premises said Christmas trees, rubbish and debris within said
period of time, the Christmas trees remaining on said premises shall be
deemed abandoned, and, in that event, the Highway Superintendent is
hereby authorized to enter upon said premises and remove all Christmas
trees, rubbish and debris and to dispose of the same, and there shall
be no liability on the part of the Town of Amherst to any person, firm
or corporation on account of such entry and removal of Christmas trees,
rubbish and debris. The costs of the removal of said Christmas trees,
rubbish and debris shall be a charge against and deducted from the cash
deposit made by the applicant.
A. No person, firm or corporation, except as hereinafter provided, shall
engage in or carry on the business of dealing in evergreen trees
commonly known as "Christmas trees" or storing Christmas trees
intended for sale without first procuring a permit to do so.
B. Application shall be made, in writing, to the Highway Superintendent
upon forms provided for that purpose.
C. Applicants shall state the maximum number of trees proposed to be
stored at any one time and location. Where the premises are not owned
by the applicant, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the
lease covering said premises where said trees are intended to be
stored, together with proof of ownership by the applicant or a consent,
in writing, to the use of said premises for such purpose.
D. The applicant shall, at the time of filing of the application, pay a permit
fee of $25 and, in addition thereto, make a cash deposit of $500 to
ensure the removal of any trees, rubbish or debris left on the premises.
E. The Highway Superintendent may also deny any application. Christmas
tree permits shall not be located in a residential district except for
parcels located in the Suburban Agricultural District.
§ 179-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-22
1:605
§ 179-22. Refund of deposit.
The cash deposit made by the applicant shall be refunded, less any charges,
upon certification by the Highway Superintendent that all trees have been
removed from the premises and that the premises have been satisfactorily
cleaned up.
§ 179-23. Obstruction of view prohibited.
Christmas trees shall not be placed within the restricted clear-vision area
as defined in Chapter 203-2-4, Zoning.
§ 179-24. Exceptions.
The provisions of Article VIII of this chapter shall not apply to persons, firms
or corporations engaged in business as nurserymen in the Town of Amherst.
§ 179-22 AMHERST CODE § 179-24
1:606
ARTICLE IX
General Restrictions and Penalties
§ 179-25. Interference with Highway Superintendent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, obstruct or interfere
with the Highway Superintendent or any of his agents or employees while
engaging in the maintenance or removal of any street trees, park trees or
trees on private property, as authorized in this Chapter.
§ 179-26. Penalties for offenses.
Every violation by any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an offense
against this chapter, and, upon conviction therefore, shall be subject to a
fine of a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment not to exceed fifteen (15)
days, or both. The removal of each tree shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the aforementioned penalties, the court having jurisdiction
may impose a civil penalty for the removal or destruction of any tree on
private property or street or park tree equal to its value, not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per tree.
§ 179-27. Remedial tree planting required.
If any trees are unlawfully cut down, cleared, killed or otherwise destroyed
by any person(s), firm(s), association(s) or corporation(s) in connection
with or preparatory to any development, improvement or change of use
or proposed rezoning, for which a permit or permission is required by
the Town, then, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided for in
this chapter or elsewhere, said person(s), firm(s), association(s) or
corporation(s) shall not be granted such permit or permission by the Town
unless and until a remedial tree planting plan for the subject premises is
accepted and approved by the Town Division of Forestry and Planning Board
as part of the coordinated review process.
§ 179-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-27
1:607

ARTICLE X
Tree Planting and Maintenance Fund
§ 179-28. Establishment; amount.
Each year in its annual budget, the Town Board shall include the
establishment of a Town Tree Planting and Maintenance Fund. Such fund
shall be an annual budget appropriation and in an amount of not less than
$2 per capita of population for the Town.
§ 179-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-28
1:609

ARTICLE XI
Repealer; Enforcement; Severability; Title
§ 179-29. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered as specified herein and enforced by the
Commissioner of Building.
§ 179-30. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter and shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 179-31. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Town of Amherst Comprehensive Tree
Law."
§ 179-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-31
1:611
Chapter 181
(RESERVED)
Chapter 184
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
Removal and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
189.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 184-1. Purpose.
The outdoor storage of abandoned vehicles within the Town, other than
within licensed junkyards, is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. It also constitutes an attractive nuisance to
children and in many ways imperils their safety; endangers persons and
property since fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily
explode; is unsightly and depreciates property values; and provides nesting
places for rats, mice and other rodents. The control of the outdoor storage
of abandoned and unlicensed motor vehicles, other than within licensed
junkyards, within the Town is therefore regulated for the preservation of the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDON(ED) — Includes abandon(ed), discard(ed) and junk(ed).
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes the legal owner, contract
purchaser in possession, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver,
assignee or trustee of premises or property located within the Town of
Amherst.
OWNER OF VEHICLE — Person having the property in or title to a vehicle,
including a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to
a security interest in another person and also including any lessee or bailee
of a vehicle having the use thereof under lease or otherwise.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, partnership and corporation.
TOWN — The area within the Town of Amherst outside the Village of
Williamsville.
§ 179-31 AMHERST CODE § 184-2
1:612
VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated, driven or capable of being operated or
driven upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power.
§ 184-3. Designation of vehicle as abandoned.
A vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle if left unattended:
§ 184-4. Abandoning vehicle prohibited; penalties for offenses.
A. With no then-valid numbered registration plates affixed thereto, for
more than six hours on any highway or in any other public place.
B. For more than 24 hours on any highway or in any other public place,
except a portion of a highway or public place on which parking is legally
permitted.
C. For more than 48 hours after the parking of such vehicle shall have
become illegal, if left on a portion of a highway or public place on which
parking is legally permitted.
D. For more than seven days on property of another, if left without
permission of the owner.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any highway or any other public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any private property of which he is not the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner of private property to cause or allow
any vehicle to be abandoned or stored or kept without valid, numbered
registration plates affixed thereto on his private property. The
provisions of the foregoing sentence shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles on private property licensed as junkyards.
(2) Vehicles kept or stored within a completely enclosed building.
(3) Vehicles kept or stored for sale without dismantling on private
property occupied pursuant to Chapter 203, Zoning, for the sale of
new or used vehicles.
(4) A motor home or other vehicle designed and used primarily for
recreation purposes. This exception shall not apply to more than
one such vehicle per parcel of property.
D. A violation of this § 184-4 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100.
§ 184-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-5
1:613
§ 184-5. Removal of abandoned vehicles authorized.
Any vehicle abandoned in violation of this chapter may be removed and
stored by the Police Department or other agency authorized by the Town
Board.
§ 184-6. Immediate passage of title to Town for certain vehicles.
If an abandoned vehicle, as hereinbefore defined, at the time of
abandonment has no numbered plates affixed and is of a wholesale value,
taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $100 or less, such
value to be established by a person to be designated by the Town Building
Commissioner for such purpose, title shall immediately vest in the Town of
Amherst.
§ 184-7. Search of ownership; notice; action if unclaimed.
§ 184-8. Disposition of vehicles; costs; proceeds.
A. Except for vehicles governed by § 184-6 above, the Building
Department of the Town shall make an inquiry concerning the last
registered owner of such vehicle as follows:
(1) Abandoned vehicle with numbered plates affixed, to the jurisdiction
which issued such plates.
(2) Abandoned vehicle with no numbered plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
B. The Building Department shall notify the last registered owner, if any,
that the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned
vehicle and that, if unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed. If the agency described in
Subsection A also notifies such Building Department that a lien or
mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or
mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay
the costs of removal and storage of such.
C. Title to such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the Town of
Amherst five days from the date such notice is mailed or, if the last
registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is
received.
A. Abandoned vehicles, title to which has vested in the Town of Amherst,
shall be sold by the Building Commissioner at public auction. The time
and place of auctions and rules pertaining to the holding thereof shall
be determined by the Commissioner. He shall publish a notice in the
Town's official newspaper of each auction at least five days prior to the
date thereof.
B. The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be presumed to
be the owner and liable to the Town of Amherst for the costs of removal,
§ 184-5 AMHERST CODE § 184-8
1:614
§ 184-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, or part thereof, of this chapter shall not affect
the remaining provisions hereof.
§ 184-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take affect immediately.
Chapter 186
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 57.
Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 145.
Snowplowing — See Ch. 166.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 177.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 184.
Removal and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
189.
§ 186-1. Applicability; exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply, except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer, peace officer, fire police, or Town constable
as defined by the Laws of the State of New York, or parking enforcement
officer duly appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Amherst, or official
traffic control device.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK, PARKS, PARKING, and PARKED — The stopping of a vehicle upon any
public highway or adjacent area as described herein and leaving such motor
vehicle or motorcycle unattended by a person capable of operating it for a
period longer than necessary to load or unload passengers or freight.
storage and disposition of such vehicle unless he shall present proof of
present ownership in another person.
C. Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses
incurred by the Town of Amherst, shall be held by the Town, without
interest, for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period of five
years. If not claimed within such five-year period, such proceeds shall
be paid into the general fund of the Town.
§ 184-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-2
1:615
STAND, STANDING, and LEFT STANDING — The stopping of a vehicle upon
any public highway when such vehicle shall be occupied by persons capable
of operating it for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers or freight, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic
control signal or marking.
STREET — For the purposes of parking, standing, or stopping, includes that
part of the public right-of-way between the outer pavement edge and the
outer edge of the sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, the public right-ofway
shall be defined for the purpose of this chapter as 10 feet from the outer
edge of the pavement.
§ 186-3. All-night parking.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all Town and county roads
within the Town of Amherst, exclusive of the Village of Williamsville,
November 1 through and including April 1 of each ensuing year, inclusive,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 186-4. No parking anytime. [Amended 4-1-2019 by L.L. No.
9-2019]
No person shall park a vehicle on any bike lane or any streets or parts
of streets posted as areas of "No Parking" as described in the Highway
Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices
of the Highway Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-5. No standing anytime. [Amended 4-1-2019 by L.L. No.
9-2019]
No person shall stand a vehicle on any bike lane or any of the streets
or parts thereof posted for "No Standing" as described in the Highway
Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices
of the Highway Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-6. No stopping anytime. [Amended 4-1-2019 by L.L. No.
9-2019]
No person shall stop a vehicle on any bike lane or any street or part
of any street as posted for "No Stopping" as described in the Highway
Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices
of the Highway Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-7. Parking in excess of 24 hours prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle on any Town highways or county roads in the
Town of Amherst for a period in excess of 24 consecutive hours.
§ 186-2 AMHERST CODE § 186-8
1:616
§ 186-8. Parking of oversized vehicles on residential streets
prohibited; exceptions.
§ 186-9. No parking during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified for any given
day where posted, to prohibit such parking on any of the streets or parts of
streets as described in the Highway Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic
Control Devices on file in the offices of the Highway Superintendent and
Town Clerk, as amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-10. Left turns prohibited.
No person shall operate a vehicle so as to make left-hand turns at the
locations posted and as set forth in the Highway Superintendent's Inventory
of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices of the Highway
Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-11. No right or left turns on red.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to make a right-hand or
left-hand turn on a red light onto a one-way street in violation of Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1111, Subdivision (d)2, at the locations posted to prohibit
such turns described in the Highway Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic
Control Devices on file in the offices of the Highway Superintendent and
Town Clerk, as amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-12. Vehicles in excess of posted weight limits and commercial
vehicles excluded from certain highways. [Amended 12-17-2007 by
L.L. No. 17-2007]
A. In addition to the restrictions provided for in §§ 186-1 through 186-7, no
vehicle larger than 225 inches, inclusive of load and bumper, and wider
than 80 inches, as measured by the body, or higher than 81 inches, as
measured from the underside of the tire to the top of the vehicle, shall
be parked on any street within a residential area in the Town of
Amherst.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles parked because of an emergency or at the direction of a
Town of Amherst police officer;
(2) Vehicles of the Town of Amherst, fire apparatus, ambulances, or
vehicles engaged in the work of a public utility; and
(3) Vehicles engaged in making pickups or deliveries or rendering
services in or upon any property adjacent to the street where said
vehicles are parked.
§ 186-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-12
1:617
§ 186-13. Exceptions to weight limits and commercial traffic
restrictions. [Amended 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 17-2007]
The regulations established in this article shall not be construed to prevent
the local delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property on any
highway from which such vehicles and combinations are otherwise
excluded.
§ 186-14. Parking restricted temporarily.
§ 186-15. Private parking lots; municipal parking lots.
A. No person shall operate on Town highways a vehicle having a weight in
excess of the limits posted on such highway as set forth in the Highway
Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the
office of the Highway Superintendent and Town Clerk as amended from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
B. No person shall operate on Town highways a truck, commercial vehicle,
tractor-trailer combination, tractor semitrailer combination or tractortrailer
semitrailer combination on Town highways posted against such
use as set forth in the Highway Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic
Control Devices on file in the office of the Highway Superintendent and
Town Clerk as amended from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board.
A. The Chief of Police or the Highway Superintendent may prohibit the
parking of vehicles in designated locations on a temporary basis.
B. The Chief of Police or Highway Superintendent shall post, with the
appropriate "No Parking" signs, the location or locations that are
temporarily restricted.
A. Private parking lots. Owners, lessees, or those entities otherwise in
possession of private parking lots may post signs limiting parking in
their lots to certain times or categories of users such as customers,
tenants, guests, employees, visitors and other similar user groups.
When the controlling entity posts a notice of such a restriction, it is a
violation of this chapter to park there in violation of such restriction.
Violators will be subject to fines and/or towing at their expense at the
direction of the police. The following is a sample notice of parking
restrictions:
§ 186-12 AMHERST CODE § 186-15
1:618
§ 186-16. Stop signs.
No one shall operate a vehicle so as to pass a stop sign without stopping and
yielding the right-of-way to other street traffic either stopped or oncoming
in either direction in violation of Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 1142 and
1172 as posted at the locations set forth in the Highway Superintendent's
Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices of the Highway
Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-17. Yield signs.
No one shall operate a vehicle so as to fail to yield the right-of-way to
other street traffic in any direction in violation of Vehicle and Traffic Law
§§ 1142 and 1172 at locations posted and as described in the Highway
Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic Control Devices on file in the offices
of the Highway Superintendent and Town Clerk, as amended from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-18. Speeding.
No one shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of any section of the
posted speed or other speed regulations in violation of §§ 1180 and 1180-a
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, including, but not limited to, those posted
and further described in the Highway Superintendent's Inventory of Traffic
Control Devices on file in the offices of the Highway Superintendent and
Town Clerk, as amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-19. One-way streets.
No one shall operate a motor vehicle in the wrong direction in violation of
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1127 on those streets, or parts thereof, posted as
PARKING RESTRICTED EXCEPT FOR: Tenants, customers, employees,
guests, visitors (pick appropriate restriction) of
________________________ (name of business or other entity)
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT
Under penalty of law, Chapter 186 of the Code of the Town of Amherst.
Police enforcement including ticketing and/or towing at owner's
expense.
B. Municipal parking lots. The Town of Amherst department head of the
Town department having jurisdiction of parking lots owned, leased,
possessed, and otherwise maintained by the Town of Amherst shall have
the authority to post signs restricting the use of such parking lots.
Failure to observe the posted restrictions shall be a violation of this
section and subject violators to fines and/or towing at the owner's
expense.
§ 186-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-19
1:619
one-way and listed in the Superintendent of Highways' Inventory of Signs
filed in the Offices of the Highway Superintendent and the Town Clerk, as
amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-20. Crosswalks.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to fail to yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians at properly marked or posted crosswalks in violation
of Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1151 at the locations described in the
Superintendent of Highways' Inventory of Signs kept on file in the offices of
the Superintendent of Highways and the Town Clerk, as amended from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 186-21. Traffic signals.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to fail to obey traffic signals in
violation of Vehicle and Traffic Law §§ 1111-a and 1113 at the traffic signals
located at the intersections listed in the Superintendent of Highways'
Inventory of Signs filed in the Superintendent of Highways' office and the
Town Clerk's office, as amended from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board.
§ 186-22. Parking trailer uncoupled from towing vehicle prohibited.
No person shall detach any trailer from its towing vehicle and allow it
to remain or be unattended on any Town or county road in the Town of
Amherst.
§ 186-23. Traffic infractions.
The violation of any section of this chapter or of a rule or regulation outlined
herein shall constitute a traffic infraction within the meaning of § 1800 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 186-24. Enforcement.
The foregoing Vehicle and Traffic Laws may be enforced by any authorized
police officer, peace officer, or Town constable as defined by the laws of
the State of New York. In addition, any parking enforcement officer duly
appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Amherst may enforce the
foregoing vehicle and traffic regulations related to parking infractions.
§ 186-19 AMHERST CODE § 186-24
1:620
Chapter 189
VEHICLES, REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 57.
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 177.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 184.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 186.
§ 189-1. Removal of certain vehicles authorized.
When any vehicle is parked in violation of a traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation or abandoned on any public highway within the Town of Amherst,
said vehicle may be removed by the Police Department of the Town of
Amherst.
§ 189-2. Storage of vehicles; redemption procedure. [Amended
3-15-1971, effective 3-27-1971]
After such removal the Police Department may store such vehicle in a
suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge
of the vehicle may redeem same upon payment to the Police Department of
the Town of Amherst of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily
incurred in effecting such removal, such charges not to exceed $25 per day,
or fraction thereof.
§ 189-3. Notification of owner.
The Police Department shall, without delay, attempt to ascertain the owner
of such vehicle or person having same in charge and notify him of the
removal and disposition of such vehicle and the amount that will be required
to redeem same.
§ 189-4. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 10 days after publication and posting as
required by law.
Chapter 191
VENDING MACHINES
§ 186-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:621

ARTICLE I
Tobacco Products
[Adopted 9-8-1992 by L.L. No. 14-1992]
§ 191-1. Legislative findings.
The Town Board finds that:
§ 191-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to restrict minors from purchasing or
obtaining tobacco products from vending machines.
§ 191-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — One or more cigarettes or cigars, chewing
tobacco, powdered tobacco or any other tobacco products.
§ 191-4. Prohibited acts.
§ 191-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Amherst Police Department.
§ 191-6. Penalties for offenses.
A first violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$50. A second or subsequent violation of this article shall be punishable by
A. Tobacco-making is harmful to the citizens of this Town;
B. Tobacco is addictive;
C. Minors are frequently encouraged to smoke by peer pressure and the
influence of advertising; and
D. Even though sale of tobacco to persons under 18 years of age is a
violation of state law, minors have easy access to tobacco products
through purchases made at unattended vending machines.
A. No person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity of any nature
shall offer or permit the sale of tobacco products through vending
machines in the Town of Amherst, outside of the Village of Williamsville,
except within premises licensed by the New York State Liquor Authority
for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.
B. No person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity of any nature
shall permit a vending machine to be used to offer or permit the sale of
tobacco products unless it is placed at least 30 feet from any entrance
to or exit from the premises.
§ 191-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-6
1:623
a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 191-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 191-6 AMHERST CODE § 191-7
1:624
Chapter 194
(RESERVED)
Chapter 198
WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 68.
Noise — See Ch. 138.
Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 145.
§ 191-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-7
1:625

ARTICLE I
Air Guns, Air Rifles and Pistols
[Adopted 6-4-1951, effective 6-18-1951]
§ 198-1. Restrictions on carrying and discharge. [Amended
10-9-1961]
No person, other than in defense of person or property, shall carry or
discharge any species of air gun, air pistol or rifle in the Town of Amherst,
Erie County, New York, nor shall any person carry or discharge a shotgun
within 750 feet of a building, street, road or public highway in said Town.
§ 198-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-31-1966]
Every violation by any person of any of the provisions of this article shall
be deemed to be an offense against this article and, upon conviction, said
person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 and/or imprisonment
not exceeding three months.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:627

ARTICLE II
Firearms
[Adopted 2-23-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976]
§ 198-3. Legislative findings.
The Town Board of Amherst, Erie County, New York, finds that the discharge
of firearms within said Town, outside the limits of the Village of
Williamsville, is hazardous to the residents of the Town and the general
public.
§ 198-4. Discharge of firearms restricted.
Except as hereinafter permitted, no person, firm, association or corporation
shall discharge any firearm or permit any firearm to be discharged within
the Town of Amherst outside the Village of Williamsville. The foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to duly constituted law enforcement officers
engaged in the lawful performance of their duties or to persons acting in
defense of persons or property or to the discharge of any firearm as part
of target practice or trap shooting under proper supervision in an area or
building occupied and maintained for that purpose.
§ 198-5. Permit required; issuance procedure.
Upon application by the owner of land within the Town of Amherst, the
Town Clerk may issue a permit for the discharge of firearms thereon. The
application shall be referred by the Clerk to the Police Department for
its review. If, following such review, the Town Clerk determines that the
discharge of firearms on the land area covered by the application will not
violate any applicable law or regulations hereafter adopted by the Town
Board or cause hazard to persons or property, he shall issue a permit to
the owner authorizing the discharge of firearms on his land or such part
thereof as the Town Clerk shall determine. The Town Clerk may further
establish conditions or restrictions with respect to the permit in order to
prevent hazard to persons or property. Each permit shall expire on the 31st
of December next succeeding its issuance.
§ 198-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-3-1992 by L.L. No.
3-1992]
A violation of this article shall be deemed an offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 198-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this article or the application thereof
to any person is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall not affect
other sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
§ 198-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-7
1:629
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses and provisions of
this article are declared to be severable.
§ 198-8. Repealer.
The ordinance of the Town of Amherst regulating the discharge of firearms
adopted October 1, 1951, as the same has been amended on September 25,
1961, and October 5, 1968, is hereby superseded.
§ 198-9. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 198-7 AMHERST CODE § 198-9
1:630
Chapter 199
WILD WATERFOWL
§ 199-1. Legislative findings and intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the community and its wildlife by prohibiting the feeding of wild waterfowl
within the Town of Amherst. Feeding of wild waterfowl within the Town has
contributed to serious rat and other predatory animal infestation problems,
damage to public parks, water quality problems, traffic hazards, soiled and
contaminated private yards and swimming pools and has increased the
potential for the spread of disease to residents. In addition, it is the intent
of this chapter to protect the welfare of the wild waterfowl themselves since
wildlife studies have shown that the feeding of wild waterfowl within urban
areas such as the Town of Amherst can interrupt their normal migration
patterns, cause nutritional problems, increase predation and promote the
spread of serious wild waterfowl diseases such as avian cholera, plague and
botulism.
§ 199-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall feed or provide food for any wild waterfowl at any time
during the year within the Town of Amherst.
§ 199-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To place, deposit, scatter or distribute in a location accessible to
waterfowl any type of food, including but not limited to corn, wheat or other
grains, bread, popcorn, scraps or any substance liable to be eaten by wild
waterfowl.
WILD WATERFOWL — Refers to nondomesticated waterfowl, whether
migratory or not, including but not limited to Canada geese and mallard
ducks.
§ 199-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable
by a fine not less than $50 nor more than $300 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 199-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
members of the Amherst Police Department.
Chapter 200
§ 198-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-5
1:631
WETLANDS
Chapter 203
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 85.
Conservation easements — See Ch. 92.
Curb cuts — See Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Reimbursement of expert fees — See Ch. 108.
Geodetic control point network — See Ch.
119.
Controlled-access highways — See Ch. 120.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 121.
House trailers — See Ch. 122.
Construction of public improvements — See
Ch. 125.
Junkyards — See Ch. 129.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 144.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 151.
Recreation and open space — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 172.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 199-5 AMHERST CODE § 199-5
1:632
PART 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Title
This Local Law shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Amherst, County of Erie, State of New York.
§ 1-2. Purpose
1-2-1. The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the intent of the legislative
authority in its adoption is to promote the environment of the town and
its public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and the
general welfare by regulating the use of buildings, other structures and
land for residences, open space, public facilities, business, services,
industry or other purposes; by regulating and restricting the bulk,
height, design, building coverage and location of structures; by
regulating and limiting population density; and, for the aforesaid
purposes, to divide the land within the limits of the town into districts of
such number and dimensions generally consistent with the policies of
the Comprehensive Plan and to provide procedures for the
administration and amendment of said Zoning Ordinance.
1-2-2. The ordinance is intended to achieve, among others, the following
objectives:
A. To protect the character and values of residential, institutional and
public uses, business, commercial and manufacturing uses and to
insure their orderly and beneficial development;
B. To provide adequate open spaces for light, air and outdoor uses to
include public, common and private open space areas;
C. To prevent overcrowding of the land;
D. To prevent excessive concentration of population and to prevent
sparse and uncoordinated development;
E. To regulate and control the location and spacing of buildings on the
lot and in relation to the surrounding property generally consistent
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
F. To protect persons and property from damage and injury due to fire
or flood;
G. To preserve and protect significant natural features and vegetation,
thereby preventing ecological damage and visual blight which
occur when those features or vegetation are eliminated or
substantially altered to serve development purposes only;
H. To assure that structure and land use arrangements are
aesthetically harmonious with nearby areas and structures;
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:633
§ 1-3. Interpretation
I. To regulate the location of buildings and intensity of uses in
relation to streets according to plans so as to cause the least
interference with and be damaged least by traffic movements and
hence result in lessened street congestion and improved public
safety;
J. To establish zoning patterns that insure economical extensions for
sewers, water supply, waste disposal and other public utilities, as
well as development of recreation, schools and other public
facilities;
K. To guide the future development of the town so as to bring about
the gradual conformity of land, structures and uses generally
consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
L. To accomplish the specific intents and goals set forth in the
introduction to the respective sections; and
M. To protect the community from visual pollution resulting from the
unregulated use of signs and other advertising devices.
N. Based upon evaluation by the State of New York, the Town Board
declares that the use of land for hydrofracking would endanger the
health, safety and general welfare of the community. [Added
11-2-2015 by L.L. No. 23-2015]
1-3-1. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not annul or in any way
interfere with existing deed or plat restrictions, easements or other
agreements between persons, codes, laws, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued, except those which are contrary to and in
conflict with this Ordinance. The Town shall not enforce private deed or
plat restrictions.
1-3-2. Wherever this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
structures or land, the dimensions of buildings or requires larger land
or building areas, yards or other open spaces than are otherwise
required or imposed by deed or plat restrictions or laws, this Ordinance
shall control; and conversely, other regulations shall control where they
impose greater restrictions than this Ordinance, and for that purpose it
shall not annul, modify or impair the provisions of any existing deed or
plat restrictions, easements or other agreements.
1-3-3. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, its
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare and to accomplish the intent of this Ordinance. Except
as specifically provided in this Ordinance, it is not intended by the
adoption of this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate or annul any existing
provision of any law previously adopted relating to the use of structures
and land and the design, erection, alteration or maintenance of
§ 1-2 AMHERST CODE § 1-3
1:634
§ 1-4. Authority
This Ordinance is adopted under the grant of power as set forth in § 261 of
NYS Town Law.
§ 1-5. Conflict with Other Laws
§ 1-6. Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all land within the Town of
Amherst outside of the Village of Williamsville. No structure shall be erected
or structurally altered nor shall any land development activity take place,
unless it conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance. Uses of properties
shall be limited by the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 1-7. Subsurface Rights
This Ordinance shall not abrogate or restrict any subsurface rights acquired
by deed or lease, but all surface or above-surface structures in conjunction
therewith shall be subject to the regulations established in this Ordinance.
§ 1-8. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
It is the intention of the Town that this Ordinance, and any subsequent
amendments hereto, implement the planning policies as established by
the Town's Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
structures thereon. Titles and headings have been inserted for
convenience of reference and are not intended to define or limit the
scope of or otherwise affect any provision in this Ordinance.
1-5-1. Where this Ordinance differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and
regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the
Town, state or federal government, this Ordinance shall apply.
1-5-2. The Town of Amherst shall not be responsible for the enforcement
authority of any federal or state law, rule, or regulation cited in this
Ordinance.
1-7-1. Prohibited Uses [Added 11-2-2015 by L.L. No. 23-2015]
A. Prohibition against the use of high volume hydro fracking (HVHF)
and prohibition against the disposition of hydrofracking
byproducts.
1.) No land in the Town of Amherst shall be used for high volume
hydro fracking (HVHF).
2.) To the extent not pre-empted by Federal, State or County rules,
regulations or statutes, no byproducts of hydrofracking are
permitted to enter or be disposed of in the Town of Amherst.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:635
The Town hereby reaffirms its commitment that this Ordinance and any
amendment to it be in conformity with such policies.
§ 1-9. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective on the 23rd day of May, 2006.
§ 1-10. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
§ 1-11. Establishment of Zoning Districts and Map
1-11-1. Establishment of Districts. In order to carry out the purpose,
intent and objectives of this Ordinance, the Town is hereby divided into
the districts established in the table below. Such districts shall be
designated on the Official Zoning Map by symbols and boundaries.
When the terms "base district," "residential district," "business
district," "industrial district," "special purpose district" or "overlay
district" are used in this Ordinance, they shall be construed in
accordance with the table below.
Base Zoning Districts
Residential Districts
R-R Rural Residential District
S-A Suburban Agricultural District
R-1 Residential District One
R-2 Residential District Two
R-3 Residential District Three
CR-3A Cluster Residential District Three-A
TR-3 Traditional Residential District
R-4 Residential District Four
MFR-4A Multifamily Residential District Four-A
MFR-5 Multifamily Residential District Five
MFR-6 Multifamily Residential District Six
MFR-7 Multifamily Residential District Seven
MHR-8 Manufactured Home Residential District
Business Districts
OB Office Business District
NB Neighborhood Business District
GB General Business District
§ 1-8 AMHERST CODE § 1-11
1:636
Base Zoning Districts
CS Commercial Service District
MS Motor Service District
SC Shopping Center District
Industrial Districts
RD Research and Development
ST Science Technology
GI General Industrial
Special Purpose Districts
AG Agricultural District
NCD New Community District
PRD Planned Residential District
PDD Planned Development District
CF Community Facilities District
RC Recreation Conservation District [Added 2-24-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014]
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development District
LW-1 Live-Work District [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
Overlay Zoning Districts
(-TNB) Traditional Neighborhood Business Overlay District
1-11-2. Official Zoning Map.
A. The districts listed above are designated by symbols, and the
location and boundaries of these districts are shown on the Official
Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
Ordinance. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed
on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the
Official Zoning Map after the amendment has been adopted by the
Town Board.
B. A digital map created through the use of geographic information
technology may be used in the administration and enforcement of
this Ordinance, but shall not replace the original of the Official
Zoning Map on file in the Town Clerk's office.
1-11-3. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists
as to boundaries of districts, the following rules shall apply:
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:637
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets or highways shall be construed to follow such center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following existing lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town boundaries
shall be construed as following such boundaries.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the edge of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow the center lines thereof.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in paragraphs A through E above shall be construed
pursuant to those provisions.
G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
inconsistent with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered above, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall interpret the district boundaries. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
H. Where a district boundary line established upon the adoption of
this Ordinance divides a lot which was in single ownership at that
time, the Town Board may permit the extension of the regulations
of either district into the other district in accordance with the
Zoning Map amendment procedure in § 8-3.
1-11-4. Application of District Regulations. The regulations set by this
Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall
apply uniformly to all structures and uses, except as otherwise provided
in this Ordinance:
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except as permitted
in the district and in conformity with all of the regulations specified
in this Ordinance.
B. No structure shall be erected or altered which exceeds the height
or bulk; accommodates or houses a greater number of families;
occupies a greater part of the lot area; or has narrower or smaller
rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than
permitted or required by this Ordinance.
C. No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking, loading
or stacking space required about or in connection with any
structure for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be
included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking, loading
§ 1-11 AMHERST CODE § 1-11
1:638
§ 1-12. Transitional Provisions
or stacking space required for any other structure, unless
otherwise permitted.
D. No lot shall be divided so that the yards or other required open
spaces shall be smaller than required by this Ordinance.
E. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance
shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Yards or lots created after
May 23, 2006 shall meet the minimum requirements established by
this Ordinance.
F. No required yard shall be separated in ownership from that portion
of the lot on which a structure is located.
1-12-1. Projects Under Construction Prior to Effective Date.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
A. Site plans approved within one year prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance or the PUD provisions shall be allowed to proceed under
the regulations of the prior Zoning Ordinance without additional
approvals.
B. Any buildings or development for which a permit was issued before
May 23, 2006 or before [effective date of PUD], if the PUD
provisions apply, may be completed in conformance with the issued
permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such
building or development does not fully comply with provisions of
this Ordinance.
C. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require a change to a phasing plan
approved prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or the adoption of
the PUD provisions, provided construction is consistent with the
terms and conditions of the phasing plan and proceeds to
completion within five years of the original approval date, unless
extended by the Planning Board.
D. If construction is not completed according to the applicable permit
terms, the entity that approved the application may, for good cause
shown, grant an extension of up to one year for such construction.
If the building is not completed within the time allowed under the
original permit or any extension granted, then the building shall be
constructed, completed or occupied only in compliance with this
Ordinance.
1-12-2. Applications Submitted Prior to Effective Date.
A. Any complete application submitted before May 23, 2006 may be
completed in conformance with applicable permits and conditions
of the regulations in effect at the time of submission of the
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:639
application, even if such application does not fully comply with
provisions of this Ordinance.
B. An application submitted before May 23, 2006 not considered
complete within six months after completion of SEQR review shall
be considered null and void.
C. If construction is not commenced or completed according to the
applicable terms of the application, the entity that approved the
application may, for good cause shown, grant an extension of up to
one year for such construction. If the building is not completed
within the time allowed under the original application or any
extension granted, then the building shall be constructed,
completed or occupied only in compliance with this Ordinance.
§ 1-12 AMHERST CODE § 1-12
1:640
PART 2.
DEFINITIONS AND MEASUREMENTS
§ 2-1. Definition of Terms
§ 2-2. Abbreviations
Abbrev. Term
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FCC Federal Communications Commission
ft Feet
HVAC Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
L.F. Linear feet
Min. Minimum
Max. Maximum
NIER Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation
NYS New York State
PDD Planned Development District
PRD Planned Residential District
RPZ Reduced Pressure Zone
SEQR State Environmental Quality Review Act
sf Square feet
VUA Vehicle Use Area
WTF Wireless Telecommunications Facility
ZBA Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 2-3. General Terms
BUILDING DEPARTMENT — The Building Department of the Town of
Amherst, New York.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Chief of Police of the Town of Amherst, New York.
2-1-1.Words in this Ordinance are normally used in their ordinary English
usage. Certain terms shall have the meanings that follow, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
2-1-2. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; "should"
is to be interpreted as expressing that which is desired but not
specifically required.
2-1-3. All words used in the singular include the plural, and all words used in
the present tense include the future tense.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:641
COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — Commissioner of Building of the Town
of Amherst, New York.
COUNTY — Erie County, New York.
CLERK — Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst, New York.
ENGINEER — Town Engineer of the Town of Amherst, New York.
LAW — Law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the federal state, county and
town governments, as appropriate.
PLANNING BOARD — Planning Board of the Town of Amherst, New York.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT — The Planning Department of the Town of
Amherst, New York.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — Planning Director of the Town of Amherst, New
York.
PERSON — Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
company or corporation as well as an individual.
STATE — The State of New York.
TOWN — Town of Amherst, Erie County, New York, outside the Village of
Williamsville, New York.
USED OR OCCUPIED — Includes the words intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) of
the Town of Amherst, New York.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Enforcement Officer
of the Town of Amherst, New York.[Added 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ 2-4. Specific Terms
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure located on the same
lot with the principal structure, occupied by or devoted to an accessory
use. Where an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure
in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory structure shall be
considered part of the principal structure.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OF FACILITY (WTF) — See § 6-7-1.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the property, located on the same lot therewith.
ACTIVITY CENTER — A development area established in the
Comprehensive Plan that provides a focus for surrounding neighborhoods
and promotes land use objectives such as compact, pedestrian-friendly
development. Such centers are higher in density and incorporate a wider
range of uses than the lower density, predominantly residential areas
surrounding them.
ADULT CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides temporary or longterm
residential care and services to adults who, though not requiring
§ 2-3 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:642
continual medical or nursing care, are by reason of physical or other
limitations associated with age, physical or mental disabilities or other
factors, unable to or substantially unable to live independently. An adult
care facility may provide services to nonresidents in accordance with the
provisions of NY Social Services Law, Chapter 55.
ANTENNA OR ANTENNAE — See § 6-7-1.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC — Animals that are normally considered household
pets, including but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds or fish.
APPLICATION — See § 6-7-1.
ARCADE — A continuous passageway covered by permanent roofing that
is parallel to and open to a street or public space. An arcade is open and
unobstructed to a minimum height of 12 feet and is accessible to the public
at all times. This term shall not include off-street parking or loading areas,
driveways or open pedestrian walkways.
AUXILIARY HOUSING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a
detached single-family dwelling forming a semi-independent habitable unit,
which may be occupied by elderly or disabled members of the family
occupying the dwelling for separate living, sleeping, cooking or eating
purposes.
AWNING — A roof-like cover with a rigid frame that cannot be retracted,
folded or collapsed that is designed for protection from weather or as
decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall over a window,
walkway or door.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely
underground. For application to floodplain see § 7-7-4.
BED AND BREAKFAST — An overnight accommodation in a single-family
detached dwelling that provides temporary lodging for the general public
and that may provide meal service.
BIO-SWALE OR RAIN GARDEN — Planted depressions designed to divert
surface water runoff from impervious surfaces through vegetation, soil and
riprap/stone to remove silt and pollutants before runoff is discharged into
local storm drains or surface waterways/water bodies.[Added 5-17-2010
by L.L. No. 8-2010]
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of the lot remaining after required
yards have been provided.
BUILDING — Any improvement having a roof supported by columns or
walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, a business, animals or
chattels; mobile home.
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area measured
from the exterior of the walls of the building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot covered by both the
main (principal) and accessory structures. This term does not include other
impervious surfaces such as driveways.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:643
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the finished grade line
at the foundation to the highest point of the roof.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal length of the wall of a building.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest allowable distance between
two buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (OR FRONT SETBACK) — A line equidistant
from the street right-of-way line, or edge of pavement for a private road,
between which line and the street right-of-way no building may be built.
BUSINESS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment providing
custodial and maintenance services to other businesses. Typical uses
include sign companies, window cleaning services, janitorial services and
other dwelling and building services.
BULK STORAGE — The storage of chemicals, petroleum products or
hazardous materials in above ground or below ground storage containers
designed for distribution or mass consumption.
CABARET OR THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A building or portion
of a building which provides or allows the provision of sexually oriented
entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as
an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available. Signs,
advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult
entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's
club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that an
establishment holds itself out to the public as an establishment where
sexually oriented entertainment is available.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
CALL CENTER — A facility for the handling of customer service, technical
service or telemarketing activities through electronic communications that
allows less than 100 square feet per employee.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — The triangle formed on corner lots between
points on the front, side or rear lot lines at a distance from the intersection
within which no visual obstruction may be constructed.
CLUB (PRIVATE) — A non-for-profit organization, not including a
fraternity or sorority house, whose premises are restricted to its members
and their guests.
CO-LOCATION — See § 6-7-1.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY OR COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — See § 6-7-1.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ACTIVITIES, OUTDOOR — Commercial
uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreationoriented
activities. Such activities may take place wholly outdoors or within
a number of outdoor structures. Typical uses include facilities for tennis,
racquetball, handball, basketball, baseball, football, swimming, ice-skating,
golf and soccer.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:644
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all
information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be
made with respect to an application.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Materials, written and graphic, including
maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and other descriptive material
that identify the goals, objectives, principles, guidelines, policies,
standards, devices and instruments for the immediate and long-range
protection, enhancement, growth and development which have been
adopted and may be amended by the Amherst Town Board in accordance
with NYS Town Law § 272-a.[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for service organizations,
business and professional conferences and seminars limited to
accommodations for conference attendees. The accommodations can
include sleeping, eating and recreation. A conference center is not designed
to be only utilized by the general public for overnight purposes.
CONTRACTING OR CONSTRUCTION SERVICE — An establishment
or business providing services, including but not limited to, carpentry,
electrical, masonry, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning,
painting, ornamental iron work, roofing and sheet metal; packing and
crafting and monumental works.
COURT, INNER — An unroofed, open space enclosed by four walls.
COURT, OUTER — An unroofed, open space enclosed by three walls and
with one side open to a yard.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place for the care of three or more persons for
less than 24 hours a day, away from their homes.
DBH — The outside bark diameter at breast height. Breast height is defined
as 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above the ground on the uphill side of the tree.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — An area of land permitted by this Ordinance to
be developed by a single owner or group of owners, acting jointly, which
may consist of a parcel or assembled parcels planned and developed as an
entity.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY — The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting,
or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private,
an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or
character distinguished by 1) a person who is between five feet and six feet
in height, with eyesight adequate to obtain a New York vehicle operator's
license of any type; 2) standing on a street, highway, or public sidewalk,
or on the property of others, or from the parking lot or any other portion
of the premises that is open to members of the public other than adults
who have been admitted to the business in accordance with management
policies.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
DOG DAY CARE FACILITY — A commercial facility for the supervised care
of dogs for periods of less than 24 hours a day, not to include facilities that
provide boarding, breeding or selling of dogs, or facilities whose primary
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:645
source of revenue is licensed veterinarian services.[Added 10-17-2011 by
L.L. No. 25-2011]
DORMITORY — A structure specially designed for a long-term stay by
students of a college, university, or nonprofit organization for the purpose of
dividing rooms for sleeping purposes. Common kitchens and some common
gathering rooms for special purposes may also be provided.[Added
1-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
DWELLING — A building or portion of a building designed or occupied
exclusively for residential and permitted accessory uses. The term dwelling
shall not be deemed to include a hotel, motel, bed & breakfast, hospital,
nursing home, dormitory, or fraternity or sorority house.[Amended
9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion of a building
containing three or more dwelling units and designed or used for occupancy
by three or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building forming
a single habitable unit which may be occupied by a single family for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. A dwelling unit may be attached or
detached.
ENCOUNTER CENTER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A business or
enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers: physical contact
between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or semi-nudity.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
ENTERTAINER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any person paid as an
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the operator of a cabaret
who frequently appears in a state of semi-nudity at any establishment
regulated by this chapter.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
ENTERTAINMENT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any of the following
activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually
oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, modeling (including lingerie or
photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual
conversations with customers for which some type of remuneration is
received.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
FACADE FRONTAGE — The percentage of the width of a building facade
which faces a public street relative to the lot width.[Added 5-17-2010 by
L.L. No. 8-2010]
FACADE, STREET — A facade facing a public street, parking area or
pedestrian walkway.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit; 1) who are related by blood, marriage or adoption;
or 2) although not related by blood, marriage or adoption, whose living
arrangements are the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
FARM — A single parcel of land five acres or more in size on which an
owner or tenant carries on agricultural pursuits, including but not limited
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:646
to, the raising of crops, dairying pursuits or the raising of livestock or
poultry or the keeping of bees.
FLOOR AREA — The total horizontal area of a building as outlined by
its exterior main walls, not including any space the habitation of which is
prohibited by any law, built-in or attached garages, porches or terraces.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS PUBLIC — The total area of the building accessible
or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters,
motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas
visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"),
areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles,
hallways, and entryways serving such areas.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
FOOTCANDLE — The amount of light that is produced by a candle at the
distance of one foot. A footcandle is also the equivalent of one lumen per
square foot.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE — A place of residence other than
a hotel, dormitory, or rooming house that is operated by a nationally
chartered membership organization or a local chartered organization; is
used, occupied, and maintained for persons enrolled in a college, university,
or other educational institution; which is recognized and subject to controls
by such institution; and is located entirely on the campus of that
institution.[Amended 9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by structures or supports that
is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent from
any building or other structure and includes ground signs, message center
signs, pole signs and subdivision identification signs.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building, accessory to dwellings, used exclusively
for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles, boats and trailers.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A main or accessory enclosed building with doors,
other than a private garage, used for parking or temporary storage of motor
vehicles, boats and trailers.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A main or accessory building used for purposes of
repairing motor vehicles, boats and trailers; a service garage if accessory to
an automobile salesroom.
GROUP DEVELOPMENT — Two or more structures containing attached
residential units or nonresidential structures, or a combination thereof.
Structures need not be on individual lots.
GROUND-FLOOR AREA — The maximum horizontal area of a building at
the ground level, excluding open porches, terraces and steps and attached
or built-in garage areas.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
HEIGHT (WTF) — See § 6-7-1.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:647
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the
resident thereof; provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and
does not change the character thereof.
HOSPICE — A structure other than a hospital or nursing home in which a
minimum of two terminally ill persons are regularly lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care and which has been granted a certificate of
approval to operate as a hospice pursuant to the Public Health Law or any
successor regulating state law.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of the area of a lot that is
covered by surfaces which do not readily absorb rainwater, including, but
not limited to: buildings, sidewalks, plazas and paved parking areas[Added
5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — An indoor facility designed for
sports and recreation activities including, but not limited to, golf,
basketball, baseball, football, soccer, ice skating, tennis or
swimming.[Added 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREA — Landscaped area located entirely
within the parking area of a site including landscaped islands, divider
medians and yard area at least five feet wide in excess of the minimum
required yard for Parking Areas 7,500 square feet or less (approximately 15
spaces).
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY — A facility approved by the NYS
Department of Health to provide health-related care and services to persons
who because of their physical or mental condition require institutional care,
in addition to board and lodging, but who do not have such an illness,
disease, injury, or other condition as to require the institutional care and
services provided only by a hospital or nursing home, providing such facility
meets standards of safety and sanitation in accordance with state and
federal requirements in addition to those applicable to nursing homes under
state law.
KENNEL — Any premises on which four or more dogs more than four
months old are kept.
LARGE DECIDUOUS TREE — See "Tree, large deciduous."
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business which
provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or
similar wear to individuals, couples or small groups in one or more rooms,
where the room(s) used for modeling is an area smaller than 1,000 square
feet each.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
LIVESTOCK — Any animals raised for food or product. In addition, they
include the following, regardless of purpose:
1. All animals with hooves, either single or split;
All members of the ovine (sheep), bovine (cows and cattle), caprine
(goats), equine (horses and ponies), and swine (pigs and hogs) families;
2.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:648
LOT — A parcel of land for a structure, use and the accessory structures or
uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required
by this Ordinance and such open spaces as are arranged and designed
to be used in connection with such structure. When part of an existing
conforming lot is conveyed by or to the Town of Amherst Industrial
Development Agency for a project involving the enlargement of an existing
structure or construction of an additional structure which enlargement
or additional structure is to be owned by the agency or occupied by its
lessee of the existing structures, design regulations for the district shall
be deemed not violated if the enlarged structure complies with those
regulations as applied to the entire lot.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area within lot lines.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT MEASUREMENTS — See § 2-5, Measurements and Exceptions.
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate parcel on a plat map
or deed filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of Erie County, New
York. See also "Nonconforming Use, Structure or Lot of Record."[Amended
5-4-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
LOT TYPES —
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance of a lot measured along the
building line at right angles to the mean lot depth line.[Amended 2-4-2008
by L.L. No. 1-2008]
3. Emus, rheas, and ostriches; and
4. All poultry (chickens, roosters, turkeys, ducks, geese and the like).
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land having lot lines at the junction of
two or more streets or having lot lines on the same street forming an
interior angle of intersection not more than 135 degrees.
1.
2. INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot.
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot which has frontage on more than one
street.
3.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:649
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections that, in the traveling mode, is a minimum of eight feet in width or
a minimum of 40 feet in length or, when erected on site, is a minimum of
320 square feet in floor area. A manufactured home was built on or after
June 15, 1976 on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems are
contained in the home. The term "manufactured home" shall also include
any structure that meets all the requirements of this definition except the
size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily
files a certification required by the Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing and Safety Act of 1974, as
amended. The term "manufactured home" shall not include any selfpropelled
recreational vehicle. A manufactured home shall bear a signifying
conformance to the design and construction requirements of HUD,
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR Part 3280.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
MASSAGE — Touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion,
and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the
soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding
an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L.
No. 9-2008]
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any business offering massages that is operated by
a person who is not a state licensed "massage therapist" or that provides
massages by persons who are not state licensed massage therapists by
the State Board of Massage Therapy, Office of the Professions, New York
State Education Department, under Title VIII, Education Law, Article 155
Massage Therapy.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
MEDIA — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of
anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. Media
includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers,
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:650
magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, other magnetic
media, and undeveloped pictures.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
MEDIA, SEXUALLY EXPLICIT — Magazines, books, videotapes, movies,
slides, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer images, or
other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "sexual conduct" or "specified
anatomical areas" (separately defined).[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
MEDIA STORE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A retail sales and services
establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the
following three tests:[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
(1) More than thirty percent (30%) of the gross public floor area is
devoted to sexually oriented media; or
(2) More than thirty percent (30%) of the stock in trade consists of
sexually oriented media; or
(3) It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any form as "XXX,"
"adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business.
MEDIA STORE WITH SOME SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA — A retail
sales and services establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that
meets either of the following two tests:[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
(1) More than ten percent (10%) but no more than thirty percent (30%)
of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media; or
(2) More than ten percent (10%) but no more than thirty percent (30%)
of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media.
MINOR UTILITIES — See "Utilities, minor."
MIXED USE — A building or group of buildings designed to accommodate
a combination of interrelated land uses, which includes a mix of two or
more of the following uses: retail, services, office, residential or civic/public
uses.[Added 5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable dwelling unit that was built
prior to June 15, 1976 (with or without a label certifying compliance with
NFPA, ANSI or a specific state standard) and designed and constructed to
be towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, connected to
utilities, and designed and constructed without a permanent foundation for
year-round living, excluding travel trailers.
MODELING STUDIO, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — An establishment or
business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing
suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space
smaller than 600 feet.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
MODIFICATION OR MODIFY (WTF) — See § 6-7-1.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:651
MOTION PICTURE OR VIDEO ARCADE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any
business that provides booths, cubicles, stalls or compartments which is
smaller than 150 square feet in floor area, which is designed, constructed
or used to hold or seat customers, and which is used for presenting sexually
oriented motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic,
electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but
not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROM, books,
magazines or periodicals) for observation by customers therein.[Added
7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
MOTION PICTURE THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A cinema or
motion picture theater which shows hard-core sexually oriented features on
more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers
features described as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented[Added 7-7-2008
by L.L. No. 9-2008]
MULTIPLE DEVELOPMENT — Four or more offices, commercial or
industrial establishments or enterprises or combinations of such uses
thereof, that are located in a single building; or one or more such offices,
establishments or enterprises or combinations of such uses located thereof
in two or more buildings developed or to be developed as part of an
integrated development.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION —
Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
NONCONFORMING USE, STRUCTURE OR LOT OF RECORD — Lots,
structures, uses of land and characteristics of use that were lawful before
this Ordinance or amendments thereto were passed, but that would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under terms of this Ordinance or future
amendments. The definition of nonconforming expressly does not include
any illegally established use or structure.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing
of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See also "Seminude."[
Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
NURSING HOME — A building used for the accommodation and care of
persons with, or recuperating from, illness or incapacity, where nursing
services are provided.
OCCUPIABLE SPACE — An enclosed space within a building intended for
human activities, including, but not limited to living, working, eating or
sleeping, which meet the required building codes for such spaces.[Added
5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:652
OFFICE — The use of a building or a portion of a building for the provision
of executive, consulting, professional, management, or administrative
services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, administrative offices
and services including advertising, accounting, architecture, archival
services, design, engineering, financing, government, human health care,
insurance, investment, law, medical laboratory testing service, personnel,
property management, real estate, secretarial services, telephone
answering, travel, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and
associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that
customarily associated with office services.
OPEN SPACE — An area unobstructed by buildings from the ground
upward, except for walks, paths, landscaping or other site features in
public, common or other private ownership. Yards of individual lots
occupied by dwellings shall not constitute open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within the site, privately owned
and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the site, or in specified portions of the site or other
users if permitted by the owners of the common open space. Common open
space may contain such structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons served by such
common open space.
OPEN USE — A use that creates or preserves areas intended primarily for
the raising of animals and crops, conservation, and the secondary industries
associated with agricultural production.
ORNANMENTAL TREE — See "Tree, ornamental."
OUTDOOR RECREATION (COMMON) — Public uses, varying in size,
providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Such
activities may take place wholly outdoors or within a number of outdoor
structures. Typical uses include facilities for tennis, racquetball, handball,
basketball, baseball, football, swimming, ice-skating, golf and soccer.
OUTDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — An outdoor facility designed for
sports and recreation activities including, but not limited to, golf,
basketball, baseball, football, soccer, ice skating, tennis or
swimming.[Added 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
OUTPARCEL — A parcel of land, generally located on the perimeter of a
larger parcel of commercial land that is subordinate to the larger parcel for
access, parking and drainage purposes.
OWNER — As used in this Ordinance, shall include, in addition to its usual
meaning, tenant, lessee, occupant or other user.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district classification superimposed in addition
to another (basic) district classification, further regulating or limiting
structures and uses otherwise permitted and regulated pursuant to the
basic district classification.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:653
PARK OFFICE — A small office designed to serve the needs of residents of
a manufactured home park.
PARKING AREA — An area used primarily for parking, circulation and
storage of vehicles including but not limited to parking lots and driveways.
PARKING ROOM — A parking area that is visually and functionally
segmented into several smaller parking areas.
PATIO HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit placed on a small
lot with a rear yard that may be enclosed by a wall.
PERSON — See § 6-7-1.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See § 6-7-1.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES OR PWS OR PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR PCS — See § 6-7-1.
PETITIONER — An applicant.
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY — Any space devoted to gathering together
persons for amusement, athletic, civic, dining, educational, entertainment,
patriotic, political, recreational, religious, social or similar purposes.
PLANT NURSERY — An establishment for the growth, display or sale
of trees, shrubs, flowering and nonflowering plants and materials used
in indoor or outdoor planting, conducted within or without an enclosed
building.
PRIMARY LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Entertainment which characterizes
the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of
advertising as well as actual performances.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE STRUCTURE OR FACILITY — A building or
fenced-in area containing equipment used by a public utility to provide and
distribute its services.
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION YARD — An area used on a temporary
basis for the storage, assembly or processing of materials, equipment, and
supplies used in the construction of a United States, New York State,
Erie County or Town of Amherst public works project. The public works
construction yard may include offices associated with the public works
project. Typical projects include but are not limited to: construction,
reconstruction, or repair of public infrastructure such as roadways, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, and waterlines.[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — A place of assembly used primarily as
a church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other place of religious
worship.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A business that engages in
research or development of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields.
Typical uses include: experimental, research and testing facilities, including
but not limited to, the construction or operation of: small scale experimental
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:654
and pilot plant operations; laboratories; production operations if ancillary
to, or resulting from, a permitted experimental, research or testing
operation; communication, navigation control, guidance systems,
transmission and reception equipment; data processing equipment and
systems; audio components and radio and television equipment; scientific
and medical instruments; assembly testing and calibration of components,
devices, systems and equipment, such as but not limited to, electronic,
scientific, medical, optical, biochemical, chemical, metallurgical and
pharmaceutical goods.
RESIDENTIAL CARE CENTER FOR ADULTS — A facility that provides
long-term residential care and support services to mentally ill adults,
provides case management and medication management services and
assists residents in securing clinical vocational and social services
necessary to enable the resident to continue to live in the community.
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES — Flagellation or torture by or upon
a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or
naked.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
SCREENING — A method of reducing the visual impact of one abutting
use or structure from another by landscaping, walls, berms, or other
appropriate means.
SEMI-NUDE OR IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION — The showing of the
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the
human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage
of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole
or in part.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — A building for senior citizens, primarily
for persons 62 years old or more, who are in good physical condition and do
not require physical assistance.
SERVICE STATION — An establishment engaged in the sale of motor
vehicle fuel. In addition, such uses may engage in the sale of beverages,
packaged foods, tobacco and similar convenience goods. Provision of road
maps and other informational material to customers; provision of restroom
facilities.
Oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied
and dispensed at retail and the following services may be rendered and
sales made:
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:655
Servicing of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, or boats spark plugs, batteries and distributors
and distributor parts; Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or
regrooving; Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan
belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors,
and the like; Radiator cleaning and flushing; Washing and polishing,
and the sale of automotive washing and polishing materials; Greasing
and lubrication; Providing and repairing of pumps and lines; Minor
servicing and repair of carburetors; Wiring repairs; Adjusting and
repairing brakes; Minor motor adjustments; Vehicle inspection.
Uses permissible at a service station do not include rental of motor
vehicles, major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts,
painting, welding or storage of automobiles not in operating condition. A
service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
SEX SHOP — A retail sales and services establishment that meets any of
the following tests:[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
(1) It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories:
sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or
presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic
practices, sexually oriented novelties; and the combination of such
items make up more than ten percent of its stock in trade or occupies
more than 10 percent of its floor area; or,
(2) More than five percent of its stock in trade consists of sexuallyoriented
toys or novelties; or,
(3) More than five percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the
display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
SEXUAL CONTACT — [Amended 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An inclusive term used to describe
collectively: sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion picture
theater; motion picture arcade; retail sales and services falling into the
category of sex shop or sexually oriented media shop. This collective term
does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single
use category for purposes of the zoning code or other applicable
ordinances.[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs[Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or bestiality,
or
1.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast of another person.
2.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:656
SHARED PARKING STUDY — A document required for shared parking
activities that addresses, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed
development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking
turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that
will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
SHOPPING CENTER — Four or more offices, commercial or industrial
establishments or combinations of such uses, which are located in a single
building or in two or more buildings, developed as part of a single
integrated development exceeding 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
SIGHT TRIANGLE, CLEAR — See "Clear Sight Triangle."
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or piece of land which directs attention to an object, product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business and the
supporting members thereto.
SIGN, ADDRESS. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, AWNING. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, DIRECTORY. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, FASCIA. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, FUEL PUMP. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, GROUND. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, HANGING. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, MARQUEE. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, MESSAGE CENTER. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, POLE. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, PROJECTING. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE. See § 7-8-3.
SIGN, SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, WALL. See § 7-8-4.
SIGN, WINDOW. See § 7-8-3.
SMALL TREE DECIDUOUS — See "Tree, small deciduous."
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, base and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100
kilowatts and which is intended to primarily reduce the on-site consumption
of utility power.[Added 8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:657
SOLAR SCREEN — A device attached to a building to provide shading for
glazed areas of the building.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A permit for a use that is generally considered
to be appropriate in a particular zoning district but because of its potential
for incompatibility with adjacent uses requires individual review and may
require the imposition of conditions in order to assure the appropriateness
of the use in a particular zoning district.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT (WTF) — See § 6-7-1.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQR) — A law
adopted by the New York State Legislature as Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; and Chapter
104 of the Code of the Town of Amherst, Local Environmental Review Law.
The purpose of SEQR is to incorporate the consideration of environmental
factors into the planning, review and decision-making processes of state,
regional and local government agencies. SEQR requires that all agencies
determine whether the actions they directly undertake, fund or approve
may have a significant impact on the environment, and, if it is determined
that the action may have a significant adverse impact, prepare or request
an environmental impact statement.
STEALTH OR STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — See § 6-7-1.
STORY — The portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the
next floor above or the ceilings next above under a roof.
STREET — A public or private way which permits conducting of vehicular
travel and/or affords a primary means of access by vehicles and pedestrians
to abutting properties, including the entire area within the right-of-way. The
term includes those ways as shown on plats filed in the office of the Erie
County Clerk, whether improved or not.
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
1.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
2.
EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic to which
access from the abutting properties is prohibited and all street
crossings are made by grade-separated intersections.
1.
MAJOR ARTERIAL. A high volume roadway that carries the major
portion of daily trips to centers of activity in the metropolitan area.
Major arterials (also called principal arterials) place a greater emphasis
on mobility rather than access to land and include fully and partially
controlled access facilities in three categories: Interstates,
Expressways, and Streets. A major arterial serves major through
movements between important centers of activities in a metropolitan
2.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:658
STREET GRADE — The slope of the street as measured between two
points.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line abutting a public street or edge
of pavement abutting a private street.[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008]
STRUCTURE — A building, gas or liquid storage tank, or anything other
than a fence, dumpster enclosure, vehicle use area constructed or erected
which requires permanent location in or on the ground or attachment
to something having such location. For application to the floodplain see
§ 7-7-4.[Amended 10-9-2017 by L.L. No. 21-2017]
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — See § 6-7-1.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — See § 6-7-1.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — See § 6-7-1.
TEMPORARY (WTF) — See § 6-7-1.
TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document required for
reduced parking that details how the petitioner will reduce parking demand
at the proposed development. The following are possible elements of a
transportation management plan: transportation coordinator, off-peak work
hours, preferential parking and financial incentives.
area, and a substantial portion of trips entering and leaving the area. It
also connects freeways with major traffic generators.
MINOR ARTERIAL. A street that connects and augments the major
arterial system. Although its main function is still traffic mobility, a
minor arterial performs this function at a somewhat lower level and
places more emphasis on land access than does a major arterial. A
system of minor arterials serves trips of moderate length and
distributes travel to geographical areas smaller than those served by a
major arterial.
3.
COLLECTOR. A street that distributes trips from and channels trips to
arterials. Additionally, these roadways provide access and circulation
within residential neighborhoods. Collector streets provide for both
access and circulation within residential, business, and industrial areas.
Their access function is more important than that of arterials, and
unlike arterials, their operation is not always dominated by traffic
signals.
4.
LOCAL COLLECTOR. A street that distributes lower volumes of traffic
from predominantly residential developments to collector streets and
arterials. Local collectors carry through traffic, but at lower volumes
than collectors.
5.
LOCAL STREETS. A street that provides for local traffic with the
highest level of property access and the lowest level of mobility.
Through traffic movement is discouraged on local streets.
6.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:659
TREE, LARGE DECIDUOUS — Any self-supporting woody plant of a
species that normally grows to an overall mature height of at least 40 feet,
usually with one main stem or trunk.
TREE, SMALL DECIDUOUS — Any self-supporting woody plant of a
species that normally grows to an overall mature height of at least 15 feet,
usually with one main stem or trunk.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL — Any self-supporting woody plant of a species that
features flowers, bracts and/or fruits that are conspicuous by virtue of their
color or size.
TOWN LAW — Chapter 62 of the NYS Consolidated Laws.
TURBINE — The parts of a small wind energy system including the blades,
generator and tail.[Added 8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT — A combination of uses permitted in a
nonresidential district planned as an integrated entity with common access
points, off-street parking, loading and stacking areas, fire lanes and other
facilities and features.
UPPER-STORY DWELLING UNIT — A residential dwelling unit located
above a nonresidential use.
UTILITY, MINOR — Public or private infrastructure serving a limited area
with no on-site personnel. Typical uses include stormwater retention and
detention facilities, telephone exchanges and water and wastewater pump
stations.
VEHICLE SALES, RENTAL AND LEASING — The sale or rental of
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or boats. Typical
uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and
boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle dealerships.
VEHICLE USE AREA — An area used primarily for parking, circulation and
storage of vehicles, including but not limited to, parking lots, loading areas,
stacking spaces and driveways.
VISTA — A view extending into the distance but bounded by structures or
public facilities.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF) — See
§ 6-7-1.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with the building unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of the structure from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
YARD, EXTERIOR SIDE — A side yard located immediately adjacent to
a public street right-of-way line or the edge of pavement of a private
street.[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the front lot line abutting a public right-of-way or the edge of the pavement
abutting a private street and the structure setback line as established by
this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure encroach into an easement
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:660
area established for a private street.[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No.
10-2008]
YARD, REAR — The yard extending from the rear wall of the structure to
the rear lot line across the full width of the structure.
YARD, REQUIRED — The minimum yard required between a lot line or
edge of pavement on a private street and building line or line of any parking,
loading and stacking area or any other use requiring a yard in order to
comply with the zoning regulations of the district in which the zoning
lot is located. A required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except for projections on structures as permitted in the
Zoning Ordinance and except for walks, landscaping and other yard or site
features.[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard and of a width established by this Ordinance; the width shall be
measured at right angles to its side lot line.
ZERO LOT LINE HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit
positioned on one side lot line without any setback with private yards on
three sides of the building, including a wider side yard comprising the
equivalent of two side yards for conventional detached housing.
§ 2-5. Measurements and Exceptions
2-5-1. Clear Vision Triangle. A clear vision triangle is the triangle formed
on corner lots between points on the front, side or rear lot lines or
edges of pavement on a private street 35 feet from the intersection of
the right-of-way lines or edges of pavement on a private street. Within
that area no fence, wall, ornamental gate or portal, bushes, shrubbery
or stored material shall be permitted higher than two feet above the
average finished grade of the lot. Trees shall be permitted within the
area only if maintained and trimmed so that no branches or foliage are
less than eight feet above the average finished grade of the lot. No
building shall be located within the areas, except that this restriction
shall not apply above the bottom of the second floor nor to columns of a
size required to carry the weight of upper stories. [Amended
7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:661
2-5-2. Yards.
A. Exceptions.
(1) Encroachments. The following are permitted in the required
yard areas provided they comply with all other standards of
this and other applicable ordinances. In no event shall any of
the following encroach into the public right-of-way.
(a) Cornices and Eaves. Cornices and eaves may project not
to exceed 18 inches over any required yard or court.
(b) Sills, Loaders, Belt Courses. Sills, loaders, belt courses
and similar ornamental or structural features may project
six inches into any required yard or court. An open fire
balcony or fire escape or a fire tower may project into a
required yard not more than four feet.
(c) Ground Story Bay Windows, Oriels or Balconies.
(i) Ground story bay windows, oriels or balconies, having
a combined total width not exceeding one-half of the
length of the wall to which they are attached, may
project not more than three feet into any required rear
yard or into any required side yard which is over six
feet wide.
(ii) An open porch not over one story high, window wells,
and other similar structures as determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, may project into any
required side yard, provided that it does not come
nearer the side lot line than a distance equivalent to
one-half the width of the side yard required as a
minimum for that lot. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008; 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(iii) No porch, oriel, bay window, balcony or stairway
constructed under the provisions of the preceding
paragraph shall have a width or a greater dimension
in excess of twice the distance of its projection.
(iv) An open porch or entranceway may project not to
exceed eight feet into a required front yard.
(v) A bay window not over one story high may project four
feet into a required front yard. Such bay windows shall
not occupy more than one-half of the wall to which
they are attached. Where part of the front wall
encloses garage space, such wall space shall not be
used to figure length of the bay windows. An open
porch or deck, not exceeding one story in height, may
§ 2-5 AMHERST CODE § 2-5
1:662
project not more than eight feet into a required rear
yard.
(d) Chimney, Smokestack, Flue or Elevator. A chimney,
smokestack, flue or elevator shaft may project into any
yard or court required as a minimum, provided that the
horizontal section of the projection does not exceed 12
square feet in any residence district or nine square feet in
any other district, provided that it does not come nearer
the side lot line than a distance of three feet.
(e) Exterior Heating or Air-Conditioning Structures in
Residential Districts. Except for window-mounted units,
no exterior heating or air-conditioning structure or
equipment shall be located within three feet of any lot line.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
(f) Radio and Television Antennas. Radio and television
antennas and any other communication equipment shall
not be located within the area of a lot between the front or
exterior side lot line and the nearest line of any building on
the lot.
(g) Ornamental Gates, Fences and Portals. Ornamental
gates, fences and portals may be constructed in any
district, but only on private property, and may be located
in a required yard. Fences located in a required front yard
shall be in accordance with § 7-5-3.
(h) Driveways.
(i) The parking of vehicles shall be prohibited in any
required front yard except on a paved surface.
(ii) Driveways may be located in a required front yard in
any district, and are not subject to setbacks required
for other vehicle use areas. In no case shall a
commercial driveway be located less than 10 feet from
an adjacent residential lot line.
(iii) For parcels containing one to four residential dwelling
units, the cumulative area of any driveway, plus any
impermeable surface area located in the required
front yard, shall not exceed 50 percent of the area
between the front face of the house and the right-ofway
line. Driveways and parking areas shall be
constructed of concrete, asphalt or other materials
approved by the Commissioner of Building.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:663
(2) Yards on Through Lots. Each through lot shall require a rear
yard setback equal to the required front yard of any abutting
lots on the non-frontage street.
(3) Front Yards on Partially Built-Up Residential Blocks.
Where 50 percent or more of the aggregate street frontage on
one side of a street between two successive intersecting
streets is occupied by buildings, and the average setback
distance of existing residence buildings exceeds the required
minimum front yard for the district in which the lot to be
developed is located, the minimum front yard of that lot shall
be the lesser of:
(a) Eighty-five percent of the average setback distance of
existing residential buildings located on the lots on either
side. This minimum required setback shall not exceed
twice the required setback for the zoning district as
determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(b) The minimum front yard required under any restrictive
covenants or declarations recorded in the Erie County
Clerk's office affecting the lot to be developed and those on
either side of it.
(4) Minor Utility Setbacks. Notwithstanding § 2-5-3 below,
minor utilities, as defined in § 2-4, and aboveground backflow
prevention devices, shall be subject to the minimum yard
requirements of Part 3, Part 4 or Part 5 with a minimum of ten
feet. Stormwater retention and detention facilities and
aboveground backflow prevention devices three feet or less in
height are not subject to the minimum yard requirements of
Parts 3, 4 or 5, but shall have a minimum setback of ten feet
from all property lines, with the following exception:
(a) When a stormwater retention or detention facility is
shared by multiple parcels, there shall be no side or rear
setback requirement for the facility in the location(s)
where the facility crosses a property line between shared
users of the facility.
§ 2-5 AMHERST CODE § 2-5
1:664
[Amended 1-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007, 9-21-2009
by L.L. No. 14-2009, and 4-12-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
(5) Yards on Corner Lots. [Amended 7-16-2007 by L.L. No.
7-2007]
(a) The shorter property line abutting streets on a residential
corner lot shall be deemed the front lot line.
(b) The exterior side yard for any building or structure on a
corner lot shall meet the front yard requirement for the
district within which it is located; provided, however, that
for buildings on lots within subdivisions given preliminary
plat approval prior to October 24, 1960, the minimum
width of the exterior side yard shall be 20 feet. [Amended
12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
(c) See § 4-8-2 for side yard requirements for corner lots in
nonresidential districts and § 4-12-2 for side yard
requirements for corner lots in industrial districts. [Added
2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(6) Supplemental Front Yard Regulations on Partially Built-
Up Nonresidential Blocks. In all nonresidential and special
purpose districts, where 50 percent or more of the aggregate
street frontage on one side of a street between two successive
intersecting streets is occupied by buildings of the type and
use permitted in the district, the minimum front yard of a lot to
be developed shall be the average setback distance of existing
buildings on the lots on either side as determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
2-5-3.Minimum Distances to Principal and Accessory Structures for
Specific Streets. Except as provided in subsections 2-5-2A(2) through
2-5-2A(5), the minimum setback for structures, as measured from the
center of the right-of-way, shall supersede minimum setback
requirements for any yards abutting the following streets for those
districts where such setbacks are lower than those established in the
table below. [Amended 10-9-2017 by L.L. No. 21-2017]
Street Name Location
Minimum Distance to
Structure
(ft)
Transit Road 135
Niagara Falls Blvd. Sheridan Dr. —
North
115
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:665
Street Name Location
Minimum Distance to
Structure
(ft)
Millersport Highway Sheridan Dr. —
North
115
Sheridan Dr. 115
Main St. East of Village line 115
Wehrle Dr. East of Village line 115
North French Rd. 90
Maple Rd. 90
Hopkins Rd. 90
Evans St. Sheridan Dr. to
Village line
90
Campbell Blvd. 90
Sweet Home Rd. Rensch Rd. — North 90
2-5-4. Building Height.
A. Measurement. Building height refers to the vertical distance from
the finished grade line to:
(1) The highest point of the coping of a flat roof; or
(2) The ridge line of a gable, shed, hip or gambrel roof; or
(3) The highest point of the roof and parapets of a mansard roof.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Mechanical space for building equipment placed on the
building roof may be allowed above the maximum height
specified, provided that such mechanical space is set back a
minimum of 15 feet from any exterior wall, does not exceed 15
feet in height and is adequately screened from view.
(2) Chimneys, radio or television antennae, located upon and
constituted as an integral part of a principal structure, may be
§ 2-5 AMHERST CODE § 2-5
1:666
erected above the height limit specified but are limited to
a height not exceeding 65 feet above the average finished
grade. Mechanical space for building equipment placed on
the building roof may be allowed above the maximum height
specified, provided that such mechanical space is set back a
minimum of 15 feet from any exterior wall does not exceed 15
feet in height and is screened from view.
(3) When adjacent to the following districts: R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2,
R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7 PRD,
PDD, PRD, or NCD, the following shall apply to any building or
structure in the MFR-6, MFR-7, OB, GB, NB, CS, MS, SC, RD,
ST, GI, AG, CF, R-R, S-A or RC districts: [Amended 1-16-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007; 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 8-1-2011
by L.L. No. 19-2011; 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014;
11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
(a) In no case shall the side or rear setback be less than the
greater of 30 feet or that required for a parcel abutting a
nonresidential district. Buildings greater than 35 feet in
height shall have minimum side and rear setbacks of three
feet for each foot of building height. The maximum
permitted height at the side and rear setback lines as
measured from the nearest residential district boundary
shall be 35 feet or two stories for a structure with a
pitched roof of 6:12 or greater, and 30 feet or two stories
for a building with a flat roof or pitched roof of less than
6:12. Any structure that faces a public right-of-way shall
have its facade set back 20 feet for the first 30 feet of
building height and 30 feet for building height above 30
feet. No building shall encroach into the vehicle use
setback.
(4) The maximum height for all nonresidential structures in the RR
district shall be 65 feet.
(5) No accessory structure in a residential district shall exceed the
lesser of 20 feet in height or the actual height of the structure.
[Added 7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
2-5-5. Distance Between Uses. Where a provision of this Zoning
Ordinance requires the determination of the distance between two
uses, the following principles shall be followed: [Added 7-7-2008 by
L.L. No. 9-2008]
A. The measurement to or from a use that is the principal use on a lot
shall be measured from the point on a lot line that is nearest to the
other lot line from or to which the measurement is being made;
B. The measurement from or to one of several principal uses on a lot,
such as in a shopping center, shall be measured from the point on
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:667
the boundary of the leasehold or other space occupied by that use
that is nearest to the lot line from or to which the measurement is
being made; and
C. The distance shall be measured by the shortest linear distance
between the points.
§ 2-5 AMHERST CODE § 2-5
1:668
PART 3.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 3-1. General
§ 3-2. Rural Residential District (R-R)
3-1-1.Key to Use Tables.
A.
Permitted. A in the Permitted column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district,
subject to the use regulations in Part 6. Such uses are subject to all
other applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
B.
Special Use. A in the Special Use column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a
special use permit in accordance with § 8-6. Special uses are
subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance
including the additional standards contained in Part 6, except
where expressly modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals as part of
the special exception approval process.
C. Uses Not Allowed. Any unlisted use indicates that the use is not
allowed in the particular district.
D. Uses Not Listed. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine
whether or not an unlisted use is similar to an existing use or is
substantially similar to an already defined specific use, using the
criteria in § 8-12-4, Determination of Similar Uses. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
E. Standards. The "Standards" column on the use table is a crossreference
to any limited or special use regulation listed in Part 6.
F. Developments with Multiple Principal Uses. A development
comprised of uses regulated by separate rows on the Use Table
shall be reviewed using the most restrictive process from among
the proposed uses.
3-2-1. Purpose. To provide areas for low-density, se mi-rural single-family
detached residential development that recognizes the need to protect
the long-term viability of surrounding agricultural operations. The R-R
District also accommodates farms, farm-related activities, and other
nonintensive compatible uses.
3-2-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal residential structure permitted on a lot in the R-R
district.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:669
R-R Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
Farm
Stables, public or private § 6-1-1
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-R Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 3 acres
Min. lot width 200 ft
Min. front yard 50 ft
Min. rear yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:670
R-R Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. side yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Max. height
Residential 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Nonresidential 65 ft
Max. building coverage (residential use only) 25%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.38
3-2-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
R-R Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Uses and structures customarily incidental to
the above
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Cat boarding facility [Added 2-4-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 6-8-7
Detached private garages and parking areas
Greenhouse
Home occupation Type 1 or Type II § 6-8-6
Kennels, accessory § 6-8-7
Solar energy system [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Produce stand only selling items grown onsite
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons
Signs § 7-8
38.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:671
§ 3-3. Suburban Agricultural District (S-A)
R-R Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pool and tennis court § 6-8-12
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-R Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 5 ft
Max. height 30 ft
Max. building coverage (including principle39
structure)
35%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-2-4. General Development Standards.
A. For rural residential cluster development provisions, see § 3-15-4.
B. Development in the R-R District shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
R-R General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-3-1. Purpose. To provide areas for low-density, single-family detached
residential development which would also accommodate farms, farmrelated
activities, and other nonintensive compatible uses.
39.So in original.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-3
1:672
3-3-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal residential structure permitted on a lot in the S-A
district. S-A Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
Farm
Stables, public or private § 6-1-1
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
Ground-mounted solar energy
system, Tier III [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Ground-mounted solar energy
system, Tier I & Tier II [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:673
S-A Permitted
Special
Use Standards
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
S-A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 1 acre
Min. lot width 200 ft
Min. Yards
Front yard 50 ft
Rear Yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Side Yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Corner lot See 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height
Residential 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Nonresidential 65 ft
Max. building coverage 25%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.40
3-3-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
S-A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Cat boarding facility [Added 2-4-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 6-8-7
40.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-3 AMHERST CODE § 3-3
1:674
S-A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Detached private garages and parking areas
Greenhouse
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Kennels, accessory § 6-8-7
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Private recreational uses and structures
Raising of livestock for noncommercial
purposes
§ 6-8-9
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
S-A Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 5 ft
Max. height 30 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
35%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-3-4. General Development Standards. Development in the S-A district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:675
§ 3-4. Residential District One (R-1)
S-A General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-4-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for low-density singlefamily
detached residential development where each dwelling unit shall
be located on an individual lot of at least 21,780 square feet.
3-4-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the R-1 district. R-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
§ 3-3 AMHERST CODE § 3-4
1:676
R-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-1 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 21,780 sf
Min. lot width 100 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 30 ft
Rear yard 35 ft
Combined side yard 20 ft
Each side yard 8 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
1 story 1,200 sf
More than 1 story 1,400 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.41
41.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:677
3-4-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
R-1 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when the dwelling is occupied
by the actual record owner thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-1 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-4-4. General Development Standards. Development in the R-1 district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
§ 3-4 AMHERST CODE § 3-4
1:678
§ 3-5. Residential District Two (R-2)
R-1 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-5-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for low-density singlefamily
detached residential development where each dwelling unit shall
be located on an individual lot of at least 11,500 square feet.
3-5-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the R-2 district. R-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:679
R-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-2 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 11,500 sf
Min. lot width 80 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 30 ft
Rear yard 35 ft
Combined side yard 20 ft
Each side yard 8 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
1 story 1,200 sf
More than 1 story 1,400 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.42
42.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-5 AMHERST CODE § 3-5
1:680
3-5-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
R-2 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when the dwelling is occupied
by the actual record owner thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other Uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-2 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-5-4. General Development Standards. Development in the R-2 district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:681
§ 3-6. Residential District Three (R-3)
R-2 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-6-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for low-density singlefamily
detached residential development where each dwelling unit shall
be located on an individual lot of at least 8,450 square feet.
3-6-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the R-3 district. R-3 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
§ 3-5 AMHERST CODE § 3-6
1:682
R-3 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-3 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
Interior 8,450 sf
Corner 9,750 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 65 ft
Corner 75 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 30 ft
Rear yard 30 ft
Combined side yards 10 ft
Each side yard 5 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:683
R-3 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.43
3-6-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
R-3 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when the dwelling is occupied
by the actual record owner thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
R-3 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
43.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-6 AMHERST CODE § 3-6
1:684
§ 3-7. Cluster Residential District Three-A (CR-3A)
R-3 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-6-4. General Development Standards. Development in the R-3 district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
R-3 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-7-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the town for low-density singlefamily
detached residential development on lots which may vary in size
but where the minimum lot area per dwelling unit is 5,000 square feet.
This district is designed to permit greater flexibility and creativity in the
location of structures on the land to encourage conservation and to
utilize topography and site features to the best advantage.
3-7-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the CR-3A district. CR-3A Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:685
CR-3A Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
Patio home § 6-2-5
Zero lot line home § 6-2-7
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
CR-3A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 5,000 sf
Min. lot width 40 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 25 ft
Rear yard 30 ft
Side yard None
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
§ 3-7 AMHERST CODE § 3-7
1:686
CR-3A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Min. building separation 10 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.44
3-7-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
CR-3A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when the dwelling is occupied by
the actual record owner thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
44.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:687
§ 3-8. Traditional Single-Family Residential District (TR-3)
CR-3A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
CR-3A Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-7-4. General Development Standards. Development in the R-3 district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
CR-3A General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-8-1. Purpose. To provide for higher-density single-family development
only within or near existing smaller lot single-family neighborhoods
where each dwelling unit is located on an individual lot of at least 4,500
square feet.
3-8-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the TR-3 district.
§ 3-7 AMHERST CODE § 3-8
1:688
TR-3 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
TR-3 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
Interior 4,500 sf
Corner 5,800 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 40 ft
Corner 50 ft
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8
1:689
TR-3 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. yards
Front yard 25-ft
Rear yard 25 ft
Combined yard 10 ft
Each side yard 5 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 35 ft
Max. building coverage 45%
Min. floor area (dwelling only) 1,000 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.45
3-8-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
TR-3 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Detached private garages and parking areas
Home occupations § 6-8-7
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by New York State,
when accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pool § 6-8-13
45.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-8 AMHERST CODE § 3-8
1:690
§ 3-9. Residential District Four (R-4)
TR-3 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
TR-3 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 6 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
50%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-8-4. General Development Standards. Development in the TR-3 District
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
TR-3 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-9-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the development of
attached or detached dwelling units within a single structure.
3-9-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the R-4 district.
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:691
R-4 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Attached dwelling § 6-2-1
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
(1) Detached Dwelling Units. As permitted and regulated in the
R-3 district. [Amended 9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
(2) Attached Dwelling Units.
§ 3-9 AMHERST CODE § 3-9
1:692
R-4 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 5,850 sf
Min. lot width
Two-family 90 ft
Three-family 105 ft
Four-family 120 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 30 ft
Rear yard 30 ft
Combined side yards 20 ft
Each side yard 8 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 35 ft
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
0 bedroom 400 sf
1 bedroom 640 sf
2 bedroom 760 sf
3 bedroom 1,000 sf
4 bedroom 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.46
3-9-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
R-4 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
46.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:693
R-4 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when accessory to detached
dwelling units
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The following dimensional standards
apply to structures that are accessory to a detached dwelling unit
only.
R-4 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line [Amended 2-8-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
5 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-9-4. General Development Standards. Development in the R-4 district
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
R-4 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
§ 3-9 AMHERST CODE § 3-9
1:694
§ 3-10. Multifamily Residential District Four-A (MFR-4A)
R-4 General Development Standards
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bullk47 Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-10-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the development of
attached and detached dwelling units.
3-10-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. MFR-4APermitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Attached dwelling
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
47.So in original.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:695
MFR-4APermitted
Special
Use Standards
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
(1) Detached Dwelling Units On Individual Lots.
MFR-4A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
Interior 6,000 sf
Corner 7,200 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 50 ft
Corner 60 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 25 ft
Rear yard 20 ft
Side yard 5 ft*
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Min. Location & Separation
Front to street 25 ft
Side (building to building) 10 ft
From lot line 5 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to
35 ft)
§ 3-10 AMHERST CODE § 3-10
1:696
MFR-4A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Max. building coverage 40%
* However, at the time of final plat approval, site plan
approval, or amendment thereof, upon application by one
owner of all lots to be affected hereby, the Planning Board
may permit development with side yards of less than five
feet, provided that buildings on adjacent lots or the nearest
adjacent building, if on the same lot, shall be separated by
at least 10 feet.
(2) Detached Dwelling Units Not On Individual Lots.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
MFR-4A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area per dwelling 1 unit/6,000 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 50 ft
Corner 60 ft
Min. Location & Separation
Front to street 25 ft
Rear 20 ft
Side (building to building) 10 ft
From lot line 5 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to
35 ft)
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(3) Attached Dwelling Units.
MFR-4A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area per dwelling 4,300 sf
Min. lot width 120 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 30 ft
Rear yard 40 ft
§ 3-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:697
MFR-4A Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Side yard 40 ft
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(4)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 35 ft
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
0 bedroom 400 sf
1 bedroom 640 sf
2 bedroom 760 sf
3 bedroom 1,000 sf
4 bedroom 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-10-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
MFR-4A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking areas
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons only when the dwelling is occupied by
the actual record owner thereof
§ 3-10 AMHERST CODE § 3-10
1:698
MFR-4A Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
MFR-4A Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line [Amended 2-8-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
5 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-10-4. General Development Standards. Development in the MFR-4A
district shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table
below.
MFR-4A General Development Standards
Accessory Structure Minimum Yard & Building
Spacing [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
§ 3-15-6
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
§ 3-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:699
§ 3-11. Multifamily Residential District Five (MFR-5)
3-11-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for medium-density
multifamily development where the relationship among buildings and
between wings of a single building is regulated in order to assure
adequate light and air to residents and protection to and from
surrounding development.
3-11-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. MFR-5 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Attached dwelling
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
Dormitory [Amended 9-6-2016
by L.L. No. 10-2016]
§ 6-2-4
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
§ 3-11 AMHERST CODE § 3-11
1:700
MFR-5 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
(1) Detached Dwelling Units. As permitted and regulated in the
MFR-4A district. [Amended 9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
(2) Attached Dwelling Units. As permitted and regulated in the
R-4 district or in accordance with the following table.
[Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011; 9-9-2013 by L.L.
No. 17-201348]
MFR-5 Principal Use Dimensional Standards [Amended
9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
0 to 1 bedroom 3,630 sf
2 bedroom 4,356 sf
3 bedroom 5,445 sf
4 bedroom 6,250 sf
Min. lot width 150 ft
Min. yards see § 3-15-5
Min. building separation see § 3-15-5
[Added
9-9-2013 by L.L.
No. 17-2013]
Max. height 35 ft
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
0 bedroom 400 sf
1 bedroom 640 sf
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 3-11-2B(3), Attached Dwelling Units
Not on Individual Lots, as amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011, which immediately
followed this subsection.
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:701
MFR-5 Principal Use Dimensional Standards [Amended
9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
2 bedroom 760 sf
3 bedroom 1,000 sf
4 bedroom 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.49
3-11-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
(1) Detached Dwelling Unit.
MFR-5 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking
areas
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy system [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than
two persons only when the dwelling is
occupied by the actual record owner
thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small energy wind system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
49.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-11 AMHERST CODE § 3-11
1:702
MFR-5 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
(2) Attached Dwelling Unit.
MFR-5 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Standards
Area for active recreation § 3-15-6
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Parking loading and stacking area and
driveway
§ 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Private garages § 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 3-15-6
Storage garages and sheds § 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Swimming pools § 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards Accessory Uses to Attached Dwelling
Units.
(1) When principal uses and structures are developed according to
§ 3-11-2B(2), the following standards shall be required.
[Amended 9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:703
MFR-5 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation § 3-15-6
Min. from lot line § 3-15-6
[Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(2) When principal uses and structures are developed according to
Option 2 and detached dwelling units of § 3-11-2B(2), the
following standards shall be required.
MFR-5 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 5 ft [Amended
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including
principal structure)
40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-11-4. General Development Standards. Development in the MFR-5
district shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table
below.
MFR-5 General Development Standards
Accessory Structure Minimum Yard & Building
Spacing [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
§ 3-15-6
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening50 § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
50.So in original.
§ 3-11 AMHERST CODE § 3-11
1:704
§ 3-12. Multifamily Residential District Six (MFR-6)
MFR-5 General Development Standards
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-12-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for high-density
development where the relationship among buildings and between
wings of a single building is regulated in order to assure adequate light
and air to residents and protection to and from surrounding
developments.
3-12-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. MFR-6 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Attached dwelling
Common recreation structure or
use
§ 6-2-3
Dormitory [Amended 9-6-2016
by L.L. No. 10-2016]
§ 6-2-4
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:705
MFR-6 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
(1) Detached Dwelling Units On Individual Lots.
MFR-6 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
Interior 6,000 sf
Corner 7,200 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 50 ft
Corner 60 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 25 ft
Rear yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Side yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Min. Location & Separation
Front to street 25 ft
Side (building to building) 10 ft
§ 3-12 AMHERST CODE § 3-12
1:706
MFR-6 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
From lot line 5 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to
35 ft)
Max. building coverage 40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(2) Detached Dwelling Units Not On Individual Lots.
MFR-6 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area per dwelling unit 1 unit/6,000 sf
Max. Units per individual lot 8
Min. lot width
Interior 50 ft
Corner 60 ft
Min. Location & Separation
Front to street 25 ft
Side (building to building) 10 ft
From lot line 5 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to
35 ft)
Max. building coverage 40%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(3) Attached Dwelling Units.
MFR-6 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
0 to 1 bedroom 2,562 sf
2 bedroom 2,904 sf
3 bedroom 3,630 sf
4 bedroom 4,356 sf
Min. lot width 200 ft
Min. yards see § 3-15-5
Min. building separation see § 3-15-5
[Added
9-9-2013 by L.L.
No. 17-2013]
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:707
MFR-6 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
0 bedroom 400 sf
1 bedroom 640 sf
2 bedroom 760 sf
3 bedroom 1,000 sf
4 bedroom 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.51
3-12-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
(1) Detached Dwelling Unit.
MFR-6 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking
areas
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Home occupations § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
51.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table, as amended 4-12-2010
by L.L. No. 2-2010, was repealed 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-12 AMHERST CODE § 3-12
1:708
MFR-6 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Rooming and boarding of not more than
two persons only when the dwelling is
occupied by the actual record owner
thereof
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
(2) Attached Dwelling Unit.
MFR-6 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Standards
Area for active recreation § 3-15-6
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Parking loading and stacking area and
driveway
Private garage
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 3-15-6
Storage garage
Swimming pools
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
(1) Accessory Uses to Attached Dwelling Units.
MFR-6 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation § 3-15-6
Min. from lot line § 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by
L.L. No.
17-2013]
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:709
§ 3-13. Multifamily Residential District Seven (MFR-7)
MFR-6 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including
principal structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(2) Accessory Uses to Detached Dwelling Units.
MFR-6 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line [Amended 2-8-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
5 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including
principal structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-12-4. General Development Standards. Development in the MFR-6
district shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table
below.
MFR-6 General Develop Standards
Accessory Structure Minimum Yard & Building
Spacing [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
§ 3-15-6
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
§ 3-12 AMHERST CODE § 3-13
1:710
3-13-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for high-density
development of adult care facilities, such as senior citizen housing,
nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, and single-family detached
dwellings not on individual lots. [Amended 8-20-2012 by L.L. No.
15-2012]
3-13-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. MFR-7 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Adult care facility § 6-2-2
Hospice
Intermediate care facility
Nursing home
Residential care center for adults
Senior citizen housing52 § 6-2-2
Single-family detached, not on
individual lots
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
52.Editor's Note: The entry for "single-family detached," which immediately followed this
entry, was repealed 8-20-2012 by L.L. No. 15-2012.
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13
1:711
MFR-7 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
(1) Detached Dwelling Units Not On Individual Lots.
[Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
MFR-7 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area per dwelling53 6,000 sf
Min. lot width
Interior 50 ft
Corner 60 ft
Min. Location & Separation
Front to
street —
height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft
height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft
Side (building to building) 10 ft
Rear See
§ 2-5-4B(3)
53.Editor's Note: The entry for “Max. Units per individual lot,” which immediately followed
this entry, was repealed 8-20-2012 by L.L. No. 15-2012.
§ 3-13 AMHERST CODE § 3-13
1:712
MFR-7 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
From lot line See
§ 2-5-4B(3)
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
(2) Attached Dwelling Units.
MFR-7 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling)
0 to 1 bedroom 725 sf
2 or more bedrooms 1,000 sf
Min. lot width 100 ft
Min. yards See § 3-15-5
Min. building separation 30 ft
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
0 bedroom 400 sf
1 bedroom 580 sf
2 bedroom 700 sf
3 bedroom 800 sf
4 bedroom 900 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.54
3-13-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
54.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table, as amended 4-12-2010
by L.L. No. 2-2010, was repealed 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13
1:713
MFR-7 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Convenience retail and service facility § 6-8-4
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Garden, recreation and health care facility
Off-street parking, loading and stacking
Solar energy system [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards.
MFR-7 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards.
Min. building separation § 3-15-6
Min. from lot line § 3-15-6 [Added
9-9-2013 by L.L.
No. 17-2013]
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including principal
structure)
45%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
3-13-4. General Development Standards. Development in the MFR-7
district shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table
below.
MFR-7 General Development Standards
Accessory Structure Minimum Yard & Building
Spacing [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
§ 3-15-6
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
§ 3-13 AMHERST CODE § 3-13
1:714
§ 3-14. Manufactured Home Residential District Eight (MHR-8)
MFR-7 General Development Standards
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
3-14-1. Purpose. To provide areas planned and developed as manufactured
home parks within the Town. The district will permit manufactured
homes on individual lots.
3-14-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. There shall be not more than
one principal structure permitted on a lot in the MHR-8 district. MHR-8Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Manufactured home
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
No commercial uses allowed
INDUSTRIAL USES
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14
1:715
MHR-8Permitted
Special
Use Standards
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
MHR-8 Principal Use Dimensional Standards
SITE
Min. area 10 acres
Min. number of lots 50
Min. width 100 ft
Min. recreation area (of gross site area) 8%
Min. between structure and park site
boundary
25 ft
LOT
Min. area 4,000 sf
Min. width 40 ft
Min. front yard
Public street 30 ft
Private street 25 ft
Min. rear yard 15 ft
Min. side yard 15 ft
Min. building separation 20 ft
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.55
3-14-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
55.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 3-14 AMHERST CODE § 3-14
1:716
§ 3-15. Supplemental Residential District Design Standards
MHR-8 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Convenience retail and service § 6-8-4
Dumpsters/refuse containers [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
§ 7-2-4D
Home occupation § 6-8-6
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Open space which may include recreational
facilities to serve the residents of the park
Park office § 6-8-8
Private garage
Private garden
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Storage shed
Other uses and structures customarily incidental
to the principal use
3-14-4. General Development Standards. Development in the MHR-8
district shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table
below.
MHR-8 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:717
3-15-1. Accessory Structures and Yards. No accessory structure shall
project into a front yard. An accessory building may project into a side
yard to the extent permitted in the district. Except for window mounted
units, no exterior heating or air conditioning structure or equipment
shall be located within five feet of any lot line.
3-15-2.Minimum Distances to Structures for Specific Streets. The
minimum distances to structures for specific streets set out in § 2-5-3
shall supersede any setbacks set forth in this Part.
3-15-3. Screening. In the MHR-8 district, fences, walls, plantings or other
screening materials shall be provided near the boundary of the
property.
3-15-4.Types of Residential Development. Three types of subdivisions
are permitted within the residential districts, as follows.
A. Conventional Subdivision. Conventional subdivision is a pattern
of residential development that provides the majority of property
owners with substantial yards on their own property.
B. Cluster Subdivision.
(1) Cluster subdivision trades smaller lot sizes (with smaller yards)
for additional common open space. Cluster subdivision shall
provide a minimum of 30 percent common open space,
exclusive of individual lots.
(2) In the CR-3A, MHR-8 and MFR districts, dwelling units within
a group development may be arranged in groups or clusters.
Each group or cluster shall abut a street; however, each
dwelling unit within such a group or cluster need not so abut,
provided that:
(a) Each dwelling unit is accessible by means of a private
street to service and emergency vehicles.
(b) The standards of design and construction for private
streets meet applicable town specifications for public
streets unless modified by the approved site plan.
(c) The location, design and construction of all utilities meet
all applicable specifications and are adequate to serve the
needs of the group or cluster.
(d) The procedures for the preservation and maintenance of
private streets, pedestrian ways and common open space
comply with all applicable laws.
C. Rural Cluster Subdivision.
(1) Definition. A rural cluster subdivision is a residential
development in the R-R District that:
§ 3-15 AMHERST CODE § 3-15
1:718
(a) Helps retain viable agriculture and/or open space;
(b) Minimizes land use conflicts;
(c) Provides for recreational and/or habitat corridors through
linked open space networks;
(d) Achieves flexibility, efficiency and cost reduction in the
provision of services and infrastructure; and
(e) Does not rely on central sewer facilities.
(2) Application Requirements.
(a) At the time of application for a rural cluster subdivision, in
addition to all subdivision application materials required
in accordance with § 4-4-2 of the subdivision regulations,
the petitioner shall submit a site analysis map.
(b) The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the
important site features have been adequately identified
prior to the creation of the site design, and that the
proposed open space will meet the requirements of this
Section. The site analysis map shall include the following
features:
(i) Property boundaries;
(ii) All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other
hydrologic features;
(iii) Topographic contours of no less than two-foot
intervals unless a more precise vertical scale is
available;
(iv) General vegetation characteristics;
(v) General soil types and areas suitable for installation of
on-site wastewater treatment systems;
(vi) The planned location of protected open space;
(vii) Lands with protected development rights;
(viii) Existing roads and structures; and
(ix) Potential connections with existing open space and
trails.
(3) Development Review Procedures. Subdivision review
procedures in accordance with the Town of Amherst
subdivision regulations shall apply to all cluster developments.
(4) Design Standards. The following standards shall apply to all
developed areas within a rural cluster subdivision.
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:719
(a) Location. The developed area shall be located outside the
designated open space area.
(b) Development Pattern. Within the developed area,
development of residences and infrastructure shall
accommodate, to the extent possible, existing natural
features, including site topography, water courses,
wetlands, tree and vegetation lines and similar natural
resources. Lots are not intended to be stripped out along
existing rural roadways, but rather clustered in the most
appropriate portion of the site for development, and
surrounded by open space.
(c) Determination of Density. Density in a rural cluster
subdivision shall be determined by multiplying the gross
area of the tract of land by the maximum gross density for
the R-R district (one unit per three acres).
(d) Dimensional and Density Standards. Notwithstanding
the dimensional standards in § 3-2-2B a rural cluster
subdivision shall comply with the development standards
in the following table.
Rural Cluster Subdivision Development Standards
Min. subdivision area 15 ac.
Min. open space 50% of gross
area
Max. gross density 1 unit/3 acres
Min. lot area 1 ac.
Min. lot width 150 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 50 ft
Rear yard 50 ft
Side yard 25 ft.
Max. height 2 stories (up to
35 ft.)
Max. building coverage 25%
Min. floor area (dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations,
and exceptions see § 2-5.
(e) Permitted and Prohibited Uses in Designated Open
Space.
§ 3-15 AMHERST CODE § 3-15
1:720
(i) Within the rural cluster subdivision open space, the
following uses are permitted:
a) Natural resource conservation areas;
b) Open uses as permitted in § 3-2-2A;
c) Active or passive common open space;
d) Common water supply systems; and
e) Common septic system drain fields.
(ii) Any use not listed in (i) above shall be prohibited
within the rural cluster subdivision open space.
(f) Agricultural Buffer.
(i) When the developed area of a rural cluster subdivision
is located adjacent to permitted agricultural activities
that exist either on an abutting property or within all
or part of the required open space area, a mediumimpact
screening buffer in accordance with
§ 7-2-4B(2) shall be provided.
(ii) The Planning Board or Planning Director, as
applicable, may require a higher impact screening.
The final approval authority for the site plan shall
consider the following characteristics in making the
increased buffer determination:
a) The location, type and scale of agricultural
activities;
b) The location of the developed area in relation to
the agricultural activities;
c) The absence of trees and understory vegetation in
the proposed buffer area to provide an opaque
screen of agricultural activities on abutting
properties;
d) The absence of topographic features in the
proposed buffer area to provide an opaque screen
of agricultural activities on abutting properties;
and
e) The presence of other significant structures used
for large scale commercial or industrial activities.
(iii) In no case shall the required buffer be less than 40
feet in width.
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:721
3-15-5. Yard and Building Spacing: MFR-5, MFR-6 and MFR-7. In order
to encourage greater flexibility and design and more attractive
arrangements of buildings and greater utilization of open spaces, yard
regulations for attached dwellings in the MFR-5, MFR-6 and MFR-7
districts are hereby established. Buildings shall be arranged so as to
assure privacy between adjacent structures and intersecting wings of
structures, appropriate setbacks from streets, parking and recreation
areas and to assure adequate light and air to residents and protection
to and from surrounding development. Distances shall vary in relation
to the height of structures and the arrangement to other land uses and
boundary lines.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of regulating spacing in the MFR-5,
MFR-6 and MFR-7 districts, the following definitions apply.
Building height is defined in § 2-5-4.
(1) Ha shall represent the height of building A.
(2) Hb shall represent the height of building B.
(3) H (Ha or Hb) shall represent the vertical distance measured
from the finished grade to the mean roofline. For an
explanation of how to determine the mean roof line of specific
types of buildings, see below.
(a) The highest point of the coping of a flat roof; or
(b) The mean height between the eaves and ridge line of a
gable, shed, hip or gambrel roof; or
(c) The highest point of the roof and parapets of a mansard
roof.
(4) D shall represent the required minimum horizontal distance
between any wall of Building A and the nearest wall of Building
B or between a principal building and a property line as
determined by the following formulae.
§ 3-15 AMHERST CODE § 3-15
1:722
Description Distance = Illustration
Building Separation — Parallel Arrangements
Buildings are
parallel or within 30
degrees of being
parallel and the
greater sides of each
building face each
other across an open
yard or court.
[(Ha + Hb)/2]
x 1.66
Buildings are
parallel or within 30
degrees of being
parallel and the
lesser sides of each
building face each
other across an open
yard or court, or the
lesser side of one
building faces the
greater side of the
other building.
[(Ha + Hb)/2]
x 1.5
Building Separation — Angular Arrangements
Buildings are at 30
to 60 degree angles
from one another.
Minimum separation
shall be measured at
the closest point
between the
buildings.
[(Ha+Hb)/2] x
1.5
Building and Lot Line Separation
(1)
Buildings with
wall of greater
length parallel to
the lot line.
(2)
Buildings
abutting a street
right-of-way. In
no instance shall
the minimum
distance be less
than 36 feet from
the right-of-wayline.
2H
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:723
Description Distance = Illustration
Buildings with wall
of lesser length
parallel to the lot
line or the corner of
any building on an
angle of 30 to 60
degrees to the lot
line.
1.5H
Buildings which, if
wall lines are
extended, do not
intersect the wall of
the nearest
structure.
1H
B. Building Wall Lengths and Offsets and Location for Attached
Dwellings. In the MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6 and MFR-7 districts,
any exterior wall of a sequence of units shall not exceed 132 feet in
length without a 90 degree offset of at least 10 feet, and the
aggregate length of any wall, including its offsets, shall not exceed
176 feet.
3-15-6. Accessory Structure Minimum Yard and Building Spacing.
Minimum yard and building spacing for accessory structures in
multifamily districts are set forth in the following table.
To Principal
Structure To Right-of-Way To Adjacent Property
Accessory Structure
Main
Wall End Wall Public Private
SF
Detached
SF Attached,
Multi-family
or
Nonresidential
Private Garage 15 10 25 10 10 5
Storage Garage/Shed/
Other
30* 15* 25 10 10 5
Off-street parking,
loading, stacking and
driveway; dumpster
containers and other
refuse containers
[Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L.
No. 29-2011]
15** 10** 20** 5*** 10 5
Active Recreation
Area
50 30 25 30 75 15
§ 3-15 AMHERST CODE § 3-15
1:724
To Principal
Structure To Right-of-Way To Adjacent Property
Accessory Structure
Main
Wall End Wall Public Private
SF
Detached
SF Attached,
Multi-family
or
Nonresidential
Notes: Main wall: Any exterior wall of a building containing the principal window of a living,
dining and/or sleeping room or rooms. End wall: Any exterior wall of a building other than a main
wall and containing secondary windows required for ventilation and not intended to provide a
direct view.
* Garage may be part of main multifamily building or, if detached, as set forth above.
** Parking, loading and stacking area may abut principal structure if that area does not exceed
the minimum established by this ordinance and is designed only for the use of the units
within the structure.
*** Parking, loading and stacking area only.
3-15-7. Lot Area Requirements for Attached Dwelling Units. In the R-4,
MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6 and MFR-7 districts, each attached dwelling
unit within a structure which meets the requirements for the district
shall also be deemed to meet the requirements if it is located upon a lot
meeting the applicable density or dwelling unit minimum land area
requirement. The dwelling unit may include an interest in common
lands.
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:725

PART 4.
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 4-1. General
§ 4-2. Office Building District (OB)
4-1-1.Key to Use Tables.
A.
Permitted. A in the Permitted column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district,
subject to the use regulations in Part 6. Such uses are subject to all
other applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
B.
Special Use. A in the Special Use column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a
special use permit in accordance with § 8-6. Special uses are
subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance
including the additional standards contained in Part 6, except
where expressly modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals as part of
the special exception approval process.
C. Uses Not Allowed. Any unlisted use indicates that the use is not
allowed in the particular district.
D. Uses Not Listed. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine
whether or not an unlisted use is similar to an existing use or is
substantially similar to an already defined specific use, using the
criteria in § 8-12-4, Determination of Similar Uses. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
E. Standards. The "Standards" column on the use table is a crossreference
to any limited or special use regulation listed in Part 6.
F. Developments with Multiple Principal Uses. A development
comprised of uses regulated by separate rows on the Use Table
shall be reviewed using the most restrictive regulations from
among the proposed uses.
4-2-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town devoted exclusively to
offices by regulating the land area, bulk and spacing of uses,
particularly at common boundaries and promoting the most desirable
land use and traffic patterns in accordance with the objectives of the
comprehensive plan.
4-2-2.Permitted and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:727
OB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Day-care center § 6-3-2
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Bank § 4-8-4
Contracting or construction
services
§ 6-4-4
Office
Radio or television station
[Added 4-12-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
Recording studio [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
§ 4-2 AMHERST CODE § 4-2
1:728
OB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Ground-mounted solar energy
systems, Tier III [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Training schools, such as
technical, trade, vocational or
business
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
OB Principal & Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area None
Min. lot width None
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 15 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above
35 ft.
30 ft 15 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to
30 ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/15
ft
25 ft*/10 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/25
ft
25 ft*/10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:729
Height of structure up to
30 ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/15
ft
25 ft*/10 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/25
ft
25 ft*/10 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD56
4-2-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
OB Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Commercial recreation § 6-8-3
Employee lunchroom
Landscaping § 7-2
Maintenance facility and air-conditioning,
heating and ventilating equipment
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Restaurant without drive-through or outdoor
dining
Retail stores and services (may be
manufactured or assembled on-premise)
§ 6-8-11
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Storage garage
56.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-2 AMHERST CODE § 4-2
1:730
OB Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Uses engaged primarily in research and
development activities, including:
§ 6-5-1
Research, experimental and developmental
laboratories and facilities;
Communication, navigation control,
transmission and reception equipment;
Controls equipment and guidance systems;
Data processing equipment and systems;
Audio components, radio and television
equipment;
Scientific and medical instruments;
Microfilming and record preparation;
Assembly, testing and calibration of
components, devices, systems and
equipment, such as but not limited to
electronic, scientific, medical, optical,
biochemical, chemical, metallurgical and
pharmaceutical.
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-2-2B.
4-2-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the OB district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
OB General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:731
§ 4-3. Neighborhood Business District (NB)
OB General Development Standards
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-3-1. Purpose. To provide neighborhood centers within existing and
proposed commercial nodes and mixed use activity centers for the
location of commercial uses serving the convenient shopping,
professional office and personal service needs of a neighborhood area
and to ensure the compatibility of such areas with surrounding
residential development. These areas are primarily pedestrian-oriented
with accommodations for automobiles.
4-3-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. NB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
See § 4-3-3
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Daycare center, nursery or other
private school
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
§ 4-2 AMHERST CODE § 4-3
1:732
NB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Antiques and second-hand
merchandise store
Apparel and accessories store
Apparel repair and alterations and
shoe repair shop
Bank § 4-8-4
Bakery or confectionary shop
(retail)
Beauty or barber shop
Book and stationery store § 6-4-7
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Cat boarding facility [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 6-4-1
Contracting or construction
services
§ 6-4-4
Dog day care facility [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No.
25-2011]
§ 6-4-13
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
Drug store § 4-8-4
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:733
NB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Food store
Gymnasium or health club, up to
25,000 square feet [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Hardware store
Home furnishing store
Home garden store
Jewelry store
Job printing or photography store
Ice store
Laundromat, cleaning and dyeing
outlets and pickup
§ 6-4-6
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Liquor store
Office
Personal training facility [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Photography studio [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Printing and photocopying store
§ 4-3 AMHERST CODE § 4-3
1:734
NB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Restaurant without drive-through
or outdoor dining
Sporting goods or bicycle store
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards. [Amended 1-16-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No.
39-2014]
NB Principal & Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Max. lot area 1 ac.
Min. lot width 50 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first 2
stories
20 ft 20 ft
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 2
stories
30 ft 20 ft
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
30 ft./15 ft 25 ft*/15 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
15 ft/None
or 10 ft min
if not on lot
line
25 ft*/15 ft*
Max. height 30 ft
Max. building coverage 55%
Min. interior building separation None
required
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD57
4-3-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
57.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:735
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
NB Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Signs § 7-8
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-3-2B.
4-3-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. All principal and accessory uses, except signs, outdoor storage and
display and off-street parking, loading and stacking, shall be
conducted within completely enclosed structures except as
expressly set forth in § 7-4.
C. Development in the NB district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
NB General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
§ 4-3 AMHERST CODE § 4-3
1:736
§ 4-4. General Business District (GB)
NB General Development Standards
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-4-1. Purpose. To provide community centers within existing and proposed
commercial nodes and mixed use activity centers for the location of
commercial uses which serve a larger market area than a neighborhood
center, as articulated in the comprehensive plan, and provide for
community-wide needs for general goods and services and comparison
shopping. Such uses require larger land areas, generate large volumes
of traffic and may generate large amounts of evening activity.
4-4-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Ambulance service
Daycare center, nursery or other
private school
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:737
GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Animal grooming, cat boarding
facility, hospital or veterinarian.
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
§ 6-4-1
Antiques and second-hand
merchandise store
Apparel and accessories store
Apparel repair and alterations and
shoe repair shop
Archival center
Bakery or confectionary shop
(retail)
Bank § 4-8-4
Beauty or barber shop
Book and stationery store § 6-4-7
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Commercial recreation activities,
indoor
Commercial recreation activities,
outdoor
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-4
1:738
GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Contracting or construction
services
§ 6-4-4
Department store
Dog day care facility [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No.
25-2011]
§ 6-4-13
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
Drug store § 4-8-4
Employment agency
Farm and garden supply store
Farm equipment sales or service
Food store
Funeral home
Gymnasium or health club [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Hardware store
Home furnishing store
Home garden store
House and camping trailer sales,
camping equipment and
accessories and related repair and
service
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:739
GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Household fixture and appliance
sales or service
Jewelry store
Job printing or photography store
Ice store
Laundromat, cleaning and dyeing
outlets and pickup
Liquor store
Motel or hotel
Motion picture theater or live
theater [Added 9-21-2009 by
L.L. No. 14-2009]
Nurseries for sale of plants,
shrubs, and trees
Office
Passenger terminal
Personal training facility [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Photographic store
Photography studio [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Printing and photocopying store
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-4
1:740
GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Plumbing store
Postal store or post office
Radio or television station [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Recording studio [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Restaurant with drive-through § 4-8-4
Restaurant with outdoor dining § 6-4-9
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Restaurant without drive-through
or outdoor dining
Retail services
Sexually oriented cabaret or
theater, or sexually oriented
motion picture theater [Added
7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
§ 6-6
Sexually oriented media store, sex
shop [Added 7-7-2008 by L.L.
No. 9-2008]
§ 6-6
Shops for custom work for the
making of articles to be sold only
at retail on the premises
Sporting goods and bicycle store
Tattoo parlor / body art studio
[Added 1-16-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:741
GB Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Variety store
Vehicle parts sales § 6-4-11
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Vehicle sales (new), rental, leasing
and related repair; used vehicle
sales and vehicle rental in
conjunction with new vehicle sales
only
§ 6-4-12
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Wholesale store
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 9-21-2009 by L.L.
No. 14-2009; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
GB Principal & Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area None
Min. lot width None
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 10 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 10 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential *** /nonresidential)
Height of structure up to 30
ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 15
ft
15 ft* / 5 ft*
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-4
1:742
GB Principal & Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 25
ft
15 ft* / 5 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential***/nonresidential)**
Height of structure up to 30
ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/
None or 10 ft if
not on lot line
15 ft* / 5 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See § 2-5-4B(3)
/ 25 ft
15 ft* / 5 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
None required
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD58
4-4-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
GB Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Signs § 7-8
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
58.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:743
§ 4-5. Commercial Service District (CS)
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-4-2B.
4-4-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the GB district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
GB General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-5-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the location of large
scale commercial uses meeting community-wide needs for specialized
goods and services.
4-5-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. CS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-5
1:744
CS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Building materials sales and
service
Business services, including sign
company, window cleaning and
other dwelling and building
services
Bus garages [Added 2-24-2014
by L.L. No. 4-2014]
Contracting or construction
services
Electrical and household
appliance repair service
Laundering, dry-cleaning &
dyeing services
Vehicle sales, rental, leasing and
related repair, including trailers
§ 6-4-12
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
INDUSTRIAL
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:745
CS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Ground-mounted solar energy
system, Tier III [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Ground-mounted solar energy
system, Tier II [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Job and newspaper printing
Warehousing and storage service
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
CS Principal & Accessory Use/
Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area 1 ac.
Min. lot width 100 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first 35
ft.
20 ft 10 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 10 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
50 ft / 10 ft 15 ft* / 10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
50 ft / 10 ft 15 ft* / 10 ft*
Max. height 40 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building separation None required
§ 4-5 AMHERST CODE § 4-5
1:746
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD59
4-5-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
CS Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Signs § 7-8
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-5-2B.
4-5-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the CS district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
CS General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
59.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:747
§ 4-6. Motor Service District (MS)
CS General Development Standards
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-6-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the location of
transportation-oriented commercial uses designed to serve the needs of
motorists and related vehicular needs.
4-6-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. MS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Ambulance service
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
§ 4-5 AMHERST CODE § 4-6
1:748
MS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Bus garages [Added 2-24-2014
by L.L. No. 4-2014]
Bus
Car wash § 6-4-3
Dog day care facility [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No.
25-2011]
§ 6-4-13
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
Motor vehicle repair [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Motor vehicle washing
establishment
Passenger terminal
Restaurant with drive-through
[Amended 9-21-2009 by L.L.
No. 14-2009]
§ 4-8-4
Restaurant without drive-through
or outdoor dining [Amended
9-21-2009 by L.L. No. 14-2009]
Service station § 6-4-10
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Tire, battery and accessory store
Vehicle sales, rental, leasing and
related repair, including trailers
§ 6-4-12
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:749
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 12-19-2011 by L.L.
No. 34-2011; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
MS Principal & Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area None (see
6-4-12)
Min. lot width 100 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for
first 35 ft.
20 ft 10 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above
35 ft.
30 ft 10 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See § 2-5-4B(3)
/ 25 ft
15 ft* / 10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See § 2-5-4B(3)
/ 10 ft
15 ft* / 10 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD60
4-6-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
MS Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
60.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-6 AMHERST CODE § 4-6
1:750
§ 4-7. Shopping Center District (SC)
MS Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-6-2B.
4-6-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the MS district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
MS General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-7-1. Purpose. To provide regional centers within the Town that provide
goods and services in full range and variety, drawing from a large
population base. Development occurs on parcels of at least five acres
with compatible business enterprises designed and planned as a unified
entity with common access points and off-street parking, loading and
stacking areas to jointly serve all buildings. Attached dwelling units will
be permitted when a part of and integrated with a qualifying business
enterprise development.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7
1:751
4-7-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. SC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Attached dwelling unit § 3-12-2B(3)
Upper-story dwelling unit § 6-2-6
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Daycare center, nursery or other
private school
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Animal grooming, cat boarding
facility, animal hospital or
veterinarian [Amended
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 6-4-1
Antiques and second-hand
merchandise store
§ 4-7 AMHERST CODE § 4-7
1:752
SC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Apparel and accessories store
Apparel repair and alterations and
shoe repair shop
Archival center
Bakery or confectionary shop
(retail)
Bank § 4-8-4
Beauty or barber shop (retail)
Book and stationery store § 6-4-7
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Commercial recreation activities,
indoor
Commercial recreation activities,
outdoor
Contracting or construction
services
§ 6-4-4
Department store
Drug store § 4-8-4
Employment agency
Farm and garden supply store
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7
1:753
SC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Farm equipment sales or service
Food store
Funeral home
Gymnasium or health club
[Added 2-4-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
Hardware store
Home furnishing store
Home garden store
House and camping trailer sales,
camping equipment and
accessories and related repair
and service
Household fixture and appliance
sales or service
Indoor commercial recreation
facility
Jewelry store
Job printing or photography store
Ice store
Laundromat, cleaning and dyeing
outlets and pickup
Liquor store
§ 4-7 AMHERST CODE § 4-7
1:754
SC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Medical laboratory testing service
Motel or hotel
Motion picture theater or live
theater [Added 9-21-2009 by
L.L. No. 14-2009]
Nurseries for sale of plants,
shrubs, and trees
Office
Passenger terminal
Personal training facility [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Photography studio [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Printing and photocopying store
Plumbing store
Postal store or post office
Radio or television studio [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Recording studio [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Restaurant with drive-through § 4-8-4
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7
1:755
SC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Restaurant with outdoor dining § 6-4-9
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Restaurant without drive-through
or outdoor dining
Service station § 6-4-10
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Shops for custom work for the
making of articles to be sold only
at retail on the premises
Sporting goods or bicycle store
Variety store
Vehicle sales, rental, leasing and
related repair, including trailers
§ 6-4-12
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Wholesale store
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
§ 4-7 AMHERST CODE § 4-7
1:756
SC Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area 5 ac
Min. lot width None
Min. front yard
- height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 25 ft
- height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 25 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 50
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 50
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD61
4-7-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
SC Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
61.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table, as amended 1-16-2007
by L.L. No. 2-2007, was repealed 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7
1:757
§ 4-8. Supplemental Business District Design Standards
SC Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Storage facility clearly incidental to the
principal use
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-7-2B.
4-7-4. General Development Standards.
A. All principal and accessory uses, except signs, outdoor storage and
display, and off-street parking, loading and stacking, shall be
conducted within completely enclosed structures.
B. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
C. Distance between buildings and vehicle use areas from right-of-way
of dedicated interior streets shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
D. Development in the SC district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
SC General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bullk62 Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
62.So in original.
§ 4-7 AMHERST CODE § 4-8
1:758
4-8-1.Minimum Building Separation. Except where a greater
requirement has been established under the regulations for the district,
buildings within business districts shall be separated by a minimum of
10 feet.
4-8-2. Side Yards for Corner Lots. Notwithstanding the dimensional
standards of this Part, the following minimum setbacks shall be
observed for all required side yards on corner lots in nonresidential
districts.
Street Function
To Structure
(feet)
To Parking, Loading &
Stacking
(feet)
Arterial, Major or
Minor
40 10
Collector or Local
Collector
35 10
Local 25 10
4-8-3.Minimum Distances to Structures for Specific Streets. The
minimum distances to structures for specific streets set out in § 2-5-3
shall supersede any setbacks set forth in this Part.
4-8-4. Drive-Through Facility. A drive-through facility is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables, subject to the following
standards.
A. All outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from
the nearest residential district boundary and shall not be directed
toward such neighboring property.
B. If the drive-through facility is located within 250 feet from the
nearest residential district boundary, the use of all outdoor
speakers shall be limited to between the hours of 6 a.m. and 10
p.m.
4-8-5. Unified Developments. Unified Developments are allowed in all
nonresidential districts. Reciprocal agreements providing for the
establishment, operation, use and maintenance of common facilities
and features are required and shall not thereafter be modified or
rescinded without consent by the Town.
4-8-6. Building Design.
A. Applicability. The standards in this Section shall apply to
buildings in all nonresidential districts.
B. Facades.
(1) All nonresidential street facades shall be constructed of the
following materials:
§ 4-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8
1:759
(a) Brick;
(b) Stucco (cementitious finish only, no more than 30 percent
of any facade);
(c) Architectural concrete masonry;
(d) Hardi-plank or similar cementitious siding;
(e) Masonry;
(f) Wood;
(g) Field stone, ledge stone or other native veneer;
(h) Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornaments);
or
(i) Glass (no more than 80 percent of any facade).
(2) The following materials shall be prohibited on all primary
facades and mansard roofs: [Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
1. Asbestos or corrugated metal products
2. Highly reflective metal siding or panels
3. Plain Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU)
4. Bare or painted plywood
5. T-111 or unfinished lumber grade wood
(3) Any side or rear wall facing a street, residential district or
public or semipublic area shall consist of the same facing
materials as the building front. [Added 2-8-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
C. Blank Wall Area. Blank wall areas on street facades or facing the
following districts: R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4,
MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7 PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD shall extend
a maximum of 30 feet in the vertical direction or 20 feet in the
horizontal direction. Relief or reveal work depth shall not be less
than three inches in depth. Control and expansion joints that meet
this standard shall not constitute blank wall area. Channel letter or
similar three-dimensional signs shall not constitute blank wall area.
[Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
D. Storefront Display Windows. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008; 4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(1) Storefront display windows shall cover a minimum of 25
percent of facades facing a public right-of-way. This
§ 4-8 AMHERST CODE § 4-8
1:760
requirement shall not apply to more than three facades of a
building. [Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
(2) Interior displays and shelving within ten feet of the facade
shall not exceed 15 percent of the total window area of primary
and secondary ground floor facades.
E. Building Entrances.
(1) Nonresidential buildings shall provide a minimum of one
building entrance oriented towards a street, pedestrian
walkway or parking area.
(2) Nonresidential building entrances on corner lots shall be
either oriented in the same direction as entrances of adjacent
buildings or oriented toward the corner of the lot.
F. Covered Pedestrian Walkway on Retail Facades. A covered
pedestrian walkway a minimum of six feet in width shall be
required along any facade featuring a customer entrance or along
any building facade abutting a parking area in accordance with the
following.
(1) Single Use Retail Building. A single use retail building shall
provide a covered pedestrian walkway centered on all
customer entrances for a distance of not less than 25 percent
of the length of the shortest façade featuring a customer
entrance. Where a customer entrance is located at the corner
of a building, a covered pedestrian walkway shall extend along
both facades for a distance of not less than 25 percent of the
length of the shorter façade. [Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L. No.
19-2011]
(2) Multiple Development. A building within a multiple
development shall provide a covered pedestrian walkway
consisting of either:
(a) An arcade covering 100 percent of the length of the
facade; or
(b) An awning covering a minimum of 85 percent of the length
of the facade.
(3) Arcade Requirements.
§ 4-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8
1:761
§ 4-9. Research and Development District (RD)
(a) Arcades shall be integrated structurally and
architecturally into the design of the facade and shall be
constructed of consistent materials.
(b) The exterior face of the arcade columns may abut the
maximum front yard setback line for the TND District
provided that the following requirements are met.
(i) The arcade shall be a maximum of six feet in depth,
measured from the back face of the columns to the
facade.
(ii) The arcade shall not visually separate retail frontage
from pedestrian traffic and exposure.
(4) Awning Requirements. [Amended 9-21-2009 by L.L. No.
14-2009]
(a) Awnings shall be associated with windows and doors and
shall be constructed of solid materials.
(b) Awnings shall be integrated structurally and
architecturally into the design of the facade and shall
complement the overall color scheme of the building
facade from which it projects.
(c) Awnings may extend a maximum of two feet into the
required setback area.
(d) The following awnings are prohibited:
(i) Mansard awnings (awnings that cover more than 85
percent of a facade or those that connect two
facades); and
(ii) Back-lit awnings.
(e) Fabric awnings shall be kept in good repair, so that the
original color and integrity of the fabric is maintained.
4-9-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the location of
research and development, related production activities, light
manufacturing, offices, and related training schools on sufficient land to
permit efficient development. Such districts shall be designed and
located in such a way that they shall neither encroach upon
surrounding uses nor shall surrounding uses interfere with the efficient
development of these activities. The RD district is designed to
encourage the development of a balanced employment mix within the
Town and improve the Town's tax base while providing sufficient
educational opportunities to contribute to the training of the workforce
§ 4-8 AMHERST CODE § 4-9
1:762
and thereby meet the employment needs of businesses locating in the
Town.
4-9-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. RD Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Day-care center § 6-3-2
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Ambulance Service [Added
2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
Bank
Dog day care facility [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No.
25-2011]
§ 6-4-13
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
§ 4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:763
RD Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Medical laboratory testing service
Office
Training school such as technical,
trade, vocational or business
INDUSTRIAL
Compounding, manufacturing and
assembly of:
Automobile and boating
accessories from previously
prepared materials
Clothing or other textile
products
Electrical and electronic
equipment and appliances
Food and beverage products
Household items, furniture
Musical, scientific, medical,
dental or photographic
instruments, equipment or
supplies
Office equipment
Panels, sheets, tubes or rods
Pharmaceutical products,
cosmetics or toiletries
Printing, publishing and
engraving
Recreation equipment or toys
Experimental, research and testing
facility
Ground-mounted solar energy
systems, Tier III [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
§ 4-9 AMHERST CODE § 4-9
1:764
RD Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Ground-mounted solar energy
systems, Tier II [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Research development facility
Tier I experimental pilot plant
operation [Amended 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
Warehousing and storage service
Wholesale distribution facility
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
RD Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. district area 10 ac
Min. lot area 1 ac
Min. lot width 35 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for
first 35 ft.
20 ft 25 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above
35 ft.
30 ft 25 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to
30 ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/15
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
§ 4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:765
RD Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/25
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to
30 ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 15
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/ 25
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD63
4-9-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
RD Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Day-care center
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Production operation accessory to a research
or testing operation
Retail sale of products assembled or stored
on-site
§ 6-8-11
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
63.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-9 AMHERST CODE § 4-9
1:766
§ 4-10. Science Technology District (ST)
RD Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-9-2B.
4-9-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the RD district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
RD General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-10-1. Purpose. To provide areas in the Town for planned centers for
scientific research, telecommunications, business and finance,
electronic data operations and development and testing and ancillary
production of resulting products and services.
4-10-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures.
§ 4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:767
ST Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Day-care center § 6-3-2
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Medical laboratory testing service
Offices for scientific research,
telecommunications,
telemarketing, administrative
support services for business and
finance, electronic data operations
and development and testing
enterprises
Training school such as technical,
trade, vocational or business
INDUSTRIAL
Research, experimental or
developmental laboratory
§ 4-10 AMHERST CODE § 4-10
1:768
ST Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Ground-mounted solar energy
systems, Tier III [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Ground-mounted solar energy
systems, Tier II [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Uses engaged in research and
development activities including:
Assembling testing and
calibration of electronic,
scientific, medical, optical,
biochemical, chemical,
metallurgical and
pharmaceutical components,
devices, systems and equipment
Audio components, radio and
television equipment
Communication, navigation
control, transmission and
reception equipment
Controls equipment and
guidance systems
Data processing equipment and
systems
Microfilming and record
preparation
Research, experimental and
developmental labs
Scientific and medical
instruments
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
§ 4-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:769
ST Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. district area 10 ac
Min. lot area 2 ac
Min. lot width 200 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 35 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 35 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to 30
ft
50 ft / 30 ft 45 ft* / 25 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
75 ft / 40 ft 45 ft* / 25 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to 30
ft
50 ft / 30 ft 45 ft* / 25 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
75 ft / 40 ft 45 ft* / 25 ft*
Max. height 45 ft
Max. building coverage 35%
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD64
4-10-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
64.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-10 AMHERST CODE § 4-10
1:770
ST Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Conference center serving a ST district § 6-8-5
Day-care center
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-10-2B.
4-10-4. General Development Standards.
A. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in any front yard.
B. All utility lines and communications service lines shall be placed
underground.
C. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
D. Development in the ST district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
ST General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
§ 4-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11
1:771
§ 4-11. General Industrial District (GI)
4-11-1. Purpose. To provide areas within the Town for the location of
heavier manufacturing and processing facilities, as well as office,
research and service establishments, where compatible industries will
be located in an organized manner so as to ensure the efficient
development of the industrial use and compatibility with adjacent
districts. Such district is designed to encourage the development of a
balanced employment mix within the Town and to improve the Town's
tax base.
4-11-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. GI Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Day-care center § 6-3-2
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-4
Public works construction yard
[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No.
19-2009]
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Bank
Building materials sales and
service
§ 4-11 AMHERST CODE § 4-11
1:772
GI Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Business, driving, martial arts and
other trade schools
Business services including sign
company, window cleaning and
other dwelling and building
services
Contracting or construction
Electrical and household appliance
repair service
Job and newspaper printing
Laundering, dry cleaning, and
dyeing services
Medical laboratory testing service
Motor vehicles repair [Added
3-7-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
Office
Outdoor storage
Trailer and motor vehicle sales and
rental
Training school such as technical,
trade, vocational and business
INDUSTRIAL
Automobile junkyard
Blending, mixing and packaging
of:
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11
1:773
GI Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Detergents, disinfectants,
fungicides, ink, insecticides,
soap and related household and
industrial chemical compounds
Compounding, manufacturing and
assembly of:
Automobile and boating
accessories from previously
prepared materials
Clothing or other textile
products
Electrical and electronic
equipment and appliances
Food and beverage products
Household items
Furniture
Merchandise from previously
prepared materials
Musical, scientific, medical,
dental or photographic
instruments, equipment or
supplies
Office equipment
Panels, sheets, tubes or rods
Pharmaceutical products,
cosmetics or toiletries
Printing, publishing and
engraving
Recreation equipment or toys
Experimental, research and testing
facility
Ground-mounted solar energy
system, Tier II [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No.
24-2017]
§ 6-10
Job and newspaper printing
§ 4-11 AMHERST CODE § 4-11
1:774
GI Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Laboratory
Metalwork, manufacture of
concrete, wood and other solid
products
Research development facility
Tier I experimental pilot plant
operation [Amended 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
Warehousing and storage service
Wholesale distribution facility
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
GI Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot area 1 ac
Min. lot width 100 ft
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 25 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 25 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to 30
ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/15
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11
1:775
GI Principal & Accessory
Use/Structure Dimensional
Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/25
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
Height of structure up to 30
ft
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/15
ft
25 ft* / 10 ft*
Height of structure 30 ft or
more
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/25
ft
25 ft* /10 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage None
Min. interior building
separation
30 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped.
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD65
4-11-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
GI Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Day-care center
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Retail sales and service (may be
manufactured or assembled on-premise)
§ 6-8-11
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
65.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 4-11 AMHERST CODE § 4-11
1:776
§ 4-12. Supplemental Industrial District Design Standards
GI Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to any permitted principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 4-11-2B.
4-11-4. General Development Standards.
A. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
B. Development in the GI district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
GI General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Access and Circulation § 7-5
Fences and Walls § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
4-12-1.Minimum Building Separation. Except where a greater
requirement has been established under the regulations for the district,
buildings within industrial districts shall be separated by a minimum of
10 feet.
4-12-2. Side Yards for Corner Lots. Notwithstanding the dimensional
standards of this Section, the following minimum setbacks shall be
observed for all required side yards on corner lots in industrial districts.
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:777
Street Function
To Building
(feet)
To Parking,
Loading &
Stacking
(feet)
Arterial, Major or Minor 40 10
Collector or Local 35 10
Collector
Local 25 10
4-12-3.Minimum Distances to Structures for Specific Streets. The
minimum distances to structures for specific streets set out in § 2-5-3
shall supersede any setbacks set forth in this Section.
4-12-4. Unified Developments. Unified Developments are allowed in all
nonresidential districts. Reciprocal agreements providing for the
establishment, operation, use and maintenance of common facilities
and features are required and shall not thereafter be modified or
rescinded without consent by the Town.
4-12-5. Building Materials. Exterior wall surfaces of buildings shall be of
masonry, wood, glass or metal or a combination facing of these
materials. Exterior wall facings and mansard roofs shall not include
asbestos or corrugated metal products. Any side or rear wall facing a
street, residential district or public or semipublic area shall consist of
the same facing materials as the building front.
4-12-6. Building Design. See § 4-8-6.
§ 4-12 AMHERST CODE § 4-12
1:778
PART 5.
SPECIAL PURPOSE AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 5-1. Agricultural (AG)
5-1-1. Purpose. To provide for continued use of land for agricultural
purposes, including farms, floriculture, orchards and nurseries
promoting an environment conducive to the long-term stability of
agriculture. This district provides for compatible land uses supported
by the permitted agricultural uses.
5-1-2. Principal Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted and Special Uses. There shall be not more than one
principal residential structure permitted on a lot in the AG district. AG Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
Animal husbandry
Farm
Plant nursery
Stables, public or private § 6-1-1
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utility
Park or open space
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1
1:779
AG Permitted
Special
Use Standards
COMMERCIAL USES
Agricultural products, sale of
Animal grooming, animal hospital
or veterinarian
§ 6-4-1
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
Dog day care facility [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No.
25-2011]
§ 6-4-13
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
Kennel, commercial § 6-8-7
Riding academy
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
AG Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Min. lot area 5 acres
Min. lot area per dwelling 5 acres
Min. lot width 200 ft
Min. front yard 50 ft
Min. rear yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Min. side yard See § 2-5-4B(3)
Max. height
Residential 2 stories (up to 35 ft)
Nonresidential 65 ft
Max. building coverage (residential use
only)
15%
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.66
§ 5-1 AMHERST CODE § 5-1
1:780
5-1-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
AG Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Uses and structures customarily incidental to
the above
Auxiliary housing unit § 6-8-2
Cat boarding facility [Added 2-4-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 6-8-7
Detached private garages and parking area
Greenhouse
Home occupation Type 1 or Type II § 6-8-6
Kennel, accessory § 6-8-7
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1
Private garden
Private recreational uses and structure
Produce stand only selling items grown onsite
Solar energy system [Added 12-11-2017 by
L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than two
persons
Sign § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Swimming pool and tennis court § 6-8-12
B. Dimensional Standards.
AG Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 30 ft
Max. building coverage (residential use only) 15%
66.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1
1:781
§ 5-2. New Community District (NCD)
AG Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
5-1-4. General Development Standards. Development in the AG District
shall also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
AG General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
5-2-1. Purpose. To provide flexible land use and design regulations through
the use of performance criteria so that small-to-large scale multi-use
neighborhoods may be developed on relatively large tracts within the
Town, in a manner which incorporates a variety of residential types and
nonresidential uses and services. A New Community District (NCD)
may contain both individual building sites and common property which
are planned and developed as a unit. Among the purposes of this
district are: the encouragement of innovation in residential
development so that the growing demand for housing at all economic
levels may be met by greater variety in type, design and siting of
dwellings, the conservation and more efficient use of land in such
developments and the encouragement and maintenance of high
environmental quality throughout the development. This district
encourages a similarly imaginative approach to the development of
nonresidential uses in a NCD. To encourage the most skillful planning of
parts of the community in accordance with the objectives of the Town
Master Plan or its successors, to provide for the utilization of planning
criteria in the arrangements of buildings related to common open
space, to utilize topography and other site features to their best
advantage and to obtain creative and coordinated designs, it is
necessary to expand the scope of land planning and development
beyond a concept of homogeneous uses and structures on individual
lots within formally defined districts to the planning and development of
§ 5-1 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:782
larger areas with groups of structures to create a diversified and
coordinated entity. Therefore, in lieu of zoning controls applicable in
the standard zoning districts, § 8-15 establishes procedures and this
Section establishes substantive requirements under which a developer
may prepare development plans particularly designed to meet these
objectives.
5-2-2. Objectives. In order to carry out the intent of this section, a new
community development shall achieve the following objectives:
A. A varied choice in the types of environment, occupancy tenure (e.
g., cooperative, individual ownership, condominium, leasing), types
and costs of housing, lot sizes and community facilities available to
existing and potential town residents.
B. Extensive usable open space and recreation areas, appropriate in
terms of location, size and suitability of intended function.
C. The provision of commercial, office or industrial uses of substantial
real property tax productivity intended to support the financing of
additional educational, municipal and other public services
required as a result of the development.
D. Convenience in location of commercial and service areas.
E. The preservation of such features as trees, outstanding natural
topography and geological features; the prevention of soil erosion;
and the comprehensive design of stormwater retention and proper
drainage systems.
F. A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows an orderly transition of land from rural to urban uses.
G. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and lessened burden of traffic on streets and highways,
thereby lowering utility and maintenance costs borne by new
development.
H. Creation and preservation of natural and man-made features which
will give increased environmental quality, encourage uses which
will maintain high environmental quality and provide an attractive
community design.
I. Guidance and control of development in flood hazard areas so that
life and property both within and without such areas are protected.
J. Increased safety for all modes of travel, including pedestrian and
bicycle.
K. An appropriate balancing or accommodation of the effect of major
public or private development elsewhere in the town or its vicinity.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:783
L. Sufficient civic and community facilities, carefully integrated with
adjoining areas.
M. Provision for the orderly updating of long-term, large-scale
development plans to reflect changing circumstances within an
overall, town-approved planning framework.
N. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other sections of this Zoning Ordinance.
5-2-3. Substantive Criteria, Standards and Regulations. Criteria,
standards and regulations are hereby established with respect to
planning of land and the arrangements of buildings and open spaces for
new community development undertaken in a NCD, as set forth in this
Section. Any inconsistent or contrary criteria, standards or regulations
approved by the Town Board prior to the adoption of this Section in
connection with a new community development undertaken by a public
agency which has held a public hearing on such development shall take
precedence over the requirements of this Section.
5-2-4. Location of NCD. The NCD shall be applicable to any area of the
town where the petitioner can demonstrate, or the Town Board on its
own initiative or upon recommendation of the Planning Board
determines, that the characteristics of the proposed site will meet the
objectives of this Section.
5-2-5. Use Regulations.
A. Use Classifications. The emphasis of this Section is to permit
rational and careful development of new patterns of blending uses,
building types and construction methods. Strict adherence to
formally defined and compartmented use districts or sectors is
contrary to the purposes of this Section. However, any use
permitted in the NCD shall be suitable for the character and
related to the needs of the proposed development and shall not
adversely affect the surrounding development. To this end, uses
permitted in a NCD are grouped into use classifications. Uses shall
be located in such a manner as to best serve residents, employees
and visitors to the new community. A use area, as outlined on a
development plan by references to the appropriate classification,
shall be primarily devoted to uses specified for that area, but
classifications described in paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) below may
include uses specified in any classification having a lower number.
The use of classifications are as follows:
(1) Major Open Space. This classification includes: large areas of
land in a natural state; areas for active and passive recreation;
parks and large landscaped or wooded areas; stormwater
storage and runoff areas; preservation of outstanding geologic
and topographic features; public or private recreation,
education, community and cultural facilities; conservation
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:784
facilities and areas; and pedestrian and bicycle circulation
systems. Special limited commercial services and facilities
compatible with the above uses may be included.
(2) Neighborhood. This classification includes primarily
residential areas designed to provide living space for families
and individuals. Ancillary uses designed to conveniently serve
residents may be located within them. The classification
includes:
(a) Residences and dwelling units of every type, except as
otherwise specified in this subsection. In developing a
balanced community the use of a variety of housing types,
styles and construction methods shall be deemed most in
keeping with this Section.
(b) Small convenience retail and service facilities, except for
automobile drive-in restaurants, and ancillary office
facilities designed to serve the needs of residents of the
neighborhood.67
(c) Public and quasi-public facilities, including schools and
day-care centers, religious buildings and other community
facilities.
(d) Recreation facilities, open space areas, and personal
training facilities. [Added 2-4-2008 by L.L. 1-2008]
(e) Special limited commercial services and facilities not
already included in the above uses and storage yards and
open equipment structures compatible with the above uses
or suitably screened, fenced and buffered from adjacent
uses in accordance with the performance standards in
§ 5-2-7I may be included. Storage yards for house trailers,
boats and similar equipment and for open space
maintenance equipment are included in this classification.
(3) Local Center. This classification includes uses primarily
designed to serve residents within the relatively close environs
of the center. Uses may include retail sales and service
facilities, including uses enumerated in paragraphs (1) and (2)
above and automobile-oriented retail sales and service
facilities, including gasoline service stations, spaced and
otherwise regulated according to this ordinance, business,
professional and community service office facilities, hotels and
motels, restaurants, taverns, hospitals, medical buildings,
clinics, convalescent, old-age or nursing homes or residences,
67.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(b), regarding fraternity and sorority houses,
dormitories, hostels and boardinghouses, was repealed 9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016. This
local law also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(c) through (f) as Subsection A(2)(b)
through (e), respectively.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:785
funeral homes, nonprofit institutions for charitable purposes,
gymnasiums or health club, veterinary clinics or cat boarding
facilities with kennel in enclosed building, film and performing
arts theaters, public and quasi-public facilities enumerated in
paragraphs (1) and (2) above and public or private parking
facilities. Dormitories are permitted subject to the issuance
of a special use permit by the Town Board based on criteria
found in Section 5-2-7K. Automobile drive-in restaurants shall
be located in organized retail areas or motorist service areas,
not as independent establishments. [Amended 2-4-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008; 9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
(4) General Commercial. This classification includes regional
facilities serving residents from outside the new community as
those within it. Permitted uses include comparison retail
establishments, radio or television stations, public or private
parking structures, public or private office facilities, trade or
industrial schools, print shops, passenger terminals,
commercial recreation activities subject to constraints as
outlined in the Town Amusement Ordinance.
(5) Restricted Industrial. Uses in this classification shall be
designed to provide space for office, research and light
manufacturing activities which are compatible with nearby
open space areas and with residential and commercial
development. Permitted research and manufacturing uses
shall include those uses allowed in the RD, ST, and GI districts
as set forth in this Ordinance.
B. Use Mixture.
(1) Residential Dwelling Unit Distribution. There shall be a
variety of housing types within each NCD. Single-family
detached dwelling units, or single-family attached dwelling
units connected by nonhabitable structures, contemplated by
the development plan shall comprise a minimum of 25 percent
of the total dwelling units contemplated by the development
plan.
(2) Commercial Use. Each new community development shall
have adequate convenience commercial services and facilities
to serve the residents of the community. Commercial uses in
neighborhood and local center areas shall be provided in
appropriate relation to the location and concentration of
dwelling units to be served thereby. The floor area of such
commercial facilities will be generally guided by a standard of
not less than 25 square feet of organized shopping and
convenience retail per dwelling unit and an additional 15
square feet of convenience service retail per dwelling unit,
measured according to the area served by such facilities,
whether inside or outside the NCD.
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:786
(3) Open Space Use. In any NCD, considered in its entirety, a
minimum of 25 percent of the total land area to be developed
by the new community developer or designee, in accordance
with the development plan, shall be in open space. At least 70
percent of this total open space shall be in private ownership
open to the public or in public or common ownership. At least
40 percent of the total open space, either in a natural state or
improved as permitted by and meeting the standards of this
Section, shall be offered for dedication or other public entity
for recreation and other open space uses available for use by
the public and acceptable to the Town Board or other public
entity and to the entity which was the principal owner of the
new community site, as contemplated in § 8-15, at the time of
Town Board approval of the development plan (or to the
designee of such entity). Offers for dedication or other
disposition of major open space for public use may be made at
any time after approval of the development plan. Part of the
public or common open space shall be in neighborhood areas.
For the purpose of this calculation, areas covered by roads,
building or parking areas shall not be counted as open space,
except for buildings, parts of buildings or parking lots
providing natural preservation, recreational or cultural
services in conjunction with adjoining open space. Lakes or
other water areas may not occupy so large a proportion of the
major common open space that other open space for
recreational uses cannot be adequately provided for.
C. Prohibited Uses.
(1) Junkyard;
(2) Signs other than those permitted in § 5-2-7J;
(3) Used automobile and/or trailer vehicle sales agency;
(4) Commercial drive-in film theater;
(5) Individually sited mobile home or home trailer;
(6) Fraternities and Sororities; [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No.
10-201668]
(7) Any use described in or involving or directly or indirectly
causing any condition or activity described in § 5-2-7I related
to a light industrial use; or
(8) Any other use contemplated in this Section.
D. Unlisted Uses. Uses not specifically enumerated above nor
specifically prohibited may be permitted with the approval of the
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(6) and (7) as
Subsection C(7) and (8), respectively.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:787
Town Board after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Board as part of the site plan review, so long as the uses in question
are compatible with adjacent uses and are consistent with the
intent of the development plan.
5-2-6. Dimensional Standards.
A. New Community Area Density. The overall residential density of
a NCD shall not exceed five dwelling units per gross acre; however,
the overall density may be increased, subject to the approval of the
Town Board, to correspond with any increase indicated on the
officially adopted Town Master Plan. This density shall be
calculated based on the NCD, excluding lands and units not owned
or controlled by the petitioner, and restricted industrial and
general commercial areas, but shall include lands and units owned
or controlled by any public entity.
B. Dwelling Unit Area. All dwelling units and rooms included in a
dwelling unit shall have sufficient floor area to satisfy the
applicable minimum floor area requirements of the State Building
Construction Code or the Town Building Code, whichever may be
applicable.
C. Minimum Area. The minimum area required to qualify for a NCD
shall be 1,000 contiguous acres of land. For purposes of this
subsection, lands separated by streams or drainage courses,
highways, streets or other public or private rights-of-way shall be
deemed contiguous. Boundaries should assume reasonably regular
configurations, taking advantage of natural features, public rightsof-
way and other clearly defined features as outer perimeters, in
order to facilitate buffering between the NCD and adjacent areas
and in order to minimize the development obstacles created by
sharply irregular boundaries resulting from noncontiguous
ownership patterns.
D. Building Arrangements. The design criteria set forth in this
Section are intended to provide desirable latitude and freedom to
encourage variety in the arrangement of the bulk and shape of
buildings, open space and landscape features. Therefore, in lieu of
specific minimum lot size or frontage, minimum percentage of
building coverage, building setback and spacing, yard
requirements, building height and shape and other similar
considerations, the requirements of this subsection D shall apply.
Dwellings may be arranged in various groups, courts,
combinations, sequences or clusters with open spaces organized
and related to the dwellings to form a unified composition of
buildings and space. Landscape features, lots, yards, building
arrangement, setback, spacing, height and shape shall be designed
in a manner to assure the following:
(1) Proper light, air and views for the residents.
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:788
(2) Safety in the accommodation of pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and vehicular storage and service.
(3) Usability of and convenient access to open space by residents
of adjacent dwellings without loss of visual and auditory
privacy for residents of such dwellings.
(4) Availability of open land for landscaped features, recreation or
other private uses.
(5) Building yards designed so as to relate to the amount, layout
and outlook of the space within dwelling units as well as within
the yard.
(6) Privacy between adjacent buildings and intersecting wings of
buildings, from streets, parking and recreation areas.
(7) The creation of a variety of common open spaces and private
areas through the planning of landscape features such as
walls, fences, hedges, and other features.
5-2-7. Development Standards.
A. Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Stacking. The design criteria
set forth in this Section are intended to provide desirable latitude
and freedom to encourage variety in the location, arrangement and
type of uses, to encourage convenience in accessibility to these
uses through provision of pedestrian and bicycle pathways and
public transportation services and to achieve the efficient sharing
of parking and loading facilities by multiple uses. Therefore, in lieu
of specific minimum parking and loading requirements and other
similar considerations, the following performance standards shall
apply.
(1) Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars;
(2) Pedestrian connection between parking areas and buildings
shall be along walkways to the extent necessary to assure
pedestrian safety;
(3) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of
access and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall
site design;
(4) Any above-grade loading facility shall be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
should be separate from private vehicles and pedestrians
where feasible;
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:789
(5) The design of buildings and parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the site where appropriate to
provide separate levels of access;
(6) Parking areas in all use areas except open space shall meet the
requirements of § 7-1;
(7) Off-street parking, loading, and stacking spaces shall be
provided for all new buildings at the time of erection and for all
enlargements of existing buildings. A parking space shall
measure not less than nine by 19 feet, exclusive of designated
access drives and designated walks, and shall be maintained in
usable shape and good condition; and
(8) Off-street parking, loading, and stacking spaces shall be
provided so as to prevent overflow of parked or standing
vehicles onto public or common vehicular or pedestrian rightsof-
way.
B. Landscaping, Buffering and Screening. Landscaping plans
shall meet the following standards:
(1) Landscaping shall provide privacy and screening between
uses, with visual noise and air quality factors considered;
(2) Landscaping shall contribute to prevention of water runoff and
erosion problems. Temporary or permanent protection shall be
provided during construction to prevent such problems;
(3) Landscape treatment for public and private plazas, roads,
paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an
integral part of an entire project and shall combine with walks
and street surfaces, and such requirements shall be in lieu of
any other town requirement for trees in public street rights-ofway;
(4) The area covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings and
paved areas shall be accompanied by planted areas as well as
other features to hold or carry stormwater runoff. Outdoor
planted or grassed areas within or adjacent to parking lots
shall be not less than five percent of the total vehicular area in
parking lots designed for 25 cars or more and shall be suitably
distributed so as to relieve any unsightliness and monotony of
parked cars;
(5) Landscape materials shall be appropriate to the growing
conditions on the site and the town's environment;
(6) Natural features such as streams, rock, outcrops, escarpments,
marshlands, wetlands, topsoil, trees and shrubs, natural
contours and outstanding vegetational, topographical and
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:790
geological features shall be preserved and incorporated in the
open space areas and in the landscaping of the development;
(7) Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation shall
not be permitted unless approved by the Town Board; and
(8) Trees shall be planted adjacent to all residential units at the
frequency of no less than one tree per residential unit unless
trees previously existent on the unit site are preserved. Trees
to be planted throughout the district and along the vehicular
ways shall include both deciduous and coniferous species in
adequate density and design to provide year-round benefit of
such plantings. Trees shall be of numerous species as to
minimize the impact and spread of disease.
(9) Visual and noise screening devices shall be designed and
maintained to serve their intended purposes set forth in this
Section. Artificial planting materials shall not be allowed
unless approved by the Town Board. Landscape screening
should be given priority where effective, easily maintained and
botanically feasible.
C. Topography and Site Appearance. New community
developments shall be designed to take maximum advantage of the
topography of the land in order to utilize the natural contours, to
provide for water storage and control of water runoff, to protect
natural drainage courses, to economize in the construction of
utilities, to reduce the amount of grading and to maximize the
conservation of trees and topsoil. Significant natural features and
other characteristics of the site shall be preserved and
incorporated as distinctive features of the development.
D. Local Circulation System. Both vehicular and pedestrian access
shall be provided to each dwelling, school, recreation area and
commercial area.
(1) Vehicular.
(a) Dwellings and other buildings shall be served by streets,
drives or emergency accessways planned so as to assure
access by service and emergency vehicles. The vehicular
circulation system and parking facilities shall also be
designed to fully accommodate motor vehicles with safety
and efficiency without allowing them to dominate or
destroy the form and character of the area, with screening
and buffering as may be required to satisfy the
environmental standards of this Section. Driveways and
streets serving group and cluster developments shall be
connected to collector and arterial streets at locations
where traffic can be controlled and operated effectively
and safely with minimum interference to the capacity of
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:791
the arterial streets at locations where traffic can be
controlled and operated effectively and safely with
minimum interference to the capacity of the arterial and
collector streets, bicycle routes and pedestrian ways.
(b) There shall be provision for safe bicycling routes
throughout the district which may be coincident with
pedestrian ways but which shall be separated from the
motorized vehicle system wherever feasible.
(c) The right-of-way and pavement widths, locations and
designs for private ways, roads and alleys shall conform to
generally accepted planning and engineering practices,
taking into account the estimated needs of the full
proposed development. All roads to be dedicated shall be
designed and constructed to town specifications or other
comparably strict standards.
(d) All transportation facilities provided and designed by the
new community developer adjacent to residential areas
shall be designed to provide noise buffer systems such that
the ambient noise level from the normal motorized
vehicular use of such facilities shall be guided by
applicable governmental requirements. Vegetation used in
such buffer systems shall be suitable to survive the effect
of the adjacent vehicular activity within the right-of-way
and the climatic conditions of the area. Alternatively, noise
tolerant uses may be located adjacent to the right-of-way.
(2) Pedestrian. Pedestrian ways shall connect residential areas
with other residential areas, community facilities, schools,
recreational areas, commercial areas and public
transportation. The system of pedestrian walks, malls and
landscaped spaces shall be of such extent and the elements of
such system shall be so distributed in location and number so
as to assure safety of pedestrians from vehicular traffic and
encourage pedestrian travel within such system instead of in
vehicular rights-of-way without restraints imposed by public,
private or common ownerships in a manner inconsistent with
the purposes of this subsection. Major pedestrian walks, malls
and public transportation loading places, where feasible, shall
be separated from general vehicle circulation. Landscaped,
paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be
provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly
from building entrances to adjacent buildings, play areas,
parking areas and streets. Pedestrian walks shall emphasize
desirable views of new and existing development and land
areas. Sidewalk, pathway and bikeway width, location and
materials shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this
Section in lieu of all other local laws, ordinances, rules,
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:792
regulations and requirements of the town. Buildings shall be
arranged to minimize pedestrian exposure to vehicular traffic.
E. Open Space.
(1) As used in this Section, the term "open space" includes
uncovered and unpaved lands or water areas, in public
ownership or in common or other private ownership, except
lots under single-family ownership. Lands covered by
structures or other improvements may also be deemed to
constitute open space under the limited conditions specified in
this Section. Large land areas devoted to the uses specified in
5-2-5A(1) shall also be considered open space; and open space
may and, where required by this Section, shall be located in
areas devoted to any use classification described in 5-2-5A.
Open space acceptable for approval under the provisions of
this Section shall meet the following standards:
(a) The public and common open space shall be located and
organized to be readily accessible by foot and bicycle to
residential populations served thereby, preferably without
their having to cross limited access and arterial roadways.
In addition, appropriate access and parking for vehicles
shall be provided at those locations where town-wide use
is anticipated,
(b) The location, condition, size and configuration of the open
space shall be suitable for its use as contemplated in this
Article and as proposed in the development plan and/or
site plan, such as for recreation, amenity, drainage, flood
plain, stormwater storage, protection of water quality,
connectors between major open space areas, preservation
of wildlife, woodlands, wetlands and outstanding natural
features, as well as other uses permitted under 5-2-5A(1)
above. Such proposed uses shall be appropriate to the
scale and character of the new community, considering its
size, density, expected population, topography and the
number and types of dwelling units or employment sites to
be provided. The use of a piece of open space land for
more than one of these open space uses shall be
encouraged, yet a balance of such uses shall be maintained
such that, for example, all of the open space shall not be
buffers along noisy transportation corridors but shall
include areas suitable for quiet respite.
(c) Open space shall be suitably improved for its intended use,
but open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings,
structures and improvements which are permitted in the
open space shall be compatible with the natural
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:793
environment and appropriate to the uses which are
proposed for the open space.
(2) Common Open Space.
(a) The continued use of common open space for the purposes
contemplated in this Section shall be assured through
appropriate deed restrictions which shall include a
provision that such open space use shall not be materially
altered or abridged without the approval of the Town
Board.
(b) Satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the
improvement, operation and maintenance of such common
open space and facilities. The developer shall provide for
and establish an organization for the ownership, operation
and maintenance of common open space. In the event that
the common open space is not maintained in a manner to
avoid becoming unsightly or a nuisance to the public, the
town may undertake the necessary maintenance and
assess the owners of said common open space.
(c) In reviewing the organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common open space, the Planning
Board shall consider, in addition to other applicable
requirements of this Section, the following:
(i) Time when organization is to be created;
(ii) Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the
organization by residents;
(iii) Permanence of arrangements intended to assure
continued use of lands as common open space;
(iv) The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes
and maintenance of all facilities;
(v) Provision for pro rata sharing of costs and
assessments;
(vi) The capacity of the organization to administer
common facilities; and
(vii) The desirability of serving residents from adjoining
areas of development.
(d) As used in this Section, the term "common open space"
shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within the site
designated for a NCD, privately owned and designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the NCD or in specified portions of
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:794
the district, or other users if permitted by the owners of
the common open space. Common open space may contain
such structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons
served by such common open space.
(3) Public Open Space. The standards for the Planning Board's
determination whether to recommend Town Board approval of
an offer for dedication or other disposition to the town or other
public entity of public open space lands shall, without
excluding any other applicable requirements of this Section,
include the following:
(a) The need for public open space in the NCD. In determining
the manner of public ownership, the usage by the town
population outside the NCD shall be considered.
(b) The potential for an open space connection with other
public open space areas.
(c) The desirability of public access due to the special physical
and biological characteristics of the area which make it
suitable for public open space uses.
(d) The desirability of public acquisition of floodways,
drainageways and areas subject to flooding for water
management and recreational uses.
(e) Review and acceptability of covenants or similar
provisions proposed for inclusion in the dedication
instrument, intended to assure that public use remains
consistent with the objectives of the development plan and
site plan.
F. Boundary Treatment. The design of improvements and
landscaping along the boundaries of a NCD should, to the extent
possible, be visually harmonious and functionally compatible with
adjoining development. Extensive parking areas, service areas and
other features within the NCD and likely to have adverse effects on
surrounding property (due, e.g., to adverse views, lights, noise)
shall be screened against viewing from first stories outside the
district. Similar screening shall also be provided to protect the new
community from such adverse effects emanating from outside the
NCD.
G. Underground Utilities. New public and private utility lines and
those to be relocated or replaced shall be generally underground.
H. Aesthetics.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:795
(1) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good appearance
and easily maintained.
(2) The sides and rear of all buildings shall be designed in such
manner as to avoid undue sacrifice of amenity and design
values when viewed from side and rear vantage points.
I. Performance Standards. Without limiting the effect of any state
or local law, ordinance or regulation which may be applicable to
buildings and structures in a NCD and their effect on the comfort
and repose of the community, this Section imposes on new
community uses additional performance standards set forth below.
Uses in a NCD shall comply with such performance standards as a
precondition of occupancy and use. Any use already established in
such districts shall not be altered, added to or otherwise modified
so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance
standards that follow. Such conflict shall be corrected as a
precondition of conducting such altered, augmented or modified
use.
(1) Enclosure. All permitted principal and accessory uses and
operations which, as a result of not being enclosed, would
constitute a nuisance or offense beyond the lot line or which, as
a result of not being enclosed, would conflict with any of the
specific performance standards set forth in this subsection
shall be performed wholly within an enclosed building or
buildings.
(2) Residential Outside Storage. Outside storage or parking of
commercial and recreation vehicles, camper bodies, boats and
trailers in neighborhood areas on lands occupied for
residential purposes shall be prohibited.
(3) Dust and Smoke. The emission of smoke, soot, fly ash fumes,
dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind shall be
controlled so that the rate of emission and quantity deposited
beyond the lot shall not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, welfare or adversely affect
property values and shall not exceed the amount permitted by
other codes of the state, county or town.
(4) Odorous Matter. The emission of odorous matter in such
quantities as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond
the lot occupied by the use shall not be permitted.
(5) Toxic or Noxious Matter. The emission of toxic, noxious or
corrosive fumes or gases which would be demonstrably
injurious to property, vegetation, animals or human health at or
beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by the use shall not
be permitted.
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-2
1:796
(6) Noise. The sound pressure level as measured at the edge of a
lot and which is produced by a mechanical, electrical or
vehicular operation on the lot, where said lot is adjacent to a
residential area, shall not exceed the average intensity of the
street traffic noise in that residential area. In any event, no
sound shall have objectionable intermittence, volume, beat
frequency or shrillness characteristics.
(7) Vibration. Vibrations shall not be permitted beyond the lot
line occupied by the use which would be noticeable without the
aid of instruments or detrimental to health.
(8) Radioactive or Electrical Disturbances. Radioactive
emission or electromagnetic radiation disturbances which
adversely affect any person or equipment at or beyond the
boundaries of the property shall not be permitted.
(9) Incineration Facilities. All incineration facilities shall be
enclosed within an approved structure and shall be provided
with devices for prevention of emission of smoke, odors,
chemical or particulate matters and shall conform to the
regulations of Title 6 NYCRR, Part 219, Incinerators, or any
applicable state or county requirements.
(10)Waste Materials. No garbage, rubbish, waste matter or
empty containers shall be permitted outside of buildings
except in approved containers awaiting pickup within 24
hours. Liquid wastes shall not be discharged into an open body
of water or a sewer unless treated or controlled so that the
amount of solid substances, oils, grease, acids, alkalines and
other chemicals shall not exceed the amount permitted by
other codes of the federal, state, county or town governments.
Damages resulting from accidental spoilage or emissions of
solid, liquid or gaseous waste shall be the responsibility of the
offenders.
J. Signs.
(1) Freestanding signs in any NCD shall be limited to traffic and
pedestrian directional and control signs, signs identifying uses
as permitted on the site plan and street signs. Traffic signs and
devices shall meet state requirements. Any illuminated sign
visible from any public street or from adjoining property used
for residential purposes shall be so shaded, shielded, directed
or maintained at a sufficiently low level of intensity and
brightness that it shall not adversely affect neighboring
premises nor the safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on
public roads or highways. Signs shall be designed as an
integral part of a comprehensive site and landscape plan which
shall include a sign system specifying the general type, design,
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:797
§ 5-3. Planned Residential District (PRD)
size and location of all signs and all sign controls to be
instituted by the new community developer.
(2) Within a NCD, this subsection shall be applicable in lieu of
other town ordinances pertaining to the size, location and
appearance of signs.
K. The Town Board shall find that any proposed dormitories in NCD
are consistent with the following: [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No.
10-2016]
1. The dormitory is located either on the campus or within two (2)
miles of the institution it will serve.
2. Clear and safe pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular connections to
the campus it will serve and retail shops and services are
available.
3. Off-street parking consistent with such requirements outside
the New Community District are available.
4. The dormitory will not create traffic and circulation conflicts
and/or congestion.
5. Does not create a concentration of dormitories that will
adversely impact surrounding neighborhoods.
6. Substantial landscape buffers, heavily planted with a mix of
deciduous and coniferous trees, is provided for dormitories
located either adjacent to or in close proximity to any
residences.
7. The height, density, physical layout, and architectural design is
consistent with surrounding development, both within and
outside of the New Community District.
5-3-1. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to:
A. Promote greater flexibility and consequently more creative and
imaginative design for the development of residential areas than is
generally possible under conventional residential zoning districts;
B. Meet the growing demand for housing by greater variety in type,
design and siting of dwellings;
C. Encourage conservation and more efficient use of land in such
developments and maintenance of high environmental quality
throughout the development;
D. Encourage the most skillful planning of parts of the community
generally consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 5-2 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:798
E. Provide for the utilization of planning criteria in the arrangements
of buildings related to common open space;
F. Utilize topography and other site features to best advantage to
obtain creative and coordinated designs;
G. Expand the scope of land planning and development beyond a
concept of homogeneous use within formally defined districts and
beyond a concept of individual lots and structures thereon by the
planning and development of larger areas with groups of structures
erected thereon to create a diversified and coordinated entity.
5-3-2. Objectives. In order to carry out the intent of this Section, a Planned
Residential District (PRD) shall achieve the following objectives:
A. A varied choice in the types of environment, occupancy, tenure,
types and costs of housing, lot sizes and community facilities
available to existing and potential town residents;
B. A more efficient and economical arrangement of land uses,
buildings, circulation systems and utilities, resulting in smaller
networks of utilities and streets and lessened burden of traffic on
streets and highways, thereby lowering utility and maintenance
costs born by new development;
C. Convenience in location of commercial and community service
areas;
D. Sufficient civic and community facilities, carefully integrated with
adjoining areas;
E. Extensive usable open space and recreation areas, appropriate in
terms of location, size and suitability for intended function;
F. The comprehensive design of stormwater retention and proper
drainage systems;
G. Guidance and control of development in flood hazard areas so that
life and property both within and without such areas are protected;
H. Increased safety for all modes of travel, including pedestrian and
bicycle;
I. Preservation, to the greatest extent possible, of such features as
trees, outstanding or unique natural topography, including
marshlands, and geological features;
J. Utilization to the best advantage of these and soil characteristics to
prevent soil erosion and to create and preserve natural and manmade
features which will give increased environmental quality,
encourage uses which will maintain high environmental quality and
provide an attractive community design. These may include natural
woodlands, grasslands, marshlands and lakes;
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:799
K. A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows an orderly transition of land from rural to urban uses;
L. An appropriate balancing or accommodation of the effect of major
public or private development elsewhere in the town or its vicinity;
M. Provision for the orderly updating of long-term, large, scale
development plans to reflect changing circumstances within an
overall town-approved planning framework; and
N. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other sections of this Zoning Ordinance.
5-3-3. Use Regulations.
A. Permitted Uses, Criteria, Standards and Regulations. Uses,
criteria, standards and regulations are hereby established with
respect to planning of land and the arrangements of buildings and
open spaces for those areas which are included in a PRD and which
require development and site plan approval. The application of the
criteria, uses, standards and regulations set forth in this Section
are intended to result in the optimum development and use of land
in the Town. They are intended to insure full consideration of every
planning element pertinent to the objectives of this Section and the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. District Size.
(1) Minimum Area. The minimum area required to qualify for a
PRD shall be 10 contiguous acres of land. This requirement
shall not apply to boundary change amendments in accordance
with § 8-4. For purposes of this paragraph, lands separated by
streams or drainage courses, highways, streets or other public
or private rights of way shall be deemed contiguous.
Boundaries should assume reasonably regular configurations,
taking advantage of natural features, public rights of way and
other clearly defined features as outer perimeters in order to
facilitate buffering between the PRD and adjacent areas and in
order to minimize the development obstacles created by
sharply irregular boundaries resulting from noncontiguous
ownership patterns.
(2) Maximum Area. The maximum area for a PRD shall be 999
acres.
C. Location of Planned District. The PRD district shall be
applicable to any area of the town where the petitioner can
demonstrate or the Town Board, on its own initiative or upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, determines that the
characteristics of the proposed site will meet the objectives of this
Section.
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:800
D. Permitted Uses. A PRD designed in accordance with the
regulations, standards and design criteria set forth below and in
other applicable provisions of this Section may include:
(1) Principal Uses and Structures.
(a) All types of single-family dwellings. In developing a
balanced community, the use of a variety of housing types,
styles and construction methods shall be deemed most in
keeping with this Section.
(b) Multifamily Dwellings.
(c) Small convenience retail and service facilities except for
drive-in restaurants and office facilities designed to serve
the needs of residents of the neighborhood and having no
advertising outside the building except identification signs
as permitted by this Section. Commercial uses shall be
provided in appropriate relation to the location and
concentration of dwelling units to be served thereby.
Limited commercial development designed to be
compatible with residential development may be within a
primarily residential building or within a building used for
commercial purposes only. Such commercial facilities shall
be allowed as follows:
Area of PRD
Maximum Gross Floor
Area
Under 100 acres None
100 acres to 200 acres 4,000 square feet
201 acres to 300 acres 10,000 square feet
301 acres to 400 acres 20,000 square feet
401 acres to 500 acres 30,000 square feet
Over 500 acres 40,000 square feet
(d) Recreation areas and facilities, except activities producing
excessive noise.
(e) Community facilities, including schools, fire and police
protection services, cultural and religious facilities and
day care centers.
5-3-4. Development Standards.
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading. The design criteria set forth in
this Section are intended to provide desirable latitude and freedom
to encourage variety in the location arrangement and type of uses,
to encourage convenience in accessibility to these uses through
provision of pedestrian and bicycle pathways and public
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:801
transportation services and to achieve the efficient sharing of
parking and loading facilities by multiple uses. Therefore, in lieu
of specific minimum parking and loading requirements and other
similar considerations, the following performance standards shall
apply:
(1) Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened to minimize
unsightliness and monotony of parked cars.
(2) Pedestrian connection between parking areas and buildings
shall be along walkways to the extent necessary to assure
pedestrian safety.
(3) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of
access and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall
site design.
(4) Any above grade loading facility shall be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
should be separate from private vehicles and pedestrians
where feasible.
(5) The design of buildings and parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the site where appropriate to
provide separate levels of access.
(6) Parking areas in all use areas except open space shall meet the
requirements of § 7-1.
(7) Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for all
new buildings at the time of erection and for all enlargements
of existing buildings and shall be maintained in usable shape
and good condition.
(8) Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided so as to
prevent overflow of parked or standing vehicles onto public or
common vehicular or pedestrian rights of way.
B. Landscaping, Buffering and Screening.
(1) Landscape Features and Building Arrangements. The
design criteria set forth in this Section are intended to provide
considerable latitude and freedom to encourage variety in the
arrangement of the bulk and shape of buildings, open space
and landscape features. Dwellings may be arranged in various
groups, courts, sequence or clusters with open spaces
organized and related to the dwellings so as to provide privacy
and to form a unified composition of buildings and space.
Although latitude in design is provided and encouraged, the
following design conditions shall, however, be assured in any
PRD. Yards, building setback and spacing and building height
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:802
and shape, landscape features and building arrangement shall
be designed in a manner to assure:
(a) Proper light, air and views for the residents;
(b) Safety in accommodating pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and vehicular storage and service;
(c) Usability of and convenient access to open space by
residents of adjacent dwellings without loss of privacy for
the residents of such dwellings;
(d) Availability of open land for landscaped features,
recreation or other private uses;
(e) Privacy between adjacent buildings and intersecting wings
of buildings, from streets, parking and recreation areas;
(f) The creation of a variety of common open spaces and
private areas, through the planning of landscape features
such as walls, fences, hedges and other features.
(2) Landscaping Standards. Landscaping plans shall meet the
following standards:
(a) Landscaping shall provide privacy and screening between
uses, with visual, noise and air quality factors considered.
(b) Landscaping shall contribute to prevention of water runoff
and erosion problems. Temporary or permanent protection
shall be provided during construction to prevent such
problems.
(c) Landscape treatment for public and private plazas, roads,
paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an
integral part of an entire project and shall combine with
walks and street surfaces, and such requirements shall be
in lieu of any other town requirement for trees in public
street rights of way.
(d) The area covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings
and paved areas must be accompanied by planted areas as
well as other features to hold or carry stormwater runoff.
Outdoor planted or grassed areas within parking lots must
be not less than five percent of the total vehicular area in
parking lots designed for 10 cars or more and shall be
suitably distributed so as to relieve any unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars.
(e) Landscape materials shall be appropriate to the growing
conditions on the site and the town's environment.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:803
(f) Natural features such as streams, rock outcrops,
escarpments, marshlands, wetlands, topsoil, trees and
shrubs, natural contours and outstanding vegetational,
topographical and geological features shall be preserved
and incorporated in the open space areas and in the
landscaping of the development.
(g) Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation
shall not be permitted. Trees shall be planted adjacent to
all residential units so as to provide no less than three
trees of a minimum two and one half inch caliper,
measured six inches above the ground, per residential
unit, including trees previously existent on the site which
are preserved. Trees to be planted throughout the district
and along the vehicular ways shall include both deciduous
and coniferous species in adequate density and design to
provide year round benefit of such plantings.
(h) Trees shall be of numerous species as to minimize the
impact and spread of disease.
(3) Aesthetics.
(a) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good
appearance and easily maintained.
(b) The sides and rear of all buildings shall be designed in
such manner as to avoid undue sacrifice of amenity and
design values when viewed from side and rear vantage
points.
(4) Screening. Visual and noise screening devices shall be
designed and maintained to serve their intended purposes set
forth in this Section. Artificial planting materials shall not be
allowed. Landscape screening should be given priority where
effective, easily maintained and botanically feasible.
Decorative masonry walls in conjunction with berms and plant
materials shall be encouraged.
C. Local Circulation System. Both vehicular and pedestrian access
shall be provided to each dwelling, school, recreation area and
commercial area.
(1) Vehicular Circulation.
(a) The vehicular circulation system and parking facilities
shall also be designed to fully accommodate the
automobile with safety and efficiency without allowing it to
dominate and destroy the form of the area, with screening
and buffering as may be required to satisfy the
environmental standards of this Section.
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:804
(b) Dwellings and other buildings shall be served by streets,
drives or emergency accessways planned so as to assure
access by service and emergency vehicles.
(c) Driveways and streets serving group and cluster
developments shall be connected to collector and arterial
streets at locations where traffic can be controlled and
operated effectively and safely with minimum interference
to the capacity of the arterial and collector streets, bicycle
routes and pedestrian ways.
(d) Streets may be either private or public.
(e) Standards of design and construction for all roads to be
dedicated shall meet applicable town standards unless
specifically modified as part of the site plan approval. The
right of way and pavement widths, locations and designs
for private ways, roads and alleys shall conform to
generally accepted planning and engineering practices,
taking into account the estimated needs of the full
proposed development.
(f) There shall be provision of safe bicycling routes
throughout the district which may be coincident with
pedestrian ways but which shall be separated from the
motorized vehicle system wherever feasible.
(2) Pedestrian Circulation.
(a) Pedestrian ways shall connect residential areas with other
residential areas, community facilities, schools,
recreational areas, commercial areas and public
transportation.
(b) The system of pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped
spaces shall be of such extent and the elements of such
system shall be so distributed in location and number so as
to assure safety of pedestrians from vehicular traffic and
encourage pedestrian travel within such system instead of
in vehicular rights of way, without restraints imposed by
public, private or common ownerships.
(c) Major pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation
loading places where feasible shall be separated from
general vehicle circulation.
(d) Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian
walks shall be provided, particularly from building
entrances to adjacent buildings, play areas, parking areas
and streets.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:805
(e) Sidewalks, pathways and bikeways to be located within a
public right of way shall meet town standards as to width,
location and materials unless specifically modified as a
part of the site plan approval.
D. Topography and Site Appearance. PRD's shall be designed to
take maximum advantage of the topography of the land in order to
utilize the natural contours, to provide for water storage and
control of water runoff, to protect natural drainage courses, to
economize in the construction of utilities, to reduce the amount of
grading and to maximize the conservation of trees and topsoil.
Significant natural features and other characteristics of the site
shall be preserved and incorporated as distinctive features of the
development.
E. Open Space.
(1) Definition.
(a) Open space includes:
(i) Uncovered and unpaved lands or water areas in
public, common or other private ownership, except
lots under single family ownership;
(ii) Lands covered by structures or other improvements
may also be deemed to constitute open space under
the limited conditions specified in this Section;
(iii) Large areas of land in a natural state;
(iv) Areas for active and passive recreation;
(v) Parks and large landscaped or wooded areas;
(vi) Drainage, runoff areas and flood plain areas and areas
for stormwater storage and protection of water
quality;
(vii) Connectors between major open space areas;
(viii) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems;
(ix) Areas for preservation of wildlife, woodlands,
wetlands and outstanding natural features, including
geologic and topographic;
(x) Areas for public or private recreation, public
education, community and cultural facilities when
approved by the Town Board;
(xi) Conservation facilities and areas.
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:806
(b) Open space does not include areas covered by roads,
buildings, parking areas and driveways, service areas,
except for buildings, parts of buildings or parking lots
providing natural preservation, recreational or cultural
services in conjunction with adjoining open space and
school sites.
(c) As used in this Section, the term "common open space"
shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within the site
designated for a PRD, privately owned and designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the PRD, or in specified portions
thereof, or other users if permitted by the owners of the
common open space. Common open space may contain
such structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons
served by such common open space.
(2) Scale and Character. Such proposed uses must be
appropriate to the scale and character of the new district,
considering its size, density, expected population, topography
and the number and types of dwelling units.
(3) Area and location.
(a) In any PRD a minimum of 25 percent of the total land area,
less the amount used exclusively for nonresidential
purposes, must be in open space.
(i) At least 70 percent of this total open space shall be in
private ownership open to the public or in public or
common ownership.
(ii) Any part of the total open space, either in a natural
state or improved as permitted by and meeting the
standards of this Section, may be offered for
dedication or other disposition without cost to the
town or other public entity for recreation and other
open space uses for use by the public and acceptable
to the Town Board and other public entity and to the
owner and if accepted constitutes a credit to
Paragraph A above. Offers for dedication or other
disposition of major open space for public use may be
made at any time after approval of the development
plan.
(b) Any public or common open space shall be located and
organized to be readily accessible by foot and bicycle to
residential populations served thereby (preferably without
their having to cross limited access and arterial roadways).
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:807
In addition, access and parking for vehicles shall be
provided where appropriate.
(c) The location, condition, size and configuration of the open
space must be suitable for its use as contemplated for its
use and as proposed in the development plan and/or site
plan. Lakes or other water areas may not occupy so large a
proportion of the major common open space that other
open space and recreational uses cannot be adequately
provided for.
(4) Open Space Alterations. The continued use of common open
space for the purposes contemplated in this Section shall be
assured through appropriate deed restrictions which shall
include a provision that such open space use shall not be
materially altered or abridged without the approval of the
Town Board.
(5) Physical Improvements.
(a) Open space must be suitably improved for its intended
use, but open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved.
(b) The buildings, structures and improvements which are
permitted in the common open space must be appropriate
to the uses which are authorized for the common open
space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the
common open space with regard to its topography and
unimproved condition.
(6) Maintenance of Open Space.
(a) Arrangements must be made for the improvement,
operation and maintenance of such common open space
and facilities. The developer shall provide for and establish
an organization for the ownership, operation and
maintenance of common open space.
(b) In reviewing the organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common open space, the Planning
Board shall consider, in addition to other applicable
requirements of this Section, the following:
(i) Time when organization is to be created.
(ii) Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the
organization by residents.
(iii) Permanence of arrangements intended to assure
continued use of lands as common open space.
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-3
1:808
(iv) The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes
and maintenance of all facilities.
(v) Provision for pro rata sharing of costs and
assessments.
(vi) The capacity of the organization to administer
common facilities.
(vii) The availability of the open space to residents from
areas adjoining the development where requested by
the developer.
(7) Public Open Space. The standards for the Planning Board's
determination whether to recommend Town Board approval of
an offer for the dedication or other disposition to the town or
other public entity of public open space lands shall, without
excluding any other applicable requirements of this Section,
include the following:
(a) The need for public open space in the PRD. In determining
the manner of public ownership, the usage by the town
population outside the PRD shall be considered.
(b) The potential for an open space connection with other
public open space areas.
(c) The desirability of public access due to the special physical
and biological characteristics of the area which make it
suitable for public open space uses.
(d) The desirability of public acquisition of floodways,
drainageways and areas subject to flooding for water
management and recreational uses.
(e) Review and acceptability of covenants or similar
provisions proposed for inclusion in dedication instrument,
intended to assure that public use remains consistent with
the objectives of the development plan and site plan.
(8) Perimeter Treatment. The design of improvements and
landscaping along the boundaries of a PRD should be visually
harmonious and functionally compatible with adjoining
development. Extensive parking areas, service areas and other
features likely to have adverse effects on surrounding property
(due, e.g., to adverse views, lights, noise) shall be screened
against viewing from first stories both inside and outside the
district. Screening shall also be provided to protect against
lights, noise or other undesirable conditions in the
surroundings.
F. Utilities. New public and private utilities and those relocated or
replaced shall be generally underground.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:809
§ 5-4. Planned Development District (PDD)
G. Signs.
(1) Freestanding signs in a PRD shall be limited to traffic and
pedestrian directional and control signs, street signs and signs
identifying the development.
(2) One identification sign shall be permitted for each
nonresidential use, identifying use on the premises as
permitted on the site plan, of not more than 20 square feet, not
projecting beyond the building to which it is attached more
than 12 inches, not projecting more than 10 feet in height
above grade.
(3) Any illuminated sign visible from any public street or from
adjoining property used for residential purposes shall be so
shaded, shielded, directed or maintained at a sufficiently low
level of intensity and brightness that it shall not adversely
affect neighboring premises nor the safe vision of operators of
vehicles moving on public roads or highways.
(4) Signs shall be designed as an integral part of a Coordinated
Sign Plan in accordance with § 8-11.
(5) All permitted principal and accessory uses and operations
which, as a result of not being enclosed, would constitute a
nuisance or offense beyond the lot line, or which as a result of
not being enclosed would conflict with any of the specific
performance standards set forth in this subsection, shall be
performed wholly within an enclosed building or buildings.
(6) Outside storage or parking of commercial or recreation
vehicles, camper bodies, boats and trailers on lands occupied
for residential purposes shall be prohibited.
5-4-1. Purpose. The PDD provides an area for coordinated mixed use
developments that include residential, public and civic, mixed
residential and office and commercial uses. The variety of land uses
available in this district allows flexibility to respond to market demands
and the needs of tenants, which provides for a variety of physically and
functionally integrated land uses.
5-4-2. Use Regulations.
A. Permitted Uses, Criteria, Standards and Regulations. Uses,
criteria, standards and regulations are hereby established with
respect to planning of land and the arrangements of buildings and
open spaces for those areas which are included in a PDD and which
require development and site plan approval. The application of the
criteria, uses, standards and regulations set forth in this Section
are intended to result in the optimum development and use of land
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:810
in the Town. They are intended to insure full consideration of every
planning element pertinent to the objectives of this Section and
the Comprehensive Plan. Conditions placed on individual use areas
of a PDD shall supersede regulations elsewhere in this Ordinance,
unless otherwise noted.
B. Minimum District Size. The minimum area required to qualify for
a PDD shall be 10 contiguous acres of land. This requirement shall
not apply to boundary change amendments to existing PDDs in
accordance with § 8-2-2J. For purposes of this paragraph, lands
separated by streams or drainage courses, highways, streets or
other public or private rights of way shall be deemed contiguous.
Boundaries should assume reasonably regular configurations,
taking advantage of natural features, public rights of way and other
clearly defined features as outer perimeters in order to facilitate
buffering between the PDD and adjacent areas and in order to
minimize the development obstacles created by sharply irregular
boundaries resulting from noncontiguous ownership patterns.
C. Location of PDD. The PDD shall be applicable to any area of the
town where the petitioner can demonstrate or the Town Board, on
its own initiative or upon recommendation of the Planning Board,
determines that the characteristics of the proposed site will meet
the objectives of this Section.
D. Permitted Uses.
(1) A PDD containing only residential development shall contain a
balance of housing types, including a minimum of three of the
following housing.
(a) Single-family residential;
(b) Patio home (see § 6-2-4);
(c) Zero lot line home (see § 6-2-6);
(d) Single-family attached dwelling;
(e) Multifamily attached dwelling; or
(f) Senior citizen housing.
(2) A PDD with residential and nonresidential uses shall contain a
mix of residential, public and civic, office and commercial uses
in accordance with the table below.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:811
Use Not Less Than Not More Than
Residential
Upper-Story Dwelling 10% of total
nonresidential
floor area for
structures listed
below
15 units/acre
All Other Residential 0% of total
nonresidential
floor area
50% of total
nonresidential
floor area
Nonresidential
Public and Civic 5% of total
nonresidential
floor area
50% of total
nonresidential
floor area
Commercial 0% of total
nonresidential
floor area
50% of total
nonresidential
floor area
Office 0% of total
nonresidential
floor area
50% of total
nonresidential
floor area
(3) All permitted principal and accessory uses and operations
which, as a result of not being enclosed, would constitute a
nuisance or offense beyond the lot line, or which as a result of
not being enclosed would conflict with any of the specific
performance standards set forth in this subsection, shall be
performed wholly within an enclosed building or buildings.
(4) Outside storage or parking of commercial or recreation
vehicles, camper bodies, boats and trailers on lands occupied
for residential purposes shall be prohibited.
5-4-3. Development Standards.
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading. The design criteria set forth in
this Section are intended to provide desirable latitude and freedom
to encourage variety in the location arrangement and type of uses,
to encourage convenience in accessibility to these uses through
provision of pedestrian and bicycle pathways and public
transportation services and to achieve the efficient sharing of
parking and loading facilities by multiple uses. Therefore, in lieu of
specific minimum parking and loading requirements and other
similar considerations, the following performance standards shall
apply:
(1) Pedestrian connection between parking areas and buildings
shall be along walkways to the extent necessary to assure
pedestrian safety.
§ 5-4 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:812
(2) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of
access and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall
site design.
(3) Any above-grade loading facility shall be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
should be separate from private vehicles and pedestrians
where feasible.
(4) The design of buildings and parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the site where appropriate to
provide separate levels of access.
(5) Parking areas in all use areas except open space shall meet the
requirements of § 7-1.
(6) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for all
new buildings at the time of erection and for all enlargements
of existing buildings and shall be maintained in usable shape
and good condition.
(7) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided so as to
prevent overflow of parked or standing vehicles onto public or
common vehicular or pedestrian rights of way.
B. Landscaping, Buffering and Screening.
(1) Landscape Features and Building Arrangements. The
design criteria set forth in this are intended to provide
considerable latitude and freedom to encourage variety in the
arrangement of the bulk and shape of buildings, open space
and landscape features. Buildings may be arranged in various
groups, courts, sequence or clusters with open spaces
organized and related to the buildings so as to provide privacy
and to form a unified composition of buildings and space.
Although latitude in design is provided and encouraged, the
following design conditions shall, however, be assured in any
PDD. Yards, building setback and spacing and building height
and shape, landscape features and building arrangement shall
be designed in a manner to assure:
(a) Proper light, air and views for the residents, tenants and
the public;
(b) Safety in accommodating pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and vehicular storage and service;
(c) Usability of and convenient access to open space;
(d) Screening to minimize the unsightliness and monotony of
parked cars;
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:813
(e) Availability of open land for landscaped features,
recreation or other private uses;
(f) Privacy between adjacent buildings and intersecting wings
of buildings, from streets, parking and recreation areas;
(g) The creation of a variety of common open spaces and
private areas, through the planning of landscape features
such as walls, fences, hedges and other features.
(2) Landscaping Standards. Landscaping plans shall meet the
following standards:
(a) Landscaping shall provide privacy and screening between
uses, with visual, noise and air quality factors considered.
(b) Landscaping shall contribute to prevention of water runoff
and erosion problems. Temporary or permanent protection
shall be provided during construction to prevent such
problems.
(c) Landscape treatment for public and private plazas, roads,
paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an
integral part of an entire project and shall combine with
walks and street surfaces, and such requirements shall be
in lieu of any other Town requirement for trees in public
street rights of way.
(d) The area covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings
and paved areas must be accompanied by planted areas as
well as other features to hold or carry stormwater runoff.
Outdoor planted or grassed areas within parking lots must
be not less than five percent of the total vehicular area in
parking lots designed for 10 cars or more and shall be
suitably distributed so as to relieve any unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars.
(e) Landscape materials shall be appropriate to the growing
conditions on the site and the Town's environment.
(f) Natural features such as streams, rock outcrops,
escarpments, marshlands, wetlands, topsoil, trees and
shrubs, natural contours and outstanding vegetational,
topographical and geological features are encouraged to
be preserved and incorporated in the open space areas
and in the landscaping of the development.
(g) Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation
shall not be permitted. Trees shall be planted adjacent to
all residential units so as to provide no less than three
trees of a minimum two and one half inch caliper,
measured six inches above the ground, per residential
§ 5-4 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:814
unit, including existing trees on the site which are
preserved. Trees to be planted throughout the district
and along the vehicular ways shall include both deciduous
and coniferous species in adequate density and design to
provide year round benefit of such plantings.
(h) Trees shall be of numerous species as to minimize the
impact and spread of disease.
(3) Aesthetics.
(a) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good
appearance and easily maintained.
(b) The sides and rear of all buildings shall be designed in
such manner as to avoid undue sacrifice of amenity and
design values when viewed from side and rear vantage
points.
(4) Screening. Visual and noise screening devices shall be
designed and maintained to serve their intended purposes set
forth in this Section. Artificial planting materials shall not be
allowed. Landscape screening should be given priority where
effective, easily maintained and botanically feasible.
Decorative masonry walls in conjunction with berms and plant
materials are encouraged.
C. Local Circulation System. Both vehicular and pedestrian access
shall be provided to each dwelling, school, recreation area and
commercial area.
(1) Vehicular circulation.
(a) The vehicular circulation system and parking facilities
shall be designed to fully accommodate the automobile
safely and efficiently without allowing it to dominate and
destroy the form of the area, and with screening and
buffering as may be required to satisfy the environmental
standards of this Section.
(b) Dwellings and other buildings shall be served by streets,
drives or emergency accessways planned to assure access
by service and emergency vehicles.
(c) Driveways and streets serving group and cluster
developments shall be connected to collector and arterial
streets at locations where traffic can be controlled and
operated effectively and safely with minimum interference
to the capacity of the arterial and collector streets, bicycle
routes and pedestrian ways.
(d) Streets may be either private or public.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:815
(e) Standards of design and construction for all roads to be
dedicated shall meet applicable town standards unless
specifically modified as part of the site plan approval. The
right of way and pavement widths, locations and designs
for private ways, roads and alleys shall conform to
generally accepted planning and engineering practices,
taking into account the estimated needs of the full
proposed development.
(f) There shall be provision of safe bicycling routes
throughout the district which may be coincident with
pedestrian ways but which shall be separated from the
motorized vehicle system wherever feasible.
(2) Pedestrian Circulation.
(a) Pedestrian ways shall connect residential areas with other
residential areas, community facilities, schools,
recreational areas, commercial areas and public
transportation.
(b) The system of pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped
spaces shall be of such extent and the elements of such
system shall be so distributed in location and number so as
to assure safety of pedestrians from vehicular traffic and
encourage pedestrian travel within such system instead of
in vehicular rights of way, without restraints imposed by
public, private or common ownerships.
(c) Major pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation
loading places where feasible shall be separated from
general vehicle circulation.
(d) Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian
walks shall be provided, particularly from building
entrances to adjacent buildings, play areas, parking areas
and streets.
(e) Sidewalks, pathways and bikeways to be located within a
public right of way shall meet town standards as to width,
location and materials unless specifically modified as a
part of the site plan approval.
D. Topography and Site Appearance. PDD's shall be designed to
take maximum advantage of the topography of the land in order to
utilize the natural contours, to provide for water storage and
control of water runoff, to protect natural drainage courses, to
economize in the construction of utilities, to reduce the amount of
grading and to maximize the conservation of trees and topsoil.
Significant natural features and other characteristics of the site
shall be preserved and incorporated as distinctive features of the
development.
§ 5-4 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:816
E. Open Space.
(1) Definition.
(a) Open space includes:
(i) Uncovered and unpaved lands or water areas in
public, common or other private ownership, except
lots under single family ownership;
(ii) Lands covered by structures or other improvements
may also be deemed to constitute open space under
the limited conditions specified in this Section;
(iii) Large areas of land in a natural state;
(iv) Areas for active and passive recreation;
(v) Parks and large landscaped or wooded areas;
(vi) Drainage, runoff areas and flood plain areas and areas
for stormwater storage and protection of water
quality;
(vii) Connectors between major open space areas;
(viii) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems;
(ix) Areas for preservation of wildlife, woodlands,
wetlands and outstanding natural features, including
geologic and topographic;
(x) Areas for public or private recreation, public
education, community and cultural facilities when
approved by the Town Board;
(xi) Conservation facilities and areas.
(b) Open space does not include areas covered by roads,
buildings, parking areas and driveways, service areas,
except for buildings, parts of buildings or parking lots
providing natural preservation, recreational or cultural
services in conjunction with adjoining open space and
school sites.
(c) As used in this Section, the term "common open space"
shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within the site
designated for a PDD, privately owned and designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the PDD, or in specified portions
thereof, or other users if permitted by the owners of the
common open space. Common open space may contain
such structures and improvements as are necessary and
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:817
appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons
served by such common open space.
(2) Scale and Character. Such proposed uses must be
appropriate to the scale and character of the new district,
considering its size, density, expected population, topography
and the number and types of dwelling units.
(3) Area and location.
(a) In any PDD a minimum of 25 percent of the total land area,
less the amount used exclusively for nonresidential
purposes, must be in open space.
(i) At least 70 percent of this total open space shall be in
private ownership open to the public or in public or
common ownership.
(ii) Any part of the total open space, either in a natural
state or improved as permitted by and meeting the
standards of this Section, may be offered for
dedication or other disposition without cost to the
town or other public entity for recreation and other
open space uses for use by the public and acceptable
to the Town Board and other public entity and to the
owner and if accepted constitutes a credit to
paragraph (a) above. Offers for dedication or other
disposition of major open space for public use may be
made at any time after approval of the development
plan.
(b) Any public or common open space shall be located and
organized to be readily accessible by foot and bicycle to
residential populations served thereby (preferably without
their having to cross limited access and arterial roadways).
In addition, access and parking for vehicles shall be
provided where appropriate.
(c) The location, condition, size and configuration of the open
space must be suitable for its use as contemplated for its
use and as proposed in the development plan and/or site
plan. Lakes or other water areas may not occupy so large a
proportion of the major common open space that other
open space and recreational uses cannot be adequately
provided for.
(4) Open Space Alterations. The continued use of common open
space for the purposes contemplated in this Section shall be
assured through appropriate deed restrictions which shall
include a provision that such open space use shall not be
materially altered or abridged without the approval of the
Town Board.
§ 5-4 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:818
(5) Physical Improvements.
(a) Open space must be suitably improved for its intended
use, but open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved.
(b) The buildings, structures and improvements which are
permitted in the common open space must be appropriate
to the uses which are authorized for the common open
space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the
common open space with regard to its topography and
unimproved condition.
(6) Maintenance of Open Space.
(a) Arrangements must be made for the improvement,
operation and maintenance of such common open space
and facilities. The developer shall provide for and establish
an organization (such as, but not limited to a nonprofit
conservation agency or a homeowners association) for the
ownership, operation and maintenance of common open
space.
(b) In reviewing the organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common open space, the Planning
Board shall consider, in addition to other applicable
requirements of this Section, the following:
(i) Time when organization is to be created.
(ii) Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the
organization by residents.
(iii) Permanence of arrangements intended to assure
continued use of lands as common open space.
(iv) The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes
and maintenance of all facilities.
(v) Provision for pro rata sharing of costs and
assessments.
(vi) The capacity of the organization to administer
common facilities.
(vii) The availability of the open space to residents from
areas adjoining the development where requested by
the developer.
(7) Public Open Space. The standards for the Planning Board's
determination whether to recommend Town Board approval of
an offer for the dedication or other disposition to the town or
other public entity of public open space lands shall, without
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:819
excluding any other applicable requirements of this Section,
include the following:
(a) The need for public open space in the PDD. In determining
the manner of public ownership, the usage by the town
population outside the PDD shall be considered.
(b) The potential for an open space connection with other
public open space areas.
(c) The desirability of public access due to the special physical
and biological characteristics of the area which make it
suitable for public open space uses.
(d) The desirability of public acquisition of floodways,
drainageways and areas subject to flooding for water
management and recreational uses.
(e) Review and acceptability of covenants or similar
provisions proposed for inclusion in dedication instrument,
intended to assure that public use remains consistent with
the objectives of the development plan and site plan.
(8) Perimeter Treatment. The design of improvements and
landscaping along the boundaries of a PDD should be visually
harmonious and functionally compatible with adjoining
development. Extensive parking areas, service areas and other
features likely to have adverse effects on surrounding property
(due, e.g., to adverse views, lights, noise) shall be screened
against viewing from first stories both inside and outside the
district. Screening shall also be provided to protect against
lights, noise or other undesirable conditions in the
surroundings.
F. Utilities. New public and private utilities and those relocated or
replaced shall be generally underground.
G. Signs.
(1) Freestanding signs in a PDD shall be limited to traffic and
pedestrian directional and control signs, street signs and signs
identifying the development.
(2) Pole signs shall be prohibited in a PDD.
(3) One identification sign shall be permitted for each
nonresidential use, identifying use on the premises as
permitted on the site plan, of not more than 20 square feet, not
projecting beyond the building to which it is attached more
than 12 inches, not projecting more than 10 feet in height
above grade. Signs shall be designed as an integral part of a
Coordinated Sign Plan in accordance with § 8-11.
§ 5-4 AMHERST CODE § 5-4
1:820
§ 5-5. Community Facilities District (CF)
(4) Any illuminated sign visible from any public street or from
adjoining property used for residential purposes shall be so
shaded, shielded, directed or maintained at a sufficiently low
level of intensity and brightness that it shall not adversely
affect neighboring premises nor the safe vision of operators of
vehicles moving on public roads or highways.
5-5-1. Purpose. To provide a special zoning classification for public and
semipublic facilities, including governmental, religious, educational,
protective and other civic facilities in order to insure the proper
location of such facilities in relation to transportation and other land
uses within the town, compatibility of such facilities with adjacent
development and proper site design and land development.
5-5-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008; 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011; 2-24-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014;69 7-7-2014 by L.L. No. 23-2014] CF Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed70
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Airport
Basketball, baseball or football
facility
Cemetery or mausoleum § 6-3-1
Civic association
College, university, technical or
theological school
Day-care center § 6-3-2
69.Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 8-1-2014.
70.Editor's Note: The category of "residential uses," which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 7-20-2015 by L.L. No. 20-2015.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:821
CF Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Fraternal organization
Fraternity or sorority house
[Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No.
10-2016]
§ 6-2-8
Golf course or country club
Government structure or use
Hospital
Ice-skating facility71
Library
Minor utilities
Museum72
Place for public assembly
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Private club
Public or private school
71.Editor's Note: The entry for "indoor recreation facility, excluding any outdoor recreational
activities," which immediately followed this entry, was repealed 7-20-2015 by L.L. No.
20-2015.
72.Editor's Note: The entry for "non-profit institution providing care and protection of
persons," which immediately followed this entry, was repealed 7-20-2015 by L.L. No.
20-2015.
§ 5-5 AMHERST CODE § 5-5
1:822
CF Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Public recreation facility
Public utility service structure or
facility
Senior or youth center
Swimming facility
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
Tennis, racquetball or handball
facility
Wildlife reservation or
conservation project
COMMERCIAL
Private parking facility73 § 6-4-8
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
(1) All structures or site plans for residential uses, non-profit
institutions providing care and protection of persons, and
human health care institutions providing in-patient care that
have been legally constructed in conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance prior to (effective date of local law) shall be
considered conforming for a period of one (1) year from
(effective date of local law). All structures determined to be
nonconforming shall adhere to Part 9 of this Ordinance.
[Added 7-20-2015 by L.L. No. 20-2015]
B. Dimensional Standards.
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of (effective date), the
Planned Unit Development Process is required. See § 6-9. [Added
5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 39-2014]
73.Editor's Note: The entry for "human health care institutions providing in-patient care,"
which immediately preceded this entry, was repealed 7-20-2015 by L.L. No. 20-2015.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:823
CF Principal Use
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot width None
Min. front yard 50 ft 15 ft*
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 15 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 15 ft*
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/
15 ft
10 ft* / 5 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
See
§ 2-5-4B(3)/
15 ft
10 ft* / 5 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
* The entire area must be landscaped
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD
See § 4-8-2 for determining side yards for corner lots. [Added
2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
C. Minimum Lot Area. The area or parcel of land for a permitted
community facility shall be required to provide area adequate for
the main and accessory buildings, off-street parking, loading and
stacking and landscaping and other accessory uses, yards and open
spaces.
D. Maximum Building Coverage. Maximum building coverage by
structures shall be as use, yard, off street parking, loading and
stacking and landscaping requirements permit.
5-5-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
CF Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Residence for staff
§ 5-5 AMHERST CODE § 5-5
1:824
CF Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Solar energy systems [Added 12-11-2017
by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Signs § 7-8
Small wind energy system [Added
8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 5-5-2B.
5-5-4. General Development Standards.
A. Fences, walls or plantings or other screening materials may be
required to provide visual screening between adjacent structures
and uses and parking or other areas or uses on the parcel.
B. Outdoor recreation activities shall not be permitted within 50 feet
from an abutting residential district.
C. Exterior wall surfaces of buildings shall be of masonry, wood, glass
or metal or a combination facing of these materials. Exterior wall
facings and mansard roofs shall not include asbestos or corrugated
metal products. Any side or rear wall facing a street, residential
district or public or semi-public area shall consist of the same
facing materials as the building front.
D. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
E. Development in the CF district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
CF General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:825
§ 5-6. Traditional Neighborhood Development District (TND)
CF General Development Standards
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
5-6-1. Purpose. To provide for new, greenfield development of fully
integrated, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods that
encourage walkability and minimize traffic congestion, sprawl,
infrastructure costs and environmental degradation based on the
following principles:
A. Traditional neighborhood business districts have identifiable
centers and edges that are consistent in scale and context with the
surrounding neighborhood;
B. Uses and housing types are mixed or in close proximity to one
another;
C. Density is highest in the center of the district and decreases with
distance from the center;
D. Serve as a foci of community activity in Amherst;
E. Are designed to encourage walking, biking, and use of public
transportation as alternatives to automobile trips;
F. Streets are interconnected and blocks are small; and
G. Civic buildings and community facilities are given prominent sites
in the neighborhood.
5-6-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures. TND Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached § 3-8-2B
Attached dwelling (up to four
units)
Patio home § 6-2-4
§ 5-5 AMHERST CODE § 5-6
1:826
TND Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Upper-story dwelling § 6-2-6
Zero lot line home § 6-2-7
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Civic association (upper story
only)
Daycare center, nursery or other
private school
Fraternal organization (upper
story only)
Government structure or use
Library
Museum
Park or open space
Place for public assembly
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Animal grooming, animal hospital
or veterinarian
§ 6-4-1
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:827
TND Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Antiques and second-hand
merchandise store
Apparel and accessories store
Apparel repair and alterations and
shoe repair shop
Bank
Bakery or confectionary shop
(retail)
Beauty or barber shop
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
Book and stationery store § 6-4-7
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Contracting or construction
services
§ 6-4-4
Drug store § 4-8-4
Food store
Hardware store
Home furnishing store
Home garden store
§ 5-6 AMHERST CODE § 5-6
1:828
TND Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Jewelry store
Job printing or photography store
Ice store
Laundromat, cleaning and dyeing
outlets and pickup
§ 6-4-6
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Liquor store
Office
Personal training facility [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Photography studio [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Printing and photocopying store
Radio or television station
[Added 4-12-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
Recording studio [Added
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Restaurant with outdoor dining § 6-4-9
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Restaurant without drive-through
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:829
TND Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Service station § 6-4-10
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011]
Sporting goods or bicycle store
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards.
TND Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Minimum district area 40 acres
Min. lot width 30 ft
Min. front yard None/see
§ 2-5-2A(2)
Max. front yard 6 ft
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential/nonresidential)
15 ft/none
required
25 ft/15 ft
Min. side yard (abutting
residential/nonresidential)
15 ft/none
required
25 ft/15 ft
Max. height 50 ft
Min. height 26 ft
Max. building coverage 55%
Min. interior building
separation
None
required74
5-6-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses and Structures or Part 7, General Development Standards.
74.Editor's Note: The diagram which immediately followed this table was repealed 2-8-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016.
§ 5-6 AMHERST CODE § 5-6
1:830
TND Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 7-1
Signs § 7-7
Small wind energy system [Added 8-17-2009
by L.L. No. 12-2009]
§ 6-8-14
Uses and structures customarily incidental to
the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 5-6-2B. [Amended 8-20-2012 by L.L. No.
15-2012]
5-6-4. General Development Standards.
A. Mix of Uses. The following table establishes the minimum and
maximum land allocation that shall be devoted to various land uses
in a TND District. The land use allocations in the table below may
be applied to multi-story buildings and to unified developments.
Use Not Less Than Not More Than
Residential
Upper-Story Dwelling 10% of floor area
of nonresidential
structures listed
below
200% of total
nonresidential
floor area
All Other Residential 0% of floor area 10 units / acre
Nonresidential
Public and Civic 5% of floor area 50% of floor area
Commercial
Office Uses 30% of floor area 80% of floor area
All Commercial Uses
(excluding office uses)
5% of floor area 15% of floor area
B. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking Facilities.
(1) No drive-through facility shall be allowed to face any street
within the TND District.
(2) No vehicle use area shall be permitted between the front
building line and any street except for alleys. Such areas shall
be located to the interior side or rear of the lot.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:831
§ 5-7. Traditional Neighborhood Business Overlay District (TNB).
[Amended 5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
(3) No vehicle use area shall abut a public and civic use or open
space nor shall such use terminate a vista.
(4) The minimum parking requirements in § 7-1-6A shall apply. In
addition, there shall be a maximum of one parking space per
300 square feet of gross floor area for all office uses and one
parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area for all
other uses.
C. Other Development Standards.
(1) Any particular acre of a TND development may contain a
maximum of 30 dwelling units, provided that the average
residential density of the entire TND development shall not
exceed 15 dwelling units per acre.
(2) A commercial tenant other than an office shall have a
maximum gross floor area of 25,000 square feet.
(3) The Planning Board may approve alternative landscape
improvements in the TND District in lieu of strict compliance
with the landscape standards in § 7-2-3A(2) and § 7-2-3A(3),
provided that such improvements are in accord with the
purpose of the TND District and the purpose of § 7-2.
(4) All principal and accessory uses, except signs and off-street
parking, loading and stacking, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed structures.
(5) Development in the TND District shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
TND General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
§ 5-6 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:832
5-7-1. Purpose. To provide for the development and redevelopment of fully
integrated, mixed-use centers that promote pedestrian-oriented
neighborhoods, encourage walkability and minimize traffic congestion,
sprawl, infrastructure costs and environmental degradation based on
the following principles:
A. Traditional neighborhood business districts have identifiable
centers and edges that are consistent in scale and context with the
surrounding neighborhood;
B. Uses and housing types are mixed or in close proximity to one
another or mixed within the same property and/or building;
C. Serve as a focus of community activity in Amherst;
D. Are designed to encourage walking, biking, and use of public
transportation as alternatives to automobile trips;
E. Streets are interconnected and blocks are small;
F. Civic buildings and community facilities are given prominent sites
in the neighborhood;
G. Multi-story buildings are encouraged where appropriate; and
H. Conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians are reduced.
5-7-2. Principal and Special Uses.
A. Permitted Uses and Structures.
(1) All uses allowed by the underlying zoning district are
permitted in the -TNB Overlay District.
(2) The following uses are also included as permitted:
(a) Public parking;
(b) Upper-story dwelling units subject to the standards in
§ 6-2-6.
(3) The following uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning, shall be
considered allowable uses within the -TNB overlay and must
meet the requirements of § 5-7-6 and § 6-4. [Amended
12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011]
(a) Bank and retail pharmacy drive-through establishments;
(b) Motor vehicle service station;
(c) House and camping trailer sales;
(d) Vehicle sales, rental, leasing and repair;
(e) Farm equipment sales or service.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:833
(4) The following use is prohibited:
(a) Restaurant with drive-through.
B. Dimensional Standards. The following dimensional standards
shall apply to the -TNB Overlay District.
-TNB Principal Use Dimensional Standards
SubZone '1'
[Amended
12-19-2011 by
L.L. No.
34-2011;
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
SubZone '2'
Subzone '3'
[Amended
11-5-2012 by
L.L. No.
17-2012]
Min. lot width 30 ft 30 ft
Min. front yard None None
Max. front yard 6 ft 15 ft
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential/nonresidential)
15 ft/none
required
15 ft/none
required
Min. rear yard parking
(abutting residential/
nonresidential)
10 ft/5 ft 10 ft/5 ft
Min. side yard (abutting
residential/nonresidential)
15 ft/None or 10
ft min if not on lot
line [Amended
8-1-2011 by L.L.
No. 19-2011]
15 ft/none
required
Min. side yard parking
(abutting residential/
nonresidential)
10 ft/5 ft 10 ft/5 ft
Min. front yard parking 5 ft 5 ft
Min. Facade Frontage See
§ 5-7-2B(3) below
60% 50%
Max. height 50 ft (4 stories) 35 ft (3 stories)
Min. height (new
construction)
26 ft 26 ft
Max. impervious coverage 90% 90%
Min. interior building
separation
None required None required
(1) All structures or site plans legally constructed in conformance
with the Zoning Ordinance prior to the approval of the -TNB
district shall be considered conforming. All modifications to
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:834
such structures or sites which do not increase the degree of
non-conformity to these -TNB regulations shall be considered
conforming. All structures determined to be nonconforming
shall adhere to Part 9 of this Ordinance. [Amended 3-4-2019
by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(2) Site areas consisting of pervious asphalt, concrete or similar
landscaping materials designed to permit the absorption of
stormwater shall not count as impervious coverage.
(3) The minimum facade frontage only applies to lots greater than
150 feet in width.
5-7-3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. All accessory uses
allowed by the underlying zoning district are permissible in the -
TNB Overlay District.
B. Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 5-7-2B above and must meet the requirements of
§ 6-8. [Amended 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-201175]
5-7-4. General Development Standards.
A. Impervious Surface Area. Developed properties existing prior to
the approval of the -TNB district which seek approval of a
modification to a previously approved site plan shall be permitted,
with approval of the Planning Board or Planning Director, as
applicable, to exceed the maximum impervious surface area limits
provided that:
(1) The work removes or relocates two or more existing front yard
parking spaces to the side or rear of the building, and;
(2) The work provides improved front yard landscaping/pedestrian
buffer, as defined in § 5-7-9C and;
(3) The impervious surface area of the property overall is
decreased.
B. All properties are required to provide sidewalks a minimum of five
feet in width for the full width of the lot frontage.
C. All principal and accessory uses, except signs and off-street
parking, loading and stacking, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed structures.
75.Editor's Note: This history was inserted here pursuant to L.L. No. 34-2011, Section 2, item
3, which provided as follows: “§3.5-7-3B Revise to add ‘§5-7-2B above and must meet the
requirements of §6-8.”
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:835
D. Development in the -TNB Overlay District shall also comply with
the requirements referenced in the table below.
-TNB General Development Standards
Building Design Standards § 5-7-8
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking § 7-1, § 5-7-5
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2, § 5-7-9
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8, § 5-7-7
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable
Liquids
§ 7-10
5-7-5. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking. All off-street parking,
loading and stacking requirements of § 7-1 shall apply to properties
within the -TNB Overlay, with the following modifications. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
A. Parking Requirements.
Schedule of Parking Requirements (per square feet net
floor area)
[Amended 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011]
COMMERCIAL USES Minimum Parking Spaces
Office, professional (not
including medical offices)
3 per 1,000 sf
Retail sales and service over
2,000 but less than 25,000 sf
3.5 per 1,000 sf
Shopping center and retail sales
and service (25,000 to 200,000
sf)
3 per 1,000 sf, plus 1 per 5
seats in sit-down restaurants
and theaters
B. All new or expanded parking areas must be located in the rear or
side yards of the building. No new or expanded parking areas are
permitted in the front yard for new construction. For the purposes
of this provision, corner lots shall count both street frontages as
front yard areas.
C. Mixed use parking. Mixed use developments consisting of both
residential and non-residential uses may be permitted a reduction
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:836
in required parking spaces based on the reasonable expectation
that there would be staggered parking demands between the two.
Such reduction may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer as an alternative parking plan in accordance with § 7-1-7.
D. Applications for site plan approval may be required to consolidate
or reduce the width of any existing curb cuts and provide vehicular
links to adjacent parking areas as may be deemed appropriate by
the Planning Board or Planning Director, as applicable.
E. Residential and nonresidential uses shall have vehicular access to
local, collector and arterial streets. The number and location of the
curb cuts shall be approved by the highway authority having
jurisdiction over the street from which access is being taken. A
curb cut for a corner parcel at the intersection of any streets shall
be located the maximum practical distance from the intersection
point of the rights-of-way of the intersecting streets, without
intrusion into any required buffer.
5-7-6. Commercial Use Standards.
A. Drive-through establishments — General.
(1) New drive-through facilities are permitted only as part of an
approved structure which is two or more stories in height.
Such upper floors must provide occupiable space located along
the front facade of the structure.
(2) New drive-through facilities shall be limited to a single curb
cut arrangement [Figure 1], except at corner sites where there
may be permitted a curb cut for each frontage on a public
street.
(3) No drive-through facility shall be located between a public
right-of-way and a principal structure.
(4) See § 4-8-4 for additional requirements.76
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Motor Vehicle Service Stations, and Subsection C,
House and Camping Trailer Sales; Vehicle Sales, Rental, Leasing and Repair; Farm
Equipment Sales or Service, were repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011. See now §
6-4-5 and § 6-4-10D.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:837
Figure 1
5-7-7. Sign Regulations. All sign regulations of § 7-8 shall apply to
properties within the -TNB Overlay, with the following modifications.
A. Permitted Signs. All signs permitted under § 7-8, except as noted
below.
B. Prohibited Signs. All signs prohibited under § 7-8, and those
noted below.
(1) Freestanding pole mounted signs.
(2) Message center signs.
(3) Internally illuminated cabinet or "box" style signs which do not
meet the Sign Lighting Standards of this section.
C. Sign Dimensions.
(1) Ground signs shall not exceed five feet in height and 50 square
feet in area.
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:838
(2) Wall sign area shall not exceed one square foot of area per
linear foot of facade frontage, but shall not be required to be
less than ten square feet.
D. Sign Lighting Standards. Sign lighting, if provided, shall be
employed through one of the following methods.
(1) Externally lit — Externally lit with the use of shielded fixtures
mounted directly above or below the sign area which directs
light at the immediate sign surface, such as with gooseneck
lamps [Figure 3].
Figure 3
(2) Internally lit channel lettering — Internally lit surface applied
channel lettering where the face of each individual letter or
logo is the only portion of the sign which is translucent or
illuminated [Figure 4].
Figure 4
(3) Internally lit cabinet sign — Internally lit cabinet sign where
the lettering or logo itself is the only portion of the sign cabinet
which is translucent or illuminated, provided that the cabinet
is recessed into and flush with the surface of the facade so as to
be architecturally integrated with the design [Figures 5 and 6].
Figure 5 (Night Photo)
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:839
Figure 6 (Day Photo)
(4) Silhouette — Surface applied channel lettering which is
opaque, with an illumination source provided behind the
letters to illuminate each individually by silhouette [Figure 7].
Figure 7
E. Scope and Authority.
(1) New Signs — All new signs submitted for approval after the
effective date that this overlay is established for that property
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
(2) Existing Sign Changes — Any legal sign existing prior to the
approval of the -TNB district which is modified, changed in
name or business use, enlarged, reconstructed, extended,
moved or structurally altered after the effective date of this
overlay is required to be brought into compliance with § 7-8
and this section.
(3) Existing Sign Permit Fee Waiver — Sign permit fees shall be
waived for owners of non-conforming signs who request
approval of a new sign conforming with § 7-8 and the
requirements of this section within one year of the effective
date of this overlay.
5-7-8. Building Design Standards.
A. Applicability. The provisions of these standards shall supersede
those of the underlying zoning districts and shall apply to any of the
following:
(1) A new building;
(2) An addition which exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of
the existing building; or
(3) A property owner may use these standards for an addition that
does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the
existing building.
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:840
B. All new structures shall have a maximum gross floor area of 10,000
square feet unless providing a second story or stories. Such upper
stories must provide occupiable space located along the front
facade of the structure, and shall be no less than 75 percent of the
width of the ground floor frontage. [Figure 8]
Figure 8
C. The third and fourth floor levels of any structure shall step back a
minimum of 40 feet from any adjacent residential property line or
district. [Figure 9]
Figure 9
D. Within the -TNB SubZone '2', the third floor level of any structure
shall step back from the vertical plane of the facade a minimum of
ten feet along any facade that is adjacent to a street. [Figure 10]
Figure 10
E. All new structures shall provide commercial retail shops, services,
public or civic uses, or restaurant uses at the ground floor level
directly facing and clearly visible from the sidewalk or public way.
Floor areas specifically dedicated for office or residential uses, if
provided, shall be located on upper floors only. This provision shall
not apply to new structures constructed in the Office Building
zoning district.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:841
F. The Planning Director may require the front setback of new
construction to align with the setbacks of neighboring structures,
or both front and side setbacks for corner lots.
G. Prohibited Exterior Materials.
(1) Exterior building materials visible from a street or abutting a
residential district shall not be constructed of the following:
Facade Imitation Brick Siding, Asphalt Siding or Asbestos
Siding Plain Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU) bare or
painted Plywood, T-111 or unfinished lumber grade
wood Corrugated Metal, mirrored or similar highly
reflective siding or panels
Other Asphalt Sidewalks / Asphalt Walkways
H. Facade Articulation.
(1) No facade facing a street shall contain an area of wall without
windows, doorways or other openings which extends more
than 20 feet in the horizontal direction and eight feet in the
vertical direction. ['A' in Figure 11]
(2) No facade facing a street shall contain an area of blank wall
which extends more than ten feet in the horizontal direction
and eight feet in the vertical direction without articulation in
the plane of the facade. Articulations such as pilasters,
windows or corbelled brickwork shall be used which are no
less than three inches in depth to create decorative relief and
cast shadows, as directed by the Planning Board or Planning
Director, as applicable. ['B' in Figure 11]
(a) Control and expansion joints, awnings, signs or other
approved architectural elements that meet this standard
shall not constitute blank wall area.
(3) The ground floor facade area and pedestrian areas facing a
street shall exhibit a higher or equal percentage of facade
articulation with larger window openings and increased facade
depth than the upper floor facade area.
(4) Ground floor storefront display windows shall be between four
and eight feet in height, and constitute at least 70 percent of
the ground floor facade area facing a street. ['C' in Figure 11]
(5) Windows of upper floor areas shall constitute no less than 25
percent of the upper floor facade area. ['D' in Figure 11]
(6) The primary entry area shall be highlighted by increased
massing or fenestration. ['E' in Figure 11] Front facades which
are at or very near the property line shall utilize a recessed
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:842
doorway to prevent the doors from swinging into the sidewalk
area.
(7) The use of facade articulation shall be used to create specific
areas for signage. ['F' in Figure 11]
(8) False, blackout or otherwise blank windows are not permitted
along ground floor facade areas facing a street.
Figure 11
I. Building Entrances.
(1) Nonresidential buildings shall provide a minimum of one
building entrance oriented toward the street.
5-7-9. Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening. All landscaping regulations
of § 7-2 shall apply to properties within the -TNB Overlay, with the
following exceptions:
A. New developments are not required to comply with the full extent
of the landscaping provisions of § 7-2 under the following
conditions:
(1) Where the front yard is less than ten feet, § 7-2-3A(2) shall not
apply. One or more alternatives to "at-grade" landscaping shall
be provided in front of the building, including but not limited to
portable/temporary raised planters, window boxes, hanging
baskets, vines or other method approved by the Planning
Director.
(2) Where the dimension of the side yard is less than ten feet or
the combined side yards is less than 15 feet, § 7-2-4B shall not
apply. Where space and conditions permit, landscaping shall be
provided to soften the appearance of buildings and paved
areas.
(3) Where the dimension of the rear yard is less than ten feet or
the combined rear yards is less than 15 feet, § 7-2-4B shall not
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:843
apply. Where space and conditions permit, landscaping shall
be provided to soften the appearance of buildings and paved
areas.
B. Developed properties existing prior to the approval of the -TNB
district seeking approval for a modification to a previously
approved site plan are not required to comply with the full extent of
the landscaping provisions of § 7-2 under the following conditions:
(1) The existing structures on the site are not proposed to be
demolished or reduced in size more than 50 percent from their
current footprint area, and;
(2) The total amount of impervious surface area on the site
remains the same or is being reduced through the addition of
new landscaped greenspace areas, and;
(3) The work provides improved front yard landscaping, as defined
in § 5-7-9C.
(4) If the above conditions are met, the Planning Board or
Planning Director, as applicable, is authorized to direct the
applicant to provide landscaping improvements in keeping
with the purpose and general intent of § 7-2 as deemed
appropriate.
C. Improved Front Yard Landscaping: Developed commercial
properties existing prior to the approval of the -TNB district which
propose to reconfigure any existing front yard parking areas shall
minimize existing curb cut widths to the maximum extent
practicable, as determined by the Planning Board or Planning
Director, as applicable, and replace existing front yard asphalt
surfaces with one of the following landscaping improvements:
(1) Landscaped Parking Buffer One — A landscaped buffer planted
along the edge of the public right-of-way which separates the
sidewalk from adjacent parking areas, measuring no less than
five feet in depth (measured away from the road) which must
include;
(a) Shade or ornamental trees of a size consistent with
§ 7-2-3A(1)(g) of the Zoning Ordinance provided at the
rate of one tree for every 150 square feet of landscaping
buffer (minimum one).
(b) A mix of evergreen shrubs and perennials no less than
three feet in height, provided at the rate of one shrub for
every ten square feet of landscaping (minimum of three).
(c) Groundcover plants or grass for all remaining landscaped
area.
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-7
1:844
Figure 12 — Landscape Parking Buffer One
(2) Landscaped Parking Buffer Two — A landscaped buffer planted
along the edge of the public right-of-way which separates the
sidewalk from adjacent parking areas, which must include;
(a) A decorative masonry wall or fence measuring between 24
and 36 inches in height located between the landscaped
area and the parking lot. All masonry wall or fence
materials must be approved by the Planning Board or
Planning Director, as applicable.
(b) Where space permits, an optional mix of evergreen shrubs
and perennials between 12 and 36 inches in height,
provided at the rate of one shrub for every ten square feet
of landscaping (minimum of three) with groundcover
plants or grass for all remaining landscaped area.
Figure 13 — Landscape Parking Buffer Two
(3) The above landscaping options shall be provided for the
available width of the front yard area, as deemed appropriate
by the Planning Board or Planning Director, as applicable, but
not less than nine feet wide.
(4) Alternate Landscaped Parking Buffer. In the event of
significant site constraints which would prohibit the inclusion
of the landscaped parking buffers without a loss of necessary
egress or parking spaces, an alternative buffer design may be
substituted with Planning Board or Planning Director approval,
as applicable.
D. For all properties, a minimum of ten percent of the area of the site
not covered by buildings shall be devoted to a planted area (i.e. bioswale
or rain garden) for the purpose of treating non-roof
generated storm water runoff to prevent pollution of local
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:845
§ 5-8. Live-Work District 1 (LW-1) [Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
13-2012]
waterways. This function can be accommodated in at-grade
landscaped areas on-site such as required parking yard areas and
parking area landscaped islands, or off-site as part of a coordinated
stormwater management facility.
Figure 14 — Before and after simulation of the goals of the
overlay landscaping requirements. Create a more attractive
streetscape by providing landscaped buffers between the road and
adjacent parking lots, and reduce the size of existing curb cuts
widths.
5-8-1. Purpose To provide areas along arterials and major collectors for
live-work uses, which combine residential dwellings with limited on-site
working/commercial space. Such uses can help support a mixed-use
environment, promote redevelopment and the reuse of existing
buildings, provide alternative space for small businesses, and protect
adjacent residential areas from intensive commercial development.
5-8-2. Principal and Special Uses
A. Permitted Uses and Structures LW-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
§ 5-7 AMHERST CODE § 5-8
1:846
LW-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Single-family detached
Attached dwelling § 6-2-1
Upper-story dwelling unit
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Daycare center, nursery or other
private school
§ 6-3-2
Minor utilities
Place of worship § 6-3-3
Public utility service structure or
facility
§ 6-3-5
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
COMMERCIAL USES
Advertising agency
Apparel repair and alterations
and shoe repair
Art studio
Beauty or barber shop
Bed and breakfast § 6-4-2
Office
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:847
LW-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Photography studio
Production and sale of arts and
crafts made on-site
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards
LW-1 Principal Use Dimensional
Standards Vehicle Use Area
Min. lot width 40 ft
Min. yards
Front yard 25 ft 5 ft
Rear yard (abutting
residential/
nonresidential)
25 ft/25 ft 15 ft/none required
Each side yard
(abutting
residential/
nonresidential)
5 ft/5 ft 15 ft/none required
Corner lot See § 2-5-2A(5)
Through lot See § 2-5-2A(2)
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 50%
Min. floor area for
detached dwelling units
(dwelling only)
Under 2 stories 1,000 sf
2 or more stories 1,200 sf
Min. floor area for
attached
400 sf
dwelling units (dwelling
only)
640 sf
0 bedroom 760 sf
1 bedroom 1,000 sf
§ 5-8 AMHERST CODE § 5-8
1:848
LW-1 Principal Use Dimensional
Standards Vehicle Use Area
2 bedroom 1,200 sf
3 bedroom
4 bedroom
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
5-8-3. Accessory Uses and Structures
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures The following
accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal
use are allowed subject to the requirements of § 6-8, Accessory
Uses or Part 7, General Development Standards.
LW-1 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units § 6-8-2
Detached private garages and parking
areas
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 7-1, § 5-8-4B
Private gardens
Solar energy systems [Added
12-11-2017 by L.L. No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Rooming and boarding of not more than
two persons only when the dwelling is
occupied by the actual record owner
thereof
Signs § 7-8, § 5-8-4C
Swimming pools § 6-8-12
Other Uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
B. Dimensional Standards
LW-1 Accessory Use Dimensional Standards
Min. building separation 5 ft
Min. from lot line 3 ft
Max. height 20 ft
Max. building coverage (including
principal structure)
55%
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:849
Note: For explanation of measurements, computations, and
exceptions see § 2-5.
5-8-4. General Development Standards
A. Mix of Uses
(1) No more than two residential units and one commercial use
shall be permitted per parcel.
(2) Within each principal structure, the floor area devoted to
commercial uses shall not exceed 50% of the total principal
structure floor area, up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet.
B. Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Stacking Facilities All offstreet
parking, loading and stacking requirements as stated in § 7-1
shall apply as a maximum for properties within the LW-1 district.
C. Sign Regulations All sign regulations of § 7-8 shall apply to
properties within the LW-1 district, with the following
modifications:
(1) Permitted signs shall be limited to ground, wall and awning
signs only. Internally-lit signs shall not be permitted.
(2) A maximum of twelve square feet of total sign area shall be
permitted. Signage shall be limited to one of the permitted sign
types.
D. Other Development Standards
(1) All new principal structures shall have a pitched roof, such as a
hip, gable, or gambrel roof. Flat roofs shall not be permitted.
(2) No equipment or process shall be used which creates
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall
be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises.
(3) All nonresidential activities shall be limited to the hours
between 8 AM and 9 PM.
(4) Except for signage and parking permitted under this
Ordinance, no display pertaining to the commercial use shall
be visible from outside the dwelling.
(5) Development in the L-W district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
§ 5-8 AMHERST CODE § 5-8
1:850
§ 5-9. Recreation Conservation District (RC) [Added 2-24-2014 by
L.L. No. 5-2014]
LW-1 General Development Standards
Off-Street Parking, Loading and
Stacking
§ 7-1
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
Bulk Storage of Combustible or
Flammable Liquids
§ 7-10
5-9-1. Purpose To provide a special zoning classification primarily for
public, private and civic uses related to recreation and conservation.
5-9-2. Principal and Special Uses
A. Permitted Uses and Structures RC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
OPEN USES
No open uses allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Day-care center [Added
7-7-2014 by L.L. No. 22-2014]
§ 6-3-2
Indoor recreation facilities
[Amended 10-9-2017 by L.L.
No. 21-2017]
Outdoor recreation facilities
Outdoor ice-skating facility
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:851
RC Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Outdoor tennis, racquetball or
handball facility
Park or open space
Place of worship 6-3-3
Public or private golf course and
country club [Added 7-7-2014
by L.L. No. 22-2014]
Public utility service structure or
facility
6-3-4
Swimming facility
Telecommunication facility § 6-7
Wildlife reservation or
conservation area
COMMERCIAL
No commercial uses allowed
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
B. Dimensional Standards
For parcels 30 acres in size or more as of July 7, 2014, the Planned
Unit Development process is required. See § 6-9. [Added 7-7-2014
by L.L. No. 22-2014; amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
RC Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. lot width None
Min. front yard
Height of structure for first
35 ft.
20 ft 15 ft*
Height of structure for any
portion of building above 35
ft.
30 ft 15 ft*
§ 5-9 AMHERST CODE § 5-9
1:852
RC Principal Use Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Area
Min. rear yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
50 ft/15 ft 25 ft*/5 ft*
Min. side yard (abutting
residential**/nonresidential)
50 ft/15 ft 25 ft*/5 ft*
Max. height 65 ft
Max. building coverage 10%
* The entire area must be landscaped
** R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7, PRD, PDD, PRD, NCD
5-9-3. Accessory Uses and Structures
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
RC Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 7-2
Off-street parking, loading,
and stacking
§ 7-1
Private schools and day-care
centers, accredited when
required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of
worship
Solar energy systems
[Added 12-11-2017 by L.L.
No. 24-2017]
§ 6-10
Residence for staff
Signs § 7-8
Other uses and structures
customarily incidental to the
principal use
B. Dimensional Standards The dimensional standards for an
accessory use or structure shall be the same as those for the
principal use in § 5-9-2B.
5-9-4. General Development Standards
A. Fences, walls or plantings or other screening materials may be
required to provide visual screening between adjacent structures
and uses and parking or other areas or uses on the parcel.
§ 5-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:853
B. Exterior wall surfaces of buildings shall be of masonry, wood, glass,
stone or metal or a combination of these materials. Exterior wall
facings and mansard roofs shall not include asbestos or corrugated
metal products. Any side or rear wall facing a street, residential
district or public or semi-public area shall consist of the same
facing materials as the building front.
C. Interior side or rear yards separating parking, loading and stacking
area from lot lines are not required for unified developments.
D. Development in the RC district shall also comply with the
requirements referenced in the table below.
RC
General Development
Standards
Off-Street Parking § 7-1
Landscaping and Buffering § 7-2
Site Lighting § 7-3
Outdoor Storage and Display § 7-4
Fences and Walls § 7-5
Access and Circulation § 7-6
Flood Damage Prevention § 7-7
Sign Regulations § 7-8
Performance Standards § 7-9
§ 5-9 AMHERST CODE § 5-9
1:854
PART 6.
USE REGULATIONS
§ 6-1. Open Use Standards
§ 6-2. Residential Use Standards
6-1-1. Stables, Public or Private. A stable is permitted in accordance with
the district use tables in Part 3 or Part 5, subject to the following
standards.
A. A maximum of two horses shall be allowed on the first two acres
with an additional horse allowed for each additional two acres.
B. The stable and all exercise tracks shall be located at least 50 feet
from any lot line; and
C. The manure from such stables shall be stored in tightly covered
containers, which will control odor and insects.
6-2-1.Attached Dwelling. An attached dwelling is permitted in accordance
with the district use tables in Part 3, 4 or Part 5, subject to the following
standards.
A. There shall be only one attached dwelling structure per lot.
B. The attached dwelling shall not exceed four units per structure.
6-2-2. Assisted Group Living. An assisted group living facility including
elderly or handicapped group living, adult care facility, a nursing home
and a senior citizen home is permitted in accordance with district use
tables in Part 3 or Part 5, subject to the following standards.
A. The minimum floor area shall conform to the minimum floor area
requirements stated in the affected district. Alternatively, if the
sum of the floor areas of all bedrooms, dining areas, recreation
rooms, and other common living areas divided by the total number
of bedrooms is equal to 400 square feet or more, the facility shall
be permitted.
B. Any applicable requirements of NY Social Services Law, Chapter
55.
6-2-3.Common Recreation. A common recreation use or structure is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 3, subject to
the following standards.
A. The land is owned by a homeowners' association or other common
ownership and is maintained and used only by the members of the
association or the owners in common, their families and guests;
B. The members of the association or common owners are residents of
the subdivision within which the structure or use is located; and
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:855
C. All buildings shall be located at least seventy-five feet from any
adjoining residential lot line and all other structures and uses shall
be at least 25 feet away.
6-2-4. Dormitory. A dormitory-is permitted in accordance with the district
use tables in Part 3, subject to the following standards. [Amended
9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider proximity to campus
and residential areas, traffic impact and the availability of public
transportation when reviewing a special use permit for a dormitory.
B. The dormitory shall meet the off-street parking requirements in
§ 7-1-6. Such requirements shall not be eligible for a variance.
6-2-5.Patio Home. A patio home is permitted in accordance with the
district use tables in Part 3 or Part 5, subject to the following standards.
A. Description. The patio home is a single-family detached dwelling
unit, similar to a zero lot line home, placed on a small lot. Due to
the modest area of the lot, the rear yard may be enclosed by a wall,
while still preserving a narrow front yard. Where an alley is
provided, all garage access shall take place from the alley.
B. Patio House Dimensional Standards.
(1) Notwithstanding the dimensional standards for the district in
which a patio home is permitted, a patio home shall comply
with the following standards.
Patio Home Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 5,000 sf
Min. lot width 40 ft
Min. front yard 12 ft
Min. garage setback from street ROW 20 ft
Min. rear yard 10 ft
Min. side yard —
Min. patio area 1,000 sq ft
Min. patio width 20 ft
§ 6-2 AMHERST CODE § 6-2
1:856
Patio Home Standards
Min. building separation 12 ft
Max. height 28 ft
Max. building coverage 40%
Min. floor area 1,000 sq ft
(2) A garage with alley access may extend into the rear setback.
6-2-6. Upper-Story Dwelling Unit. An upper-story dwelling unit is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 4 or Part 5,
subject to the following standards.
A. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be as follows: 400
sq ft for a zero bedroom unit; 640 sq ft for a one bedroom unit; 760
sq ft for a two bedroom unit; 1,000 sq ft for a three bedroom unit,
and 1,200 sq ft for a four bedroom unit. [Amended 2-4-2008 by
L.L. No. 1-2008]
B. Parking may be shared with ground floor uses, where appropriate.
6-2-7. Zero Lot Line Home. A zero lot line home is permitted in accordance
with the district use tables in Part 3 or Part 5, subject to the following
standards.
A. Description. The zero lot line home is a single-family detached
dwelling unit positioned on one side lot line without any setback.
The home has private yards on three sides of the building,
including a wider side yard comprising the equivalent of two side
yards for conventional detached housing. Garage access may take
place from the front or the rear of the lot.
B. Zero Lot Line Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding the
dimensional standards for the district in which a zero lot line home
is permitted, a zero lot line home shall comply with the following
standards.
Zero Lot Line Home Standards
Min. lot area (per dwelling) 5,000 sf
Min. lot width 40 ft
§ 6-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:857
Zero Lot Line Home Standards
Min. front yard 15 ft
Min. garage setback from street ROW 20 ft
Min. rear yard 10 ft
Min. side yard —
Min. building separation 12 ft
Max. height 2 stories (up to 35
ft)
Max. building coverage 40%
C. Setbacks.
(1) The side yard setback may be reduced to zero on one side of
the home. This reduction is not permitted on the front or rear
yard setback or on the side yard setback adjacent to lots that
are not within the zero lot line project.
(2) A garage with alley access may extend into the rear setback.
D. Maintenance Easement. An easement between the two property
owners to allow for maintenance or repair of the home shall be
required when the roof overhang or side wall of the house are
within four feet of the adjacent property line. The easement on the
adjacent property shall provide at least five feet of unobstructed
space. The easement shall be recorded on the deed for the lot
where the projection occurs.
§ 6-2 AMHERST CODE § 6-2
1:858
§ 6-3. Public and Civic Use Standards
E. Privacy. If the sidewall of the house is on the property line, or
within three feet of the property line, windows or other openings
that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are not
permitted. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of
the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent
window, are permitted.
6-2-8. Fraternity or Sorority House. Permitted only as an accessory use to
a college, university, or other educational institution. [Added 9-6-2016
by L.L. No. 10-2016]
A. Located a minimum of 250 feet from any lot in the R-R, SA, R-1, R-2,
R-3, CR3-A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7, MHR-8,
AG, NCD, PRD, PDD, TND, or TNB Overlay districts.
B. Maintained for persons enrolled in a college, university, or other
educational institution and located entirely on the campus of that
institution.
C. Operated by a nationally chartered membership organization or a
locally chartered organization recognized by the educational
institution on which it is located.
D. On-site management and security is provided 24 hours/day.
E. A minimum 1.25 spaces of off-street parking for each bed is
required.
6-3-1. Cemetery or Mausoleum. A cemetery or mausoleum is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables in Part 5, subject to the
following standards.
A. A cemetery shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any residential
district. A mausoleum shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
residential district. [Amended 4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
§ 6-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:859
B. Any cemetery shall contain a single continuous area of 20 acres or
more.
6-3-2. Day Care. A day care is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 3, Part 4, or Part 5 subject to NY Social Services Law,
Chapter 55, Article 6, Children.
6-3-3. Place of Worship. A place of worship is permitted in accordance with
the district use tables in Part 3, Part 4 or Part 5, subject to the following
standards.
A. The minimum lot area shall be one acre and the minimum lot width
shall be 200 feet.
B. The minimum yards for structures, parking, loading and stacking
areas shall be in accordance with the following table.
Structure Height
Yard
Up to 30
ft
30 ft or
more
Parking,
Loading &
Stacking
Area
Front, from right-of-way
of a dedicated street
50 15 ft*
Side, abutting a
residential district
25 10 ft*
Rear, abutting a
residential district
50 10 ft*
Side and rear, abutting
a nonresidential district
15
Add 1
additional
foot of
setback on
all sides for
every foot
of height
over 30
feet
5 ft*
* Entire area shall be landscaped
C. Maximum building coverage shall be 25 percent.
D. Maximum structure height shall be 65 feet.
E. Schools and day-care centers are permitted as an accessory use.
6-3-4. Public Utility Service Structure or Facility. A public utility service
structure or facility is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 3, Part 4 or Part 5 subject to the following:
A. The facility shall be secured.
B. The facility shall not be used for storage of vehicles or fuels for
vehicles.
C. The site plan for the proposed structure shall be reviewed by the
Planning Director before a hearing is held by the ZBA. The
Planning Director shall submit a written report to the ZBA
§ 6-3 AMHERST CODE § 6-3
1:860
containing its analysis of the proposal under the standards set forth
in § 8-6-6. Site plan submittal and review under § 8-7 shall not be
required.
6-3-5. Public Works Construction Yard. A public works construction yard
is permitted in accordance with the districts' "Permitted Use and
Structures" tables in Part 4, subject to the following standards. [Added
12-7-2009 by L.L. No. 19-2009]
A. Such yard shall be permitted on a temporary basis by the
Commissioner of Building for a period not to exceed the terms of
the public works construction contract and restoration period or
one year, whichever is less. The applicant shall submit an operation
plan for the location and extent of activities to occur on the site,
and a site restoration plan. The operation plan shall include any
proposed changes to the drainage system. A public works
construction yard may continue to be operated for a period
exceeding one year upon approval of a Temporary Use Permit by
the ZBA. If approved, the Temporary Use Permit shall stipulate the
duration of the permit and all restrictions or conditions deemed
appropriate by the ZBA.
B. The yard shall be maintained in such a manner that it is neither
obnoxious nor offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke,
gas, noise, vibration, electromagnetic disturbance, radiation or
other nuisance situation as determined by the Commissioner of
Building.
C. All noise-making activities that are audible at the property line of
the public works construction yard shall be limited to the house
stipulated in Chapter 138, Noise, of the Town of Amherst Code.
Additionally, in the OB, NB, GB, MS, SC, RD, and ST districts, the
hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from
7 A.M. to 7 P.M.
D. A public works construction yard shall not be located within 250
feet of a residential zoning district, a property containing a daycare
center or any other occupied building.
E. When a public works construction yard is located within 500 feet of
a residential property, fencing of the entire perimeter of the public
works construction yard shall be required. The fencing shall be
substantially opaque with a minimum height of seven feet a
maximum height of ten feet. The point of access to the yard shall be
provided with a gate that is secured when the yard is not in use.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
F. Only one point of access to the public works construction yard shall
be permitted. Such access shall be provided directly to a public
right-of-way.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:861
G. The storage or stockpiling of materials and supplies within the
construction yard shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet.
H. The maximum area of a public works construction yard shall be one
acre.
I. The operation for any on-site crushing of stone, concrete or similar
processing shall not be conducted within 500 feet of a residential
zoning district listed in Part 3 of this Zoning Ordinance. The hours
of operation for any on-site crushing of stone, concrete or similar
processing shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 8 A.M.
to 5 P.M. Additionally, such activity shall not be conducted on any
day that is a national (United States) holiday. [Amended 3-4-2019
by L.L. No. 6-2019]
J. Any lighting placed on the site shall be oriented so as to direct
glare or excessive illumination away from the public right-of-way
and adjoining properties.
K. Unless otherwise approved by this ordinance, no signage shall be
permitted on the site.
L. The yard shall be maintained in good condition during the time of
its use. Material and construction residue and debris shall not be
permitted to accumulate. Grass shall be regularly mowed and weed
growth controlled.
M. In the event that the conditions of this section are not adhered to,
the Commissioner of Building may issue a stop work order.
N. Upon completion of construction, all materials, supplies,
equipment and debris associated with the yard's activities shall be
completely removed and the area restored to its original vegetative
and topographic state as stipulated in the site reclamation plan
within 90 days.
O. Fee. The fee for the operation of a public works construction yard
shall be one-hundred dollars ($100) for each year, or portion
thereof, of operation. This fee shall be in addition to any fee
required for the application of a Temporary Use Permit from the
ZBA. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
6-3-6. Archery and Shooting Club, Outdoor Upon approval of a special
use permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals, an archery and shooting
club is permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 5,
subject to the following standards. [Added 2-24-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
A. The minimum site area shall be 15 acres.
B. The facility owner shall provide to the Town a hold-harmless
agreement signed by all owners of the facility and to remain valid
throughout the existence of the club.
§ 6-3 AMHERST CODE § 6-3
1:862
§ 6-4. Commercial Use Standards
C. The minimum distance from any firing point measured in the
direction of fire to the nearest property line shall be a minimum of
500 feet and a minimum of 3,000 feet from any occupied structure.
D. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
E. The facility shall be monitored at all times by an attendant, and no
unsupervised clients shall be permitted in any of the shooting
areas.
F. All facilities to be designed and constructed in accordance with
nationally recognized guidelines for such facilities, such as the
National Rifle Association's The Range Manual: A Guide to
Planning and Construction.
G. All construction of such facilities shall comply with all codes
including the Town fire code and building code.
H. The entire perimeter of all hunting and shooting clubs shall be
fenced and signed to reduce the potential for trespassing into firing
zones. Warning signs identifying the range shall be posted around
the perimeter of the parcel on which the shooting range is located
at minimum intervals of 75 feet.
I. No sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted
on the property.
6-3-7. Outdoor Recreation Facility An outdoor recreation facility is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 5, provided
that the facility is not within 50 feet from an abutting residential district
or use. [Added 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
6-4-1. Animal Grooming, Cat Boarding Facility, Animal Hospital or
Veterinarian. An animal grooming facility, cat boarding facility, animal
hospital or veterinarian is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 4 or Part 5, provided that all activity associated with the
operation shall take place within a completely enclosed building.
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
6-4-2. Bed and Breakfast. A bed and breakfast establishment is permitted
subject to the approval of a special use permit by the ZBA and in
accordance with the following standards:
A. A bed and breakfast shall only be established in a single-family
detached dwelling.
B. A maximum of four guestrooms and a maximum of 10 overnight
guests at any time shall be permitted in any one bed and breakfast
establishment.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:863
C. No food preparation, except beverages, is allowed within individual
guestrooms. Meal service may only be provided to overnight
guests.
D. All parking areas on property (except driveways) shall be behind
the required building setback line and shall be screened from the
view of adjacent residences to a height of six feet by a solid
screening fence, or dense shrubs and vegetation.
E. The bed and breakfast shall be located adjacent to and take access
from a collector or arterial street only, as defined by the Town and
this ordinance.
F. The operator of the bed and breakfast shall be a full-time resident
of the dwelling in which the bed and breakfast establishment is
housed.
G. No exterior evidence of the bed and breakfast establishment shall
be allowed, except for parking and one attached sign no larger than
eight square feet. No additional advertising of any kind is allowed
on site. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have discretion
regarding the location of the attached sign.
H. Guests for events or similar functions shall be limited to a total of
15 (including overnight guests).
I. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to impose
additional reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed bed and breakfast
establishment.
6-4-3. Car Wash. A car wash is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 4 however, unenclosed overnight parking of motor
vehicles at a car wash is prohibited.
6-4-4. Contracting or Construction Services. Contracting or
construction services are permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 4 or Part 5, provided that there shall be no storage of the
contractor's materials or equipment.
6-4-5. Farm Equipment Sales or Service and House and Camping
Trailer Sales. Farm equipment sales or service or house and camping
trailer sales, when permitted in a TNB Overlay District, shall comply
with the following standards: [Added 12-19-2011 by L.L. No.
34-201177]
(1) No vehicle storage, display or parking shall be permitted between
the principal structure and front lot line.
(2) No service bay or garage doors shall face the street.
77.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsections 6-4-5 through 6-4-11 as
Subsections 6-4-6 through 6-4-12, respectively.
§ 6-4 AMHERST CODE § 6-4
1:864
(3) Display vehicles shall be arranged in an orderly fashion and provide
reasonable room for pedestrian and vehicular maneuvering.
6-4-6. Laundromat, Cleaning and Dyeing Outlets and Pickup Stations.
A laundromat, cleaning and dyeing outlet or pickup station is permitted
in accordance with the district use tables in Part 4 or Part 5 provided
that such use shall have a gross floor area that does not exceed 5,000
square feet.
6-4-7. Media Store with Some Sexually Oriented Media. A retail book,
video or other media store that has sexually explicit media that
constitutes more than ten percent but no more than 30 percent of its
inventory or that occupies more than ten percent but no more than 30
percent of its gross public floor area shall be permitted and shall not be
subject to the standards for a sexually oriented media store provided
that: [Added 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008]
A. The sexually explicit media is kept in a separate room from the rest
of the inventory of the store;
B. Access to the separate room is available only to persons 18 years or
older;
C. Access to the room is through a solid door, accessed by an
electronic control device monitored by the clerk or manager on
duty through direct visual control; and
D. Customers and activities in the room are visible at all times to
management or the clerk on duty through a video system located at
the clerk's or manager's counter.
6-4-8. Private Parking Facility. A private parking facility is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables in Part 5 subject to the following
standards.
A. The parcel served by such facilities shall be located within 250 feet
of the nearest point of the parking facilities. For developments
greater than 60,000 square feet, the parking facilities shall be
located within 500 feet.
B. When the private parking facilities are being used to meet the
minimum required parking requirements for a building, the use of
the private parking facilities shall be provided at all times that the
building is in use.
6-4-9. Restaurant With Outdoor Dining. A restaurant with outdoor dining
is permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 4 or Part
5, subject to the following standards.
A. A minimum of five feet of clear walkway along the curb and leading
to the entrance of the establishment shall be free of tables and
other impediments.
§ 6-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:865
B. Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided in the outdoor dining
area.
C. Where 24 or less seats are located in the outdoor dining area, such
seats need not be included in calculating the minimum parking
requirement for the restaurant. [Amended 10-9-2017 by L.L. No.
21-2017]
D. Outdoor dining shall be permitted between the hours of:
(1) 6 AM and 10 PM, Sunday through Thursday.
(2) 6 AM and 11 PM, Friday and Saturday.
E. Patrons shall be permitted to remain outdoors to complete meals
and beverages served before the latest hours indicated above.
Outdoor dining shall be prohibited at any other time.
F. Outdoor dining may be permitted after the hours listed in § 6-4-9D,
provided a special use permit is granted in accordance with § 8-6.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011]
6-4-10. Service Station. A service station is permitted in accordance with
the district use tables in Part 4 or Part 5, subject to the following
standards.
A. All Permitted Districts. Unenclosed parking of motor vehicles at
service stations shall be limited to four vehicles, and no vehicle
shall remain so parked in excess of 24 hours. Unenclosed overnight
parking of motor vehicles at motor vehicle washing establishments
is prohibited.
B. MS and SC District.
(1) Fuel pumps and pump islands may be located in a required
side or rear yard but shall not be located in any required yard
abutting a residential district.
(2) All fuel pumps and pump islands shall be at least 10 feet from
any building.
(3) All fuel pumps, pump islands and canopies shall be at least 20
feet from any lot line.
C. TND District.
(1) No more than eight pumps shall be permitted.
(2) If more than four pumps are proposed, the pumps shall be split
and located on either side of the building.
(3) No signs shall be located on any canopy over the pumps.
(4) All canopy lighting shall meet the requirements of § 7-3.
§ 6-4 AMHERST CODE § 6-4
1:866
D. TNB Overlay District. [Added 12-19-2011 by L.L. No.
34-2011, § 2, item 5; amended 12-19-2011 by L.L. No.
34-2011, § 3, item 1; 11-5-2012 by L.L. No. 17-2012]
a. The design of any fuel canopy structure shall relate in form,
materials, color and architectural style to the principal
structure on the premises.
b. The design of the fuel canopy shall employ a non-illuminated
fascia. Signage shall be of similar style, color and materials as
signage on the principal structure.
c. The design of the fuel island canopy shall include fully recessed
lighting arranged and shielded so that the sources or lenses of
such illumination are not visible from any street or adjoining
property. The lighting levels shall comply with the
requirements of § 7-3-4.
6-4-11.Vehicle Parts Sales. A vehicles parts sales establishment is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 4, subject to
the following standards.
A. Vehicles shall be serviced only with parts bought on-site.
B. Space for servicing vehicles shall be limited to 15 percent of the
retail space floor area and shall not exceed 15,000 square feet.
6-4-12.Vehicle Sales, Rental, Leasing and Related Repair. [Amended
12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 34-2011]
A. All Permitted Districts. A vehicles sales, rental or leasing
establishment is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 4, subject to the following standards. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(1) All vehicle storage shall occur on paved surfaces except for
vehicle storage located behind the rear line of any principal
building, which may occur on any surface approved by the
Commissioner of Building.
(2) No outdoor speakers shall be permitted.
(3) Wheel stops or other permanent barriers shall be installed to
prevent vehicles from encroaching on required setbacks or
landscaping.
(4) Display vehicles shall be arranged in an orderly fashion and
provide reasonable room for pedestrian and vehicular
maneuvering.
(5) In the MS district, such uses shall require a minimum lot area
of one-half acre.
§ 6-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:867
(6) In the GB district, used car sales and car rental shall be in
conjunction with new car sales only and shall be limited to less
than 50 percent of total automobile inventory on the same lot
as the new car sale usage.
(7) In a GB district that abuts a residential district, car sales and
service establishments must meet the following standards:
(a) Hours of operation are limited from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(b) Overhead doors shall not face a residential district and
doors will be closed except for entry and exit of vehicles.
(c) The minimum setback to paved areas shall be 25 feet.
B. TNB Overlay District
(1) No vehicle storage, display or parking shall be permitted
between the principal structure and front lot line.
(2) No service bay or garage doors shall face the street.
(3) Display vehicles shall be arranged in an orderly fashion and
provide reasonable room for pedestrian and vehicular
maneuvering.
6-4-13.Dog Day Care Facilities. A facility for the day care and
socialization of dogs is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables in Part 4 or Part 5 subject to the following standards. [Added
10-17-2011 by L.L. No. 25-2011; amended 11-5-2012 by L.L. No.
17-2012]
A. Dogs may be groomed, trained, exercised and socialized, but not
boarded overnight, bred or sold.
B. All activities related to the dog day care facility shall be undertaken
indoors with the exception of short-term outdoor periods for the
dogs to relieve themselves. Outdoor areas shall be located a
minimum of 250 feet from the nearest residential district boundary
and shall be screened by solid wood, vinyl or masonry fencing that
is eight (8) feet high.
C. Dog day care facilities may include as an accessory use the retail
sale of products related to the operation of the facility.
D. The operator of the facility will be required to maintain all required
licenses and permits.
E. All animal waste must be placed in closed waste disposal
containers and collected and disposed of by a qualified waste
disposal company at least weekly.
§ 6-4 AMHERST CODE § 6-4
1:868
§ 6-5. Industrial Use Standards
§ 6-6. Standards for Sexually Oriented Businesses [Added 7-7-2008
by L.L. No. 9-2008]
F. A building for a dog day care facility shall be soundproofed to
maintain a noise level that is less than 35 dBA as measured at the
property line or common wall if within a multi-tenant building.
G. The hours of operation of a dog day care facility shall begin no
earlier than 6:00 AM and shall end no later than 9:00 pm.
6-5-1. Research and Development Uses. Research and development uses
listed in the district tables in Part 4 shall be permitted provided that no
such use shall occupy more than 15 percent of the gross floor area of
the occupant space within which it is located and no such use shall
exceed 25,000 square feet of the gross floor area of the building.
6-6-1. Purpose. [Amended 2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Concurrently with a major revision to this Zoning Ordinance, the
Town of Amherst retained Eric Damian Kelly, Ph.D., FAICP, and
Connie B. Cooper, FAICP, working under Duncan Associates, to
study the issues related to sexually oriented businesses in the Town
and in the surrounding region. In a report entitled "Findings and
Recommendations, Sexually Oriented Entertainment and Related
Businesses," dated August 2005, Kelly and Cooper summarized
studies from other communities, including several in New York
State, documenting the negative secondary effects that sexually
oriented businesses may have on property values and the negative
effects that such businesses may have on the community through
increases in crime around them. As part of their work, Cooper and
Kelly provided to the Town copies of major studies from other
communities, which have also been made available to the Town
Board. Based on Kelly and Cooper's report and on these other
studies, the Town Board has made specific findings regarding such
secondary effects and has concluded that the regulations contained
in this Article provide an appropriate and narrowly tailored
approach to limiting the negative secondary effects of such
businesses while allowing the types of communication protected by
the First Amendment to occur in Amherst, limited only by
appropriate regulations on the place and context of such
communications.
B. The Constitution and laws of the State of New York grant to the
Town of Amherst powers, especially police power, to enact
reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise
sexually oriented entertainment establishments in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 6-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:869
C. It is not the intent of the Town of Amherst in enacting this
Ordinance to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the
United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the
Town of Amherst to impose any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, video tapes, books and/or other
materials. Further, by enacting this Ordinance, the Town of
Amherst does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult
to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by
the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor does it intend to
restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that
distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may
have.
6-6-2. Restrictions Affecting Sexually Oriented Uses. [Amended
2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Sexually oriented media stores, sex shops, and other sexually
oriented businesses to which this section may be applicable by
cross-reference, shall be permitted uses in the zoning districts in
which they are listed as such only if they also comply with the
following locational standards:
(1) No more than one of the uses governed by these provisions
shall be permitted on any single lot in the Town of Amherst.
(2) None of the uses regulated under this Section shall be allowed
within 500 feet of any lot or parcel in the Town and located
within any of the following zoning districts: R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2,
R-3, CR-3A, TR-3, R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7, or
MHR-8;
(3) Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a public or private
school, religious institution, day-care center, public park or
playground, or public library;
(4) Within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
Sexually oriented businesses permitted under this Zoning
Ordinance shall, with the exception of their permitted signs,
landscaping, and off-street parking, be conducted in an
enclosed building.
B. Sexually oriented cabarets, sexually oriented theaters, and sexually
oriented motion picture theaters shall be subject to the following
standards:
(1) Presentation Area. The room or area in the establishment in
which performances or presentations will take place shall have
a minimum area of at least 500 square feet, all parts of which
shall be open and visible to a person at least five feet in height
standing anywhere in the room. There shall be no partitions,
half-walls, screens, curtains or other dividers dividing portions
§ 6-6 AMHERST CODE § 6-6
1:870
of the room that are accessible to the public from other parts
of the room that are accessible to the public; and
(2) Private Rooms. There shall be no private rooms or booths that
are accessible to the public, except required restrooms. This
shall not prohibit the construction of offices, dressing rooms,
kitchens, storage areas and other non-public spaces, provided
that they are clearly posted "employees only" or "public access
not allowed."
C. A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
which is contrary to these regulations shall be subject to
prosecution under § 8-16 of this Ordinance.
6-6-3. Registration. [Amended 2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent,
maintain, operate, use or allow to be operated or used any business
or establishment, any part of which contains a sexually oriented
use, without first complying with the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Ordinance as set forth below.
B. In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no
form of sexually oriented use shall be allowed to operate or
continue to operate until a certificate of registration is filed with
the Town Clerk containing:
(1) The name and address of the business or establishment subject
to the provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The names, business and home addresses and business or
home phone numbers of the owner(s) of the business or
establishment subject to the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) If the entity registering under this section is not a natural
person, the registration shall include the names, business and
home addresses and business or home phone numbers of all
directors, officers, general partners or managing partners of
the business.
(4) The date of the initiation of the sexually oriented business.
(5) The exact nature of the sexually oriented use, specifying
whether it is a sexually oriented media store, a sex shop, a
sexually oriented motion picture theater, or a sexually oriented
cabaret or theater.
(6) If the premises or the building in which the business
containing the sexually oriented use is located is leased, a copy
of the lease showing that the petitioner under this Section has
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:871
control of the premises, and the name, address and telephone
number of the landlord.
(7) The petitioner shall also submit a plan drawn to appropriate
scale of the premises proposed for registration indicating the
areas to be covered by the registration, all windows, doors,
entrances and exits and the fixed features of the proposed
registered premises. The term "fixed features" shall include
walls, stages, immovable partitions, projection booths,
admission booths, concession booths and stands, immovable
counters and similar appurtenances that are permanent.
(8) The petitioner shall state all criminal convictions, the nature of
this conviction and location.
(9) The petition shall certify that the property in question is free of
liens for any "delinquent tax", as such term is defined in
Section 1102, Article 11 of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York, including, but not limited to, any unpaid tax,
special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other charge
imposed upon real property by or on behalf of a municipal
corporation or special district, plus all applicable charges,
relating to any parcel which is included in the return of unpaid
delinquent taxes or such other general, special or local law as
may be applicable, however, in no event, however shall
"delinquent tax" include any unpaid tax or other charge against
lands owned by the state, If the Building Commissioner
determines that tests or other reports are necessary to verify
conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons may be designated by or
otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the
expense of the applicant.
C. If there occurs any change in the information required for the
information of registration or the certification of registration, the
Town Clerk shall be notified of such change and a new or amended
certificate filed within 30 days of such change.
D. No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this
part of the Zoning Ordinance shall be transferable to any person
other than the registrant, nor shall a certificate of registration be
transferable for use at any premises, building or location other than
stated in the certificate of registration. Relocation of the business
requires a new registration, in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
E. The owner, manager or agent of any sexually oriented use shall
cause a copy of the certificate of registration issued under the
provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance to be displayed at
eye level in a portion of the premises that is regularly open to
customers of the business.
§ 6-6 AMHERST CODE § 6-6
1:872
F. Any knowingly false statement or any statement which the
registrant or petitioner should reasonably have known to be false
which is provided in the certificate of registration or any document
or information supplied therewith shall be grounds for denial,
rejection, suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.
G. It is a violation of this part of the Zoning Ordinance for the owner or
person in control of any property to establish or operate thereon or
to permit a sexually oriented use without having in force a
certificate of registration complying with this subsection.
6-6-4. Review Procedure. [Amended 2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of registration under
this part, the Town Clerk shall review it for completeness. If the
application is incomplete, the Town Clerk shall, within five business
days of receiving such application, return it to the petitioner, with a
form or letter indicating that it is incomplete, identifying the
item(s) that are missing, and stating that the incomplete
application will not be processed.
B. If the application is complete, the Town Clerk shall, no later than
the end of the fifth day after receipt of the application, forward it to
the Commissioner of Building and the Chief of Police for review and
comment determination regarding compliance with § 6-6-5. The
Town Clerk shall request that each of these officials provide a
written review determination of compliance or non-compliance
within 14 days of receiving the application; if either official fails to
act within that time, such official shall be deemed to have
recommended approval. Upon receipt of the reviews
determinations from these officials, but no later than the 21st
business day after receiving the application, the Town Clerk shall
act in accordance with the following sub-section.
C. If the Town Clerk, after receiving the determinations of the Chief of
Police and Commissioner of Building, indicating that the
application shows that the proposed business application will
conforms with the standards set out in § 6-6-5, then the Clerk shall
approve the application on or before the end of the 21st day after
receipt of the complete application.
D. If the Town Clerk receives a determination from the Chief of Police
or the Commissioner of Building that the application shows that the
business fails or will fail in any way to conform to the standards set
out in § 6-6-5, then the Clerk shall disapprove the application,
acting within such time, and shall, in writing, notify the petitioner
that the application has been denied and shall specify the
standards with which the business would not conform. In making
their determination, the Chief of Police and the Commissioner of
Building shall identify those standards set out in § 6-6-5 which the
application fails or will fail in any way.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:873
E. Notification of denial shall be by certified mail and shall be sent to
the address on the registration application, which shall be
considered to be the correct address.
6-6-5. Standards for Review. [Amended 2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Personal. The Chief of Police shall determine that the application
fails to conform to the code if an investigation indicates that any
owner, officer, director, general partner or managing partner of the
proposed establishment:
(1) Has had a registration under this part of the Zoning Ordinance
or its predecessors revoked during the previous five years;
(2) Has been convicted of prostitution, pandering, solicitation for
any type of sex act, rape, or any other sexual offense that is a
felony under New York law, regardless of where the conviction
took place, within the previous ten years; or
(3) Has been convicted of possessing, manufacturing or selling
any unlawful drugs, or trafficking illegally in prescription
drugs.
B. Physical Location and Design. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall determine that the application fails to conform to the code if a
review of the application indicates that the proposed location of the
business or, in the case of a sexually oriented cabaret, sexually
oriented motion picture theater or sexually oriented theater, that
the proposed location does not meet the required setbacks for
sexually oriented business or the layout of the proposed business
does not conform with the requirements of § 6-6-2A. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
C. Application. The Clerk shall deny the application if either the
Chief of Police or Commissioner of Building finds that any
statement in the application is materially false and that the
petitioner knew, or should have known, that it was false or that the
provisions of § 6-6-5 have not met the requirements of the code.
D. Other. Unless the Clerk makes one of the negative findings set
forth in sub-sections A, B and C of this section, the Clerk shall
approve the license, conditioned only on payment of the required
fee.
E. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Clerk hereunder
may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with § 8-13.
6-6-6.Term of Registration. [Amended 2-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. All registrations issued under this part of this Zoning Ordinance
shall be classified as annual registrations which shall be paid for on
or before October 1 and shall expire on September 30 of the
§ 6-6 AMHERST CODE § 6-6
1:874
following year. A registration beginning business after October 1
and before April 1 may obtain a new registration upon application
and the payment of the appropriate annual registration fee, and
such registration shall expire on the following September 30. A
registrant beginning business after March 31 and before October 1
may obtain a new registration upon application and the payment of
1/2 of the appropriate annual registration fee required by the Town
Board. Such registration shall expire on September 30 of the same
year. The provisions of this subsection shall not affect any other
provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. A registrant under this Section shall be entitled to a renewal of his,
her or its annual registration from year to year, as a matter of
course, on or before October 1, by presenting the registration for
the previous year or satisfactory evidence of its loss or destruction
to the Town Clerk and by paying the appropriate registration fee.
6-6-7. Revocation.
A. The registration issued under this part of this Zoning Ordinance
may be revoked if the owner, general partner, managing partner,
officer or director of the registrant is convicted of a criminal act
which would have been the basis for denial of the application under
§ 6-6-5A. If the Chief of Police learns of such a conviction, the Chief
of Police shall notify the Town Clerk. Upon notification, the Town
Clerk shall send Notice of Proposed Revocation to the registrant at
the establishment address. Such notice shall provide that the
registration will be revoked unless it is appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with § 8-13. If a timely appeal is
not filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals, the registration shall be
automatically revoked without further action by the Town Clerk,
and the establishment will thereafter be considered an unlawful
use, subject to the enforcement actions provided in this Ordinance.
B. If the Commissioner of Building learns of a violation of the
provisions of this ordinance, the Commissioner of Building shall so
notify the Town Clerk. Upon notification, the Town Clerk shall send
Notice of Proposed Revocation to the registrant at the
establishment address. Such notice shall provide that the
registration will be revoked unless it is appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with § 8-13. If a timely appeal is
not filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals, the registration shall be
automatically revoked without further action by the Town Clerk,
and the establishment will thereafter be considered an unlawful
use, subject to the enforcement actions provided in this Ordinance.
6-6-8. Limitations on Board of Zoning Appeals. The authority and duties
of the Board of Zoning Board of Appeals when acting under this Section
shall be modified as follows:
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:875
§ 6-7. Telecommunication Facility Standards
A. The Board may reverse or affirm a decision of the Town Clerk to
approve or deny registration or a proposal by the Town Clerk to
revoke a registration but shall not have any other authority to
modify the action of the Town Clerk; and
B. The matter shall be considered at a public meeting, with the
opportunity for the petitioner, the appellant if not the petitioner,
and the Town Clerk and their witnesses to be heard, but it shall not
be subject to a public hearing as otherwise defined herein;
C. The time limit for action by the Board under § 8-13-5B shall be
reduced to 45 days after the filing of the appeal; and
D. If the Board fails to act within said 45-day period, the petitioner
may at any time request from the Town Clerk a "certificate of
deemed denial," and the Town Clerk shall forthwith issue such a
certificate; the applicant may rely on such certificate as a final
action by the Town which may then be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
6-6-9. Businesses Prohibited.
A. The following businesses are specifically prohibited in the Town:
(1) A massage parlor, studio or other establishment operated by a
person who is not licensed by the State of New York as a
massage therapist or as a medical practitioner;
(2) A sexually oriented encounter center;
(3) A sexually oriented video arcade or a sexually oriented viewing
booth or arcade booth;
(4) A lingerie modeling establishment unless operated as a
sexually oriented cabaret or theater in accordance with the
requirements of this section; and
(5) A nude or sexually oriented modeling establishment unless
operated as a sexually oriented cabaret or theater in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
6-7-1. Definitions.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY — An accessory facility
or structure serving or being used in conjunction with Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities, and located on the same property or lot
as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, including but not limited
to generators or other emergency power supply equipment, utility or
transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets, or fencing.
ANTENNA OR ANTENNAE — A system of electrical conductors that
transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other
§ 6-6 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:876
wireless signals. Such shall include, but not be limited to radio,
television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services
(PCS), microwave telecommunications and services not licensed by the
FCC, but not expressly exempt from the Town's siting, building and
permitting authority.
APPLICATION — All necessary and appropriate documentation that an
applicant submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a single tower or structure to support
antennae from multiple providers of wireless services.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY OR COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — The inability to perform an act on terms that are
reasonable in commerce, the cause or occurrence of which could not
have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the
financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a particular
return on investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a
situation to be "commercially impracticable" and shall not render an act
or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable."
HEIGHT — The distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to
the highest point on the tower or structure, including any antenna or
lightning protection device.
MODIFICATION OR MODIFY — The addition, removal or change of
any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a
wireless facility, such as antennae, cabling, radios, equipment shelters,
landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of
any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/
or an upgrade or changeout of equipment for better or more modern
equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service provider to a
telecommunications tower or telecommunications site is a modification.
A modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a
wireless facility where the replacement is technically equivalent to the
component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal
repair and maintenance of a wireless facility.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
joint-stock company, an association of two or more persons having a
joint common interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES OR PWS OR PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR PCS — The same meaning
as defined and used in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
PETITIONER — Any wireless service provider submitting an
application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:877
TELECOMMUNICATION SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit by which a
petitioner is allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications
facilities as granted or issued by the Town.
STEALTH OR STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Minimize adverse
aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other
facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as
the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities,
which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive
facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under
the facts and circumstances.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of
audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light,
and other electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — A structure used in the
provision of services described in the definition of "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TEMPORARY — Temporary in relation to all aspects and components
of this local law, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer
than 90 days.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF) —
Includes "telecommunications tower" and "tower" and
"telecommunications site" and "personal wireless facility" and any
commercial equipment or location used in connection with the
provision of wireless communication services, including cellular
telephone services, personal communications services, radio and
television broadcast services and private radio communications
services, which are regulated by the Federal Communications
Commission both in accordance with the Telecommunications Act of
1996 and other federal laws. A telecommunication facility shall include
antenna(e), principal and accessory telecommunication equipment and
supporting masts, monopoles and structures, buildings and
appurtenances servicing same.
6-7-2. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to:
A. Implement an application process for persons seeking a special use
permit for WTFs;
B. Establish a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
special use permit for WTF that is both fair and consistent.
C. Promote and encourage, wherever possible, the sharing and/or colocation
of facilities-WTF among service providers;
D. Promote and encourage, wherever possible, the placement, height,
appearance and quantity of WTFs in such a manner, including but
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:878
not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse
aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and
other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same
area as the requested location of such WTFs, which shall mean
using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not
technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances. Stealth technology will be strongly encouraged to
ensure that WTFs are compatible with surrounding land use.
E. Promote and encourage the site development standards which
preserve the character of residential areas and which ensure that
adequate screening and stealth technology is used.
F. Ensure that WTFs are limited to those for which the petitioner has
demonstrated a need for service essentially within the Town of
Amherst.
6-7-3. Special Use Permit Application and Other Requirements.
A. No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify
or prepare any site for the placement or use of, WTFs as of the
effective date of this Section without having first obtained a special
use permit for a WTF. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this Section, no special use permit shall be required for those noncommercial
exceptions noted in the definition of WTFs.
B. All petitioners for a special use permit for a WTF or any
modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set
forth in this Section. The ZBA is the officially designated agency or
body of the Town to whom applications for a special use permit for
a WTF must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze,
evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not
granting, recertifying or not recertifying, or revoking special use
permits for a WTF. The Town may at its discretion delegate or
designate other official agencies of the Town to accept, review,
analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the ZBA with
respect to the granting or not granting, recertifying or not
recertifying or revoking special use permits for a WTF.
C. An application for a special use permit for WTFs shall be signed on
behalf of the petitioner by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and
attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. The
landowner, if different than the petitioner, shall also sign the
application. At the discretion of the Town, any false or misleading
statement in the application may subject the petitioner to denial of
the application without further consideration or opportunity for
correction.
D. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which
are otherwise incomplete, may be rejected by the Town.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:879
E. The petitioner shall include a statement in writing:
(1) That the petitioner's proposed WTFs shall be maintained in a
safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the
special use permit, without exception, unless specifically
granted relief by the ZBA in writing, as well as all applicable
and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations,
including any and all applicable Town, state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations;
(2) That the construction of the WTFs is legally permissible,
including, but not limited to the fact that the petitioner is
authorized to do business in the state, and that the petitioner is
licensed by the FCC to provide wireless telecommunications
service in the Town.
F. No WTF shall be installed or constructed until the application is
reviewed and approved by the ZBA, and the special use permit and
all appropriate building, electrical, plumbing and fire prevention
permits have been issued.
G. All applications for the construction or installation of new WTFs
shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. The application
shall be signed by an authorized individual on behalf of the
petitioner. Where a certification is called for, such certification shall
bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in
the State of New York. The application shall include the following
information:
(1) Documentation that demonstrates the need for the WTF to
provide service primarily and essentially within the Town. Such
documentation shall include propagation studies of the
proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or
existing sites;
(2) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing
the report;
(3) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner,
operator, and petitioner, and to include the legal form of the
petitioner;
(4) The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
(5) The zoning district in which the property is situated;
(6) Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines
along with the setback dimensions from the WTF to the
abutting property lines;
(7) The location and use of all structures within 500 feet from the
WTF;
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:880
(8) The location, size and height of all structures on the property
which is the subject of the application;
(9) The location, size and height of all proposed and existing
antennae and all appurtenant structures;
(10) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping, and fencing;
(11) The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(e)
proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower's
capacity to accommodate multiple users;
(12) The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and
antenna(e);
(13) A description of the proposed tower and antenna(e) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and
lighting;
(14) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or
other transmitting equipment;
(15) The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective
radiated power of the antenna(e);
(16) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(e);
(17) Certification that the cumulative NIER levels at the proposed
site are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
(18) Certification that the proposed antenna(e) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications devices;
(19) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
WTF;
(20) Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that taking into account the
subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan,
that the site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed
WTFs on the proposed site.
(21) A statement of the proposed emergency power supply. The
storage of fuel on the site shall be identified. The type of fuel
and quantities shall be provided. If lead acid batteries are
proposed, a statement of battery classification and location
shall be submitted. The statement shall provide the cumulative
acid weight of all batteries at the proposed facility. Upon
approval of the application for the WTF, the petitioner shall
provide this information to the local fire department.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:881
H. In the case of a new tower, the petitioner shall be required to
submit a written report demonstrating its efforts to secure shared
use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other
structures within the Town. Such report shall include an
investigation of every Tower and every structure with a height
exceeding 60 feet from finished grade within two miles of the
proposed location of the new tower. Copies of written requests and
responses for shared use shall be provided to the Town in the
application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason
for rejection.
I. The petitioner shall certify that the telecommunication facility,
foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed
to meet all local, Town, state and federal structural requirements
for loads, including wind and ice loads.
J. The petitioner shall certify that the WTFs will be effectively
grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and property and
installed with appropriate surge protectors.
K. A petitioner shall be required to submit a written report identifying
buried conductors within 50 feet of any non-building mounted WTF.
L. A petitioner may be required to submit an environmental
assessment analysis and a visual addendum. Based on the results of
the analysis, including the visual addendum, the Town may require
submission of a more detailed visual analysis. The scope of the
required environmental and visual assessment will be reviewed at
the pre-application meeting.
M. The petitioner shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall
include:
(1) A "Zone of Visibility Map" which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the WTF may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representations of "before and after" views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of the Town as may be
appropriate, including but not limited to state highways and
other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands;
historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to
the public; and from any other location where the site is visible
to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance
will be provided, concerning the appropriate key sites at a preapplication
meeting.
(3) An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy
wires and accessory structures from abutting and adjacent
properties and streets as relates to the need or
appropriateness of screening.
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:882
N. The petitioner shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by
drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all
related facilities and structures of the proposed WTFs.
O. Any and all representations made by the petitioner to the Town on
the record during the application process, whether written or
verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be relied
upon in good faith by the Town.
P. All utilities at a WTF site shall be installed underground and in
compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Town, including specifically, but not limited to, the applicable
building, plumbing, electrical and fire codes of the Town, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code
where appropriate.
Q. All WTFs shall be sited so as to be the least visually intrusive
reasonably possible and thereby have the least adverse visual
effect on the environment and its character, on existing vegetation,
and on the residences in the area of the WTF.
R. Both the WTF and any accessory structure that are higher than or
not contained within fencing, walls or other visual screening shall
maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures
designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/
or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include
the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may
required by the Town.
S. At a telecommunications site, an access road, turnaround space
and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and
service access. Access road construction shall be suitable for the
weight of vehicles that will use the road during construction and
maintenance activities, as approved by the Building Department.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be
made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times
minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal
visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
T. A person who holds a special use permit for a WTF shall construct,
operate, maintain, repair, provide for removal of, modify or restore
the permitted WTFs in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the Town,
state, or United States, including but not limited to the most recent
editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that
include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical,
fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:883
between or among any of the preceding codes, rules and
regulations, the more stringent shall apply.
U. A holder of a special use permit granted under this ordinance shall
obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by
applicable law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the
same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the Town or
other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the
petitioner.
V. An applicant shall submit to the ZBA one original and nine copies of
the completed application. The Town of Amherst reserves the right
to request additional copies of the completed application if deemed
necessary by the Town. Written notification of the application shall
be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Amherst and applicable NYS laws. The
Town Planning Department shall be provided with a copy of the
application.
W. The petitioner shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
tower to accommodate future demand for a minimum of five
additional commercial applications, for example, future colocations.
The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate
a minimum of five additional antenna arrays equal to those of the
petitioner, and located as close to the petitioner's antenna as
possible without causing interference. This requirement may be
waived, provided that the petitioner, in writing, demonstrates that
the provisions of future shared usage of the Tower is not
technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates
an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon:
(1) The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
(2) The kind of WTF site and structure proposed;
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without WTFs
spaces/sites;
(4) Available space on existing and approved towers.
X. The owner of the proposed new tower, and his or her successors in
interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the
proposed tower by other wireless service providers in the future,
and shall:
(1) Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared-use petitioner;
(2) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared
use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers;
(3) Allow shared use of the new tower if another
telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:884
reasonable charges. The charges may include, but are not
limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less
depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or
equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
(4) Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be
grounds for revocation of the special use permit for the tower.
Y. There shall be a pre-application meeting with the Building
Department, the Planning Department and the Town's designated
consultant. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to
address issues which will help to expedite the review and
permitting process. A pre-application meeting, at the discretion of
the Building Department, may also include a site visit. Costs of the
Town's consultants to prepare for and attend the pre-application
meeting will be borne by the petitioner.
Z. The holder of a special use permit shall notify the Town of any
intended modification of a WTF and shall apply to the Town to
modify, relocate or rebuild a WTF.
AA. The petitioner will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed
by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the tower
or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities requires
lighting under Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Regulation
Part 77. This requirement shall be for any new tower or for any
existing structure or building where the application increases the
height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines that
the FAA must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all
responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be
provided in a timely manner.
AB. All information necessary to satisfy SEQRA requirements.
6-7-4. Location of WTFs.
A. Petitioners for WTFs shall locate, site and erect said WTFs in
accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest
priority and seven being the lowest priority.
(1) On existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height of the tower or structure;
(2) On Town-owned properties;
(3) On existing towers or other structures when a material
increase in height is required;
(4) On properties in areas zoned for industrial use;
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:885
(5) On properties in areas zoned for business or non-residential
use;
(6) On properties in areas zoned for agricultural use.
(7) On properties in areas zoned for residential use.
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed
above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a
site of a higher priority was not selected.
C. A petitioner may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the
site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application
shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not
proposed, the petitioner must explain to the reasonable satisfaction
of the ZBA why co-location is commercially impracticable or
otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting
or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of
commercial impracticability or hardship.
D. Notwithstanding the above, the ZBA may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the ZBA
finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the Town and will further the policies and
goals set forth in § 6-7-2.
E. The petitioner shall submit a written report demonstrating the
petitioner's review of the above locations in order of priority,
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If
appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed
written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not
selected shall be included with the application.
6-7-5. Shared Use of WTFs and Other Structures.
A. Locating on existing towers or other structures without increasing
the height, shall be preferred by the Town, as opposed to the
construction of a new tower. The petitioner shall submit a
comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other
suitable structures within two miles of the location of any proposed
new tower, unless the petitioner can show that some other distance
is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure can not be used.
B. A petitioner intending to locate on an existing tower or other
suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the
existing owner to permit its use by the petitioner.
C. Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service primarily and
essentially within the Town, to the extent practicable, unless good
cause is shown.
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:886
D. Tower structures existing prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, in compliance with all of the Town's ordinances prior to
the effective date of this ordinance, but which are not in
compliance with the current ordinance, are legally non-conforming
structures and may continue in existence as legally non-conforming
structures.
6-7-6. Height of Telecommunications Towers.
A. The maximum permitted height of a new WTF shall be 100 feet. The
maximum permitted height of the WTF may be exceeded if the
petitioner provides satisfactory technical justification to the ZBA.
B. The petitioner shall submit documentation justifying the total
height of any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefore.
Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the
justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and
essentially within the Town, to the extent practicable, unless good
cause is shown.
6-7-7. Appearance and Visibility of WTFs.
A. WTFs shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required
by law.
B. Towers shall be galvanized or painted with a rust-preventive paint
of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and
shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements
established by the Building Department of the Town of Amherst.
C. If lighting is required, the petitioner shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as
is permissible under applicable regulations.
D. No freestanding lattice towers or guyed towers shall be permitted.
E. Visual screening, including but not limited to landscaping, walls
and fences, shall be approved by the ZBA. The Town's landscape
architect and consultant shall provide recommendations to the ZBA
regarding visual screening.
F. No outside storage of vehicles, materials or waste shall be allowed,
except for limited periods when the facility is undergoing additions,
repair, renovations, modifications or servicing.
G. The facility shall be maintained in good order and repair at all
times in accordance with applicable Town regulations.
6-7-8. Security of WTFs. All WTFs and antennae shall be located, fenced or
otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
Specifically:
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:887
A. All antennae, towers and other supporting structures, including
guy wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and
constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be
climbed or collided with. Transmitters and telecommunications
control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are
readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service
them.
B. All antennae, towers and auxiliary structures shall be properly
bonded and grounded to protect the facility and surrounding
properties from lightning discharges.
C. All towers and accessory structures shall be surrounded by a fence
or wall that completely provides visual screening of all accessory
structures associated with the WTF. This Section shall not apply to
signage as required in § 6-7-9.
D. There shall be no permanent climbing pegs within 20 feet of the
ground adjacent to the tower.
E. Towers shall have a fenced, restricted zone, equal in distance to 1/4
of the tower height in each direction surrounding the tower to
ensure safety from ice/debris fall. This area may be reduced by the
Town for structures with flush-mounted antennae. The restricted
zone will not apply to facilities with antennae mounted inside the
structure or facilities mounted on existing utility poles or
structures.
6-7-9. Signage. A WTF shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet
in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate
area of the presence of an Antenna that has transmission capabilities
and shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the
antenna(e) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on
the equipment shelter or cabinet of the petitioner and be visible from
the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of
the shelter or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless lighting is
required by applicable law, rule or regulation. No other signage,
including advertising, shall be permitted.
6-7-10. Lot Size and Setbacks. All proposed towers not mounted on
existing buildings or structures and any other proposed WTF structures
shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and
road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A
distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or WTF structure
plus 10 percent of the height of the tower or structure, or the existing
setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is
greater. In addition, the facility shall be separated from residential
property lines, school property lines, designated historical districts,
historical landmarks and historical sites by the minimum distance of
500 feet. The ZBA may modify this condition if the facility is attached to
an existing nonresidential structure, or if an easement has been
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:888
granted or other agreement with all property owners within 500 feet
has been reached. In an agricultural district, the WTF shall be located
a minimum of 500 feet from any dwelling unit. Any accessory structure
shall be located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback
requirements for the property on which it is situated.
6-7-11. Retention of Expert Assistance and Reimbursement by
Petitioner.
A. The Town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist
the Town in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any
requests for recertification.
B. A petitioner shall deposit with the Town funds sufficient to
reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs of consultant and
expert evaluation and consultation to the Town in connection with
the review of any application including the construction and
modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be
$5,000. The placement of the $5,000 with the Town shall precede
the pre-application meeting. The Town will maintain a separate
escrow account for all such funds. The Town's consultants/experts
shall invoice the Town for its services in reviewing the application,
including the construction and modification of the site, once
permitted. If at any time during the process this escrow account
has a balance less than $1,000, the petitioner shall immediately,
upon notification by the Town, replenish said escrow account so
that it has a minimum balance of $5,000 or a lesser amount if
stipulated by the Town. Such additional escrow funds shall be
deposited with the Town before any further action or consideration
is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in
escrow by the Town is more than the amount of the actual invoicing
at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be
promptly refunded to the petitioner.
C. The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection B of
this Section may vary with the scope and complexity of the project,
the completeness of the application and other information as may
be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and
inspection of any construction or modification.
6-7-12. Action on an Application for a Special Use Permit for WTFs.
A. The Building Department and the Planning Department of the Town
of Amherst and the designated consultant will undertake a review
of an application pursuant to this local law in a timely fashion, and
shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative
complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due
regard for the public's interest and the petitioner's desire for a
timely resolution.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:889
B. The Building Department of the Town of Amherst and/or the
designated consultant may refer any application or part thereof to
any advisory or other committee for a non-binding
recommendation.
C. The site plan for the proposed WTF shall be reviewed by the
Planning Department before a hearing is held by the ZBA. The
Planning Department shall submit a written report to the ZBA
containing its analysis of the proposal under the standards set forth
in the applicable sections of this Zoning Ordinance. The Planning
Department analysis is advisory in nature and is not binding on the
ZBA. This review of the site plan by the Planning Department shall
supersede all other site plan review requirements as established in
the Zoning Ordinance.
D. After the public hearing and after formally considering the
application, the ZBA may approve, approve with conditions, or
deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall
be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon
the petitioner.
E. If the ZBA denies the special use permit for WTFs, then the
petitioner shall be notified of such denial in writing within 10
calendar days of the Town's action.
F. The timeframe for action on special use permit applications for
WTFs shall be consistent with all applicable FCC regulations.
[Added 8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
6-7-13. Recertification of a Special Use Permit for WTFs.
A. Between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year
anniversary date after the effective date of the special use permit
and all subsequent five-year anniversaries of the effective date of
the original special use permit for WTFs, the holder of a special use
permit for such WTFs shall submit a signed written request to the
Town for recertification. In the written request for recertification,
the holder of such special use permit shall note the following:
(1) The name of the holder of the special use permit for the WTFs;
(2) If applicable, the number or title of the special use permit;
(3) The date of the original granting of the special use permit;
(4) Whether the WTFs have been moved, re-located, rebuilt, or
otherwise visibly modified since the issuance of the special use
permit and if so, in what manner;
(5) If the WTFs have been moved, re-located, rebuilt, or otherwise
visibly modified, then whether the Town approved such action,
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:890
and under what terms and conditions, and whether those
terms and conditions were complied with;
(6) That the WTFs are in compliance with the special use permit
and compliance with all applicable codes, laws, rules and
regulations;
(7) Recertification that the tower and attachments both are
designed and constructed and continue to meet all local, Town,
state and federal structural requirements for loads, including
wind and ice loads. Such recertification shall be by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New York, the
cost of which shall be borne by the petitioner.
(8) The holder of the special use permit shall certify to the Town
that the cumulative NIER levels at the site are within the
threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
B. If, after such review, the Town determines that the permitted WTFs
are in compliance with the special use permit and all applicable
statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations,
then the Town shall issue a recertification of the special use permit
for the WTFs, which may include any new provisions or conditions
that are mutually agreed upon, or that are required by applicable
statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations. If, after such
review it is determined that the permitted WTFs are not in
compliance with the special use permit and all applicable statutes,
laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, then the Town may
refuse to issue a recertification special use permit for the WTFs,
and in such event, such WTFs shall not be used after the date that
the petitioner receives written notice of the decision by the Town
until such time as the WTF is brought into compliance. Any decision
requiring the cessation of use of the WTF or imposing a penalty
shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained
in a written record and shall be promptly provided to the owner of
the WTF.
C. If the petitioner has submitted all of the information requested and
required by this local law, and if the review is not completed, as
noted in subsection B of this Section, prior to the five-year
anniversary date of the special use permit, or subsequent five-year
anniversaries, then the petitioner for the permitted WTFs shall
receive an extension of the special use permit for up to six months,
in order for the completion of the review.
D. If the holder of a special use permit for WTFs does not submit a
request for recertification of such special use permit within the
time-frame noted in subsection A of this Section, then such special
use permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease
to exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting
of the special use permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries,
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:891
unless the holder of the special use permit adequately
demonstrates that extenuating circumstances prevented a timely
recertification request. If the Town agrees that there were
legitimately extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the
special use permit may submit a late recertification request or
application for a new special use permit.
6-7-14. Extent and Parameters of Special Use Permit for WTFs. The
extent and parameters of a special use permit for WTFs shall be as
follows:
A. Such special use permit shall be non-exclusive.
B. Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or
conveyed without the express prior written notification to the Town
within 30 days of such assignment, transfer, or conveyance.
C. Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior
notice to the petitioner, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a
violation of the conditions and provisions of the special use permit,
or for a material violation of this local law after prior written notice
to the holder of the special use permit.
6-7-15. Application Fee.
A. At the time that a person submits an application for a special use
permit for a new WTF or for a co-location on an existing WTF, such
person shall pay a non-refundable application fee of $1,500 to the
Town.
B. No application fee is required in order to rectify a special use
permit for WTFs unless there has been a visible modification of the
WTF since the date of the issuance of the existing special use
permit for which the conditions of the special use permit have not
previously been modified. In the case of any modification, the fees
provided in subsection A shall apply.
6-7-16.Performance Security. The petitioner must submit an analysis,
certified by a NYS licensed professional engineer, of the cost of removal
of the WTF and surrounding property restoration. The petitioner shall,
at the petitioner's cost and expense, be required to execute and file with
the Town a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the Town as to
type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount
approved by the ZBA, but not less than twice the certified cost of said
removal. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full
force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or
until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a
condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the
original special use permit.
6-7-17. Reservation of Authority to Inspect WTFs. In order to verify that
the holder of a special use permit for WTFs and any and all lessees,
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:892
renters, and/or licensees of WTFs place and construct such facilities,
including towers and antennae, in accordance with all applicable
technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and
regulations and other applicable requirements, the Town may inspect
all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's
placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such
facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennae and buildings
or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site.
6-7-18. Indemnification.
A. Any application for WTFs that is proposed for Town property,
pursuant to this local law, shall contain a provision with respect to
indemnification. Such provision shall require the petitioner, to the
extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify,
protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the Town, and its officers,
boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and
consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges
arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action,
or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or
expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might
arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction,
erection, modification, location, products performance, use,
operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal,
or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of
such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages
as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or
omissions of the Town, or its servants or agents. With respect to the
penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable
attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are
included in those costs that are recoverable by the Town.
B. Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection A of this
Section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those
instances where the Town itself applies for and secures a special
use permit for WTFs.
6-7-19. Default or Revocation.
A. If WTFs are repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified
or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance
with the provisions of this local law or of the special use permit,
then the Town shall notify the holder of the special use permit in
writing of such violation. Such notice shall specify the nature of the
violation or non-compliance and that the violations must be
corrected within 30 days of the date of the notice, or of the date of
personal service of the notice, whichever is earlier.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection or any
other Section of this local law, if the violation causes, creates or
presents an imminent danger or threat to the health or safety of
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:893
lives or property, the Town may, at its sole discretion, order the
violation remedied within 24 hours.
B. If within the period set forth in subsection A above the WTFs are
not brought into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance,
or of the special use permit, or substantial steps are not taken in
order to bring the affected WTFs into compliance, then the Town
may revoke such special use permit for WTFs, and shall notify the
holder of the special use permit within 48 hours of such action.
6-7-20. Removal of WTFs.
A. Under any of the following circumstances, the Town may determine
that the health, safety and welfare interests of the Town warrant
and require the removal of WTFs.
(1) WTFs with a permit have been abandoned (i. e., not used as
WTFs) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of
180 days in any 365 day period, except for periods caused by
force majeure or Acts of God, in which case, repair or removal
shall commence within 90 days. The owner or user of the WTFs
shall notify the Town within 10 days of the discontinuance of
the use of the facilities or any part thereof.
(2) Permitted WTFs fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates
a health or safety hazard.
(3) WTFs have been located, constructed, or modified without first
obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required
special use permit, or any other necessary authorization.
B. If the Town makes such a determination as noted in subsection A of
this Section, then the Town shall notify the holder of the special use
permit for the WTFs within 48 hours that said WTFs are to be
removed.
C. The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns,
shall dismantle and remove such WTFs, and all associated
structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as
close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being
limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90
days of receipt of written notice from the Town. However, if the
owner of the property upon which the WTFs are located wishes to
retain any access roadway to the WTFs, the owner may do so with
the approval of the Town.
D. If WTFs are not removed or substantial progress has not been made
to remove the WTFs within 90 days after the permit holder has
received notice, then the Town may order officials or
representatives of the Town to remove the WTFs at the sole
expense of the owner or special use permit holder.
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-7
1:894
E. If, the Town removes, or causes to be removed, WTFs, and the
owner of the WTFs does not claim and remove it from the site to a
lawful location within 30 days, then the Town may take steps to
declare the WTFs abandoned, and sell all equipment and
components thereof.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, the Town
may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the WTFs, for
no more 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for sale, lease,
sub-lease, removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected WTFs
shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject
to the approval of the Town, and an agreement to such plan shall be
executed by the holder of the special use permit and the Town. If
such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the
90-day time period, then the Town may take possession of and
dispose of the affected WTFs in the manner provided in this
Section.
6-7-21. Relief. The ZBA may grant relief, waiver or exemption from any
aspect or requirement of this local law. Any petitioner desiring relief,
waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this local law
may request such at the pre-application meeting, provided that the
relief or exemption is contained in the original application for either a
special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted
special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or
facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or
complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested
relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the petitioner. The petitioner
shall bear all costs of the Town in considering the request and the relief,
waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved
unless the petitioner demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence
that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant
effect on the health, safety and welfare of the Town, its residents and
other service providers.
6-7-22. Adherence to State and Federal Rules and Regulations.
A. To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for WTFs has
not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state
and/or Federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such
a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable
rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal
agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC.
Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF
emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited
to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:895
§ 6-8. Accessory Uses and Structures
and/or are modified during the duration of a special use permit for
WTFs, then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform
the permitted WTFs to the applicable changed and/or modified
rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24
months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may
be required by the issuing entity.
6-8-1. General Standards.
A. Any accessory use may be permitted provided that it is customarily
associated with a primary use that may be permitted by right
consistent with the district use tables in Parts 3, 4, and 5. The
establishment of such accessory uses shall be consistent with the
following standards.
(1) The accessory use shall be subordinate to the primary use or
principal structure;
(2) The accessory use shall be subordinate in area, extent or
purpose to the primary use served;
(3) No accessory structure shall be located in the required front
yard of the structure to which it is accessory and the street line
of the street servicing it.
(4) The accessory use shall be located within the same zoning
district as the primary use; and
(5) Accessory uses located in residential districts shall not be used
for business purposes other than legitimate Home
Occupations.
B. The total floor area of all accessory structures and the floor area of
attached or built-in garages shall not exceed 75 percent of the floor
area of the principal structure, except as permitted by the ZBA in
accordance with the provisions of § 8-13 of this Ordinance.
C. In the R-R and AG districts, the total floor area of all accessory
structures shall not exceed 200 percent of the floor area of the
principal structure, except as permitted by the ZBA in accordance
with the provisions of § 8-13 of this Ordinance.
6-8-2. Auxiliary Housing Units. Where permitted as an accessory use in
Part 3, an auxiliary housing unit may be constructed within any singlefamily
detached dwelling following approval of a special use permit as
set forth in § 8-6, subject to the following standards.
A. An auxiliary housing unit shall accommodate not more than two
members of the family occupying the principal dwelling. At least
one of the persons housed in the auxiliary housing unit shall be at
§ 6-7 AMHERST CODE § 6-8
1:896
least 60 years of age or handicapped or otherwise incapacitated to
the extent that independent housing is not practical.
B. The auxiliary housing unit shall not exceed 500 square feet.
C. The permit for the auxiliary housing unit shall be valid for a period
not exceeding two years. Thereafter, it can be renewed, from time
to time, for additional two-year periods upon proof satisfactory to
the ZBA that the circumstances warranting the original permit
continue to exist.
6-8-3. Commercial Recreation. Where permitted as an accessory use in
Part 4, commercial recreation shall occupy no more than 15 percent of
the gross floor area of the principal structure.
6-8-4. Convenience Retail and Service. Where permitted as an accessory
use in Part 4, a convenience retail and service facility shall be subject to
the following standards.
A. In the MFR-7 district, the facility shall be designed to serve the
needs of the residents of the project and have no signs outside the
building. The total gross floor area of such facility shall not exceed
five square feet per dwelling unit within the project.
B. In the MHR-8 district, the facility shall be designed to serve the
needs of the residents of the manufactured home park. One
identification sign not exceeding two square feet in area shall be
permitted. Pole signs shall not be permitted. The total floor area
shall not exceed 30 square feet per lot within the manufactured
home park. Automobile drive-in restaurants shall not be permitted.
6-8-5. Conference Center. Where permitted as an accessory use in the ST
district, a conference center shall be subject to the following standards.
A. The minimum district size shall be 25 acres.
B. One conference center shall be permitted per district.
6-8-6.Home Occupations. Where permitted as an accessory use in Part 3,
a home occupation shall be subject to the following standards.
A. General Standards.
(1) A home occupation is that accessory use of a dwelling that
shall constitute all or some portion of the livelihood of a person
or persons living in the dwelling. The home occupation shall be
incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises for
residential purposes.
(2) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises or other evidence from the outside of the
conduct of a home occupation.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8
1:897
(3) No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall
be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises.
(4) Instruction in music, dancing and similar subjects shall be
limited to two students at a time.
(5) All activities involving outside visitors, clients or deliveries
shall be limited to the hours between 8 A.M. and 9 P.M.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space per
200 square feet of home occupation floor area. The off-street
parking spaces required for the home occupation shall be
maintained in addition to the space or spaces required for the
residence itself. No parking spaces, other than driveways, may
be located in the required front yard setback. Parking spaces
shall be screened from adjacent parcels with residential zoning
using tree and shrub plantings, earthen berms, low walls or a
combination of these methods to establish a visual screen at
least 36 inches above the highest surrounding grade within
two years of installation.
(7) No display pertaining to the home occupation shall be visible
from outside the dwelling.
(8) In the R-4 district, home occupations shall be permitted only as
accessory uses to detached dwelling units.
(9) The area devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 15
percent of the ground floor area of the principal structure.
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
(10) A home occupation may be allowed in an attached dwelling
unit provided that such dwelling unit has a primary exterior
entrance.
B. Home Occupation Types. Home occupations shall be separated
into two categories and permitted subject to the following
provisions. [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(1) Type 1 Home Occupation. A Type 1 Home Occupation shall
be deemed an accessory use for a detached dwelling unit and
no further approval shall be required. Such home occupation
shall meet the following standards.
(a) The business shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling
or integral part of a dwelling and have no outside storage
of any kind related to the home occupation.
(b) The business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the principal use of the dwelling.
§ 6-8 AMHERST CODE § 6-8
1:898
(c) The business shall be conducted only by persons residing
on the premises (nonresident employees are not
permitted).
(d) There shall be no identification sign, display or advertising
of the home occupation on the site or structures.
(e) The business shall involve no retail sales or services
provided to customers on-site, and shall not include any
storage, pick-up or delivery of merchandise or equipment,
except for standard parcel delivery services.
(2) Type 2 Home Occupation. Following approval as a special
use by the ZBA, a limited business operation may be conducted
as a Type 2 Home Occupation. Upon demonstration of
continued compliance with the conditions of the original
approval, the Commissioner of Building shall biennially renew
the special use permit. If violations are determined, then a new
application for a special use permit shall be submitted to the
ZBA. The Commissioner of Building may inspect the premises
without prior notice during normal business hours. Such home
occupation shall meet the following standards. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(a) The home occupation may have only one nonresident
employee, assistant or associate.
(b) No more than one unlighted sign not more than two square
feet in size, identifying the resident and the business,
attached flat against the building, shall be permitted. Such
sign may be allowed in the required front yard along an
arterial or collector street upon approval by the ZBA.
C. Exclusions to Home Occupations. No home occupation shall be
permitted that has any of the following characteristics:
(1) Internal or external alterations inconsistent with the
residential use of the building;
(2) Except for signage and parking as permitted under this
Ordinance, home occupation activities shall not be visible from
the street;
(3) Creates a hazard to persons or property;
(4) Results in electrical interference;
(5) Is a nuisance; or
(6) Results in outside storage or display.
D. Prohibited Home Occupations. The following are prohibited as
Home Occupations:
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8
1:899
(1) Automobile and/or body and fender repairing;
(2) Greenhouse, commercial nurseries and truck farming;
(3) Food handling, processing or packing, other than catering
services that utilize standard home kitchen equipment;
(4) Repair, manufacturing and processing uses; however, this shall
not exclude the home occupation of a seamstress where goods
are not manufactured for stock, sale or distribution;
(5) Restaurants; and
(6) Uses which entail the harboring, training, raising or treatment
of dogs, cats, birds or other animals on-site.
6-8-7.Kennels. [Amended 8-20-2012 by L.L. No. 15-2012]
A. Kennels or any outdoor runs shall have a minimum front yard of
200 feet and a minimum side and rear yard of 100 feet.
B. Outdoor runs shall be visually screened from adjacent properties
and public right-of-way with an opaque material, which may
include shrubs, walls, fences or berms, and which are a minimum of
six feet in height. Where vegetative material is used, said material
shall form an opaque screen within two years from the time of first
planting.
6-8-8.Park Office. Where permitted as an accessory use in the MHR-8
district, a park office shall be subject to the following standards.
A. One identification sign per use not exceeding two square feet in
area shall be permitted. Pole signs shall not be permitted.
B. The total floor area shall not exceed 30 square feet per lot within
the manufactured home park.
6-8-9.Raising of Livestock, Noncommercial. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 2-2013; 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 11-2014]
A. Where permitted as an accessory use in the S-A district, the raising
of livestock, except for chickens as regulated in Chapter 203
§ 6-8-9(B), for noncommercial purpose shall be subject to the
following standards:
1. The lot size shall be two (2) acres or more;
2. Any structures for the housing of livestock shall be a minimum
of 50 feet from any lot line;
3. Fences or other enclosures shall be provided so as to keep the
livestock 50 feet from the lot line.
B. In the R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts, chickens may be raised
upon the approval of a temporary Special Use Permit by the Zoning
§ 6-8 AMHERST CODE § 6-8
1:900
Board of Appeals (ZBA) in compliance with the following minimum
regulations:
1. The raising of chickens shall be conducted as an accessory use
on the same premises associated with an occupied singlefamily
detached dwelling as the principal use;
2. The chickens shall be raised for noncommercial purposes;
3. The number of chickens shall be limited to a maximum of six
(6);
4. Roosters shall not be allowed. Breeding of chickens on-site
shall not be allowed;
5. The Special Use Permit shall be limited to the applicant and
shall not be transferable;
6. The raising of the chickens shall be subject to all applicable
sanitary, noise and property maintenance regulations,
ordinances and laws. Chicken waste shall not be composted or
mulched on-site. Chicken waste shall be stored in appropriate
containers that do not create any nuisance;
7. Any odor associated with the raising of the chickens shall not
be perceptible beyond the property line of the premises where
the chickens are being raised;
8. The chickens must be kept in coops or in fenced or walled
enclosures (chicken run) at all times so constructed that the
chickens can not fly over any fence or wall or otherwise escape
from the coop or chicken run. The chickens shall not be
allowed to roam freely beyond the property lines of the
premises associated with the ZBA application;
9. Feed for the chickens must be stored in secure containers that
will not attract rodents, vermin or pests of any type. Unsecured
excess feed shall not be allowed;
10. Chickens shall not be allowed in the front yard between the
principal structure and a public or private street;
11. Chicken coops or other structures for the housing of the
chickens, that are established on or after May 1, 2014, shall be
located at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line.
Chicken coops or other structures for the housing of the
chickens, that exist prior to May 1, 2014, shall be located at
least three (3) feet from any property line.
12. The ZBA may require screening of the chicken coop or chicken
run as deemed appropriate.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8
1:901
13. The Special Use Permit shall be valid for a maximum of two
years. The ZBA may grant approval of the Special Use Permit
for a period less than two years. Additional consecutive or nonconsecutive
Special Use Permits may granted by the ZBA upon
the filing of each new application.
14. The ZBA shall solicit input from property owners within 100
feet of the applicant’s property and shall evaluate any
complaints that have been received relative to the raising of
chickens on the property.
15. Prior to be the ZBA hearing for the temporary Special Use
Permit, the Building Department shall conduct an inspection of
the premises associated with application for the Special Use
Permit. The inspection shall note any property maintenance
issues and shall include an inspection of the proposed chicken
coop (if it exists). The Building Department will provide a
report of their findings to the ZBA.
6-8-10. Restaurant. Where permitted as an accessory use in Part 3, Part 4
or Part 5, a restaurant shall occupy no more than 15 percent of the
gross floor area of the principal structure. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
6-8-11. Retail Sales and Service. Where permitted as an accessory use in
Part 3, Part 4 or Part 5, retail sales and service shall occupy no more
than 15 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure:
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
6-8-12. Swimming Pool and Tennis Court. Where permitted as an
accessory use in Part 3, Part 4 or Part 5, limits on maximum building
coverage shall not apply to swimming pools or tennis courts. Within a
front yard or a required side yard, swimming pools and tennis courts
are not permitted, except to the extent permitted for accessory
structures in the district. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008;
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
6-8-13. Dumpsters. See § 7-2-4D.
6-8-14. Small Wind Energy Systems. [Added 8-17-2009 by L.L. No.
12-2009]
A. Purpose. This section is intended to provide standards to promote
the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems
designed for home, farm and small commercial use and that are
primarily used to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied
electricity.
B. Development Standards. A small wind energy system is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables in Part 3, Part 4
or Part 5, subject to the following standards.
§ 6-8 AMHERST CODE § 6-8
1:902
(1) General Standards.
(a) A small wind energy system shall be located on a lot a
minimum of one acre in size. Only one small wind energy
system per lot shall be allowed.
(b) Tower height, measured as the vertical distance from
ground level to the tip of the blade at its highest point,
shall be a maximum of 65 feet. The allowable height shall
be reduced if necessary to comply with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration requirements. The
minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
rotor blade shall be 30 feet.
(c) The minimum required setback from property lines,
overhead utility lines, and the primary structure shall be
equal to the total height of the tower and the turbine. No
part of the small wind energy system, including guy wire
anchors, shall extend closer than ten feet to the property
line.
(d) Except during short-term events including utility outages
and severe wind storms, the noise level produced by the
operation of a small wind energy system shall not exceed
50 decibels, as measured at the site property line.
(e) Exterior lighting on the system shall not be allowed,
except that which is specifically required by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
(f) Other than appropriate warning signage, a small wind
energy system shall not be used as, or used to support,
signage. In addition, a small wind energy system shall not
be used to support radio, television, or telecommunication
equipment.
(g) The system's tower and blades shall remain painted or
finished the color originally applied by the manufacturer,
typically a non-reflective light gray or light blue color.
(2) Safety Standards.
(a) Towers with climbing features shall be constructed to
provide one of the following means of access control, or
other appropriate method of access.
(i) Tower-climbing apparatus located no closer than 12
feet from the ground.
(ii) A locked anti-climb device installed on the tower.
(iii) A locked, protective fence at least six feet in height
that encloses the base of the tower.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8
1:903
(b) All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(c) The small wind energy system shall be equipped with
manual and automatic over-speed controls.
(3) Siting and Installation Standards.
(a) A small wind energy system shall be designed and
constructed to be in compliance with the applicable
provisions of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and National Electrical Code. Applications for a
small wind energy system shall submit the following
information:
(i) Legal property survey;
(ii) Property lines and physical dimensions of the
property;
(iii) Location, dimensions, and types of all existing
structures on the property;
(iv) Location of the proposed small wind energy system
and all associated equipment;
(v) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous
with the property;
(vi) Any overhead utility lines and/or buried utility
locations;
(vii)Wind system specifications, including manufacturer
and model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower
type;
(viii) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings;
(ix) Tower blueprint or drawing;
(x) Line drawing of electrical components; and
(xi) Other information as required by the Commissioner of
Building.
(b) No small wind energy system shall be installed until
evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(c) All on-site electrical wires associated with a small wind
energy system shall be installed underground, except for
§ 6-8 AMHERST CODE § 6-8
1:904
§ 6-9. Planned Unit Development Process (PUD). [Added 5-20-2013
by L.L. No. 8-2013]
"tie-ins" to a public utility company and public utility
transmission poles, towers, and lines.
(4) Maintenance and Removal.
(a) The small wind energy system shall be maintained in good
condition. Such maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, painting and structural integrity of the
foundation and support structure and security barrier (if
applicable).
(b) Any small wind energy system that is found to be unsafe by
the Commissioner of Building shall be repaired by the
owner or be removed within 120 days. In the event that a
small wind energy system is not operational for a period of
6 consecutive months or more, the Town will notify the
landowner by registered mail and provide 45 days for a
written response. In such a response, the landowner shall
set forth reasons for the operational difficulty and provide
a reasonable timetable for the corrective action. If the
Commissioner of Building deems the timetable for
corrective action as unreasonable, the Town shall notify
the landowner and such landowner shall remove the small
wind energy system and all associated equipment within
120 days.
6-9-1. Purpose. The PUD process is designed to permit coordinated
developments that allow flexibility to respond to market demands and
the needs of tenants.
The PUD process shall be required for development or redevelopment
of a portion of any lot measuring 30 acres in size or larger as of
(effective date of PUD), except for the following:
A. Developments consistent with a site plan or subdivision preliminary
plat approved prior to (effective date of PUD)
B. Site plan modifications approved prior to (effective date of PUD)
that result in changes to 50% or less of the total area of the lot.
The PUD process may run concurrently with the review of a zoning
map amendment, if one is proposed.
6-9-2. Use Regulations.
A. Permitted Criteria, Standards and Regulations. Criteria,
standards and regulations are hereby established with respect to
planning of land and the arrangements of buildings and open
spaces for those areas which are included in a PUD and which
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:905
require development and site plan approval. The application of the
criteria, standards and regulations set forth in this Section are
intended to result in the optimum development and use of land in
the Town. They are intended to insure full consideration of every
planning element pertinent to the objectives of this Section and
the Comprehensive Plan. Conditions placed on individual use areas
of a PUD shall supersede regulations elsewhere in this Ordinance,
unless otherwise noted.
B. Minimum District Size. The minimum area required to qualify for
a PUD shall be 30 contiguous acres of land. For purposes of this
paragraph, lands separated by streams or drainage courses,
highways, streets or other public or private rights of way shall be
deemed contiguous. Boundaries should assume reasonably regular
configurations, taking advantage of natural features, public rights
of way and other clearly defined features as outer perimeters in
order to facilitate buffering between the PUD and adjacent areas
and in order to minimize the development obstacles created by
sharply irregular boundaries resulting from noncontiguous
ownership patterns.
C. Permitted Uses. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning
district shall be permitted in a PUD as provided in this Section.
(1) All permitted principal and accessory uses and operations
which, as a result of not being enclosed, would constitute a
nuisance or offense beyond the lot line, or which as a result of
not being enclosed would conflict with any of the specific
performance standards set forth in this subsection, shall be
performed wholly within an enclosed building or buildings.
(2) Outside storage or parking of commercial or recreation
vehicles, camper bodies, boats and trailers on lands occupied
for residential purposes shall be prohibited.
6-9-3. Development Standards.
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading. The design criteria set forth in
this Section are intended to provide desirable latitude and freedom
to encourage variety in the location and arrangement of uses, to
encourage convenience in accessibility to these uses through
provision of pedestrian and bicycle pathways and public
transportation services and to achieve the efficient sharing of
parking and loading facilities by multiple uses. Therefore, in lieu of
specific minimum parking and loading requirements and other
similar considerations, the following performance standards shall
apply:
(1) Pedestrian connection between parking areas and buildings
shall be along walkways to the extent necessary to assure
pedestrian safety.
§ 6-9 AMHERST CODE § 6-9
1:906
(2) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of
access and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall
site design.
(3) Any above-grade loading facility shall be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
should be separate from private vehicles and pedestrians
where feasible.
(4) The design of buildings and parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the site where appropriate to
provide separate levels of access.
(5) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for all
new buildings at the time of erection and for all enlargements
of existing buildings and shall be maintained in usable shape
and good condition.
(6) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided so as to
minimize overflow of parked or standing vehicles onto public
or common vehicular or pedestrian rights of way.
B. Landscaping, Buffering and Screening.
(1) Landscape Features and Building Arrangements. The
design criteria set forth in this Section supercede those in
§ 7-2. They are intended to provide considerable latitude and
freedom to encourage variety in the arrangement of the bulk
and shape of buildings, open space and landscape features.
Buildings may be arranged in various groups, courts, sequence
or clusters with open spaces organized and related to the
buildings so as to provide privacy and to form a unified
composition of buildings and space. Although latitude in design
is provided and encouraged, the following design conditions
shall, however, be assured in any PUD. Yards, building setback
and spacing and building height and shape, landscape features
and building arrangement shall be designed in a manner to
assure:
(a) Proper light, air and views for the residents, tenants and
the public;
(b) Safety in accommodating pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and vehicular storage and service;
(c) Usability of and convenient access to open space;
(d) Screening to minimize the unsightliness and monotony of
parked cars;
(e) Availability of open land for landscaped features,
recreation or other private uses;
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:907
(f) Privacy between adjacent buildings and intersecting wings
of buildings, from streets, parking and recreation areas;
(g) The creation of a variety of common open spaces and
private areas, through the planning of landscape features
such as walls, fences, hedges and other features.
(2) Landscaping Standards. Landscaping plans shall meet the
following standards:
(a) Landscaping shall provide privacy and screening between
uses, with visual, noise and air quality factors considered.
(b) Landscaping shall contribute to prevention of water runoff
and erosion problems. Temporary or permanent protection
shall be provided during construction to prevent such
problems.
(c) Landscape treatment for public and private plazas, roads,
paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as an
integral part of an entire project and shall combine with
walks and street surfaces, and such requirements shall be
in lieu of any other Town requirement for trees in public
street rights of way.
(d) The area covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings
and paved areas must be accompanied by planted areas as
well as other features to hold or carry stormwater runoff.
Outdoor planted or grassed areas within parking lots must
be not less than five percent of the total vehicular area in
parking lots designed for 10 cars or more and shall be
suitably distributed so as to relieve any unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars.
(e) Landscape materials shall be appropriate to the growing
conditions on the site and the Town's environment.
(f) Natural features such as streams, rock outcrops,
escarpments, marshlands, wetlands, topsoil, trees and
shrubs, natural contours and outstanding vegetational,
topographical and geological features are encouraged to
be preserved and incorporated in the open space areas
and in the landscaping of the development.
(g) Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation
shall not be permitted. Trees shall be planted adjacent to
all residential units so as to provide no less than three
trees of a minimum two and one half inch caliper,
measured six inches above the ground, per residential
unit, including existing trees on the site which are
preserved. Trees to be planted throughout the district and
along the vehicular ways shall include both deciduous and
§ 6-9 AMHERST CODE § 6-9
1:908
coniferous species in adequate density and design to
provide year round benefit of such plantings.
(h) Trees shall be of numerous species as to minimize the
impact and spread of disease.
(3) Aesthetics.
(a) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good
appearance and easily maintained.
(b) The sides and rear of all buildings shall be designed in
such manner as to avoid undue sacrifice of amenity and
design values when viewed from side and rear vantage
points.
(4) Screening. Visual and noise screening devices shall be
designed and maintained to serve their intended purposes set
forth in this Section. Artificial planting materials shall not be
allowed. Landscape screening should be given priority where
effective, easily maintained and botanically feasible.
Decorative masonry walls in conjunction with berms and plant
materials are encouraged.
C. Local Circulation System.
(1) Vehicular circulation.
(a) The vehicular circulation system and parking facilities
shall be designed to fully accommodate the automobile
safely and efficiently without allowing it to dominate and
destroy the form of the area, and with screening and
buffering as may be required to satisfy the environmental
standards of this Section.
(b) Dwellings and other buildings shall be served by streets,
drives or emergency accessways planned to assure access
by service and emergency vehicles.
(c) Driveways and streets serving group and cluster
developments shall be connected to collector and arterial
streets at locations where traffic can be controlled and
operated effectively and safely with minimum interference
to the capacity of the arterial and collector streets, bicycle
routes and pedestrian ways.
(d) Streets may be either private or public.
(e) Standards of design and construction for all roads to be
dedicated shall meet applicable town standards unless
specifically modified as part of the site plan approval. The
right of way and pavement widths, locations and designs
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:909
for private ways, roads and alleys shall conform to
generally accepted planning and engineering practices,
taking into account the estimated needs of the full
proposed development.
(f) There shall be provision of safe bicycling routes
throughout the district which may be coincident with
pedestrian ways but which shall be separated from the
motorized vehicle system wherever feasible.
(2) Pedestrian Circulation.
(a) Pedestrian ways shall connect residential areas with other
residential areas, community facilities, schools,
recreational areas, commercial areas and public
transportation.
(b) The system of pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped
spaces shall be of such extent and the elements of such
system shall be so distributed in location and number so as
to assure safety of pedestrians from vehicular traffic and
encourage pedestrian travel within such system instead of
in vehicular rights of way, without restraints imposed by
public, private or common ownerships.
(c) Major pedestrian walks, malls and public transportation
loading places where feasible shall be separated from
general vehicle circulation.
(d) Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian
walks shall be provided, particularly from building
entrances to adjacent buildings, play areas, parking areas
and streets.
(e) Sidewalks, pathways and bikeways to be located within a
public right of way shall meet town standards as to width,
location and materials unless specifically modified as a
part of the site plan approval.
D. Topography and Site Appearance. PUD's shall be designed to
take advantage of the topography of the land in order to utilize the
natural contours, to provide for water storage and control of water
runoff, to protect natural drainage courses, to economize in the
construction of utilities, to reduce the amount of grading and to
maximize the conservation of trees and topsoil. Significant natural
features and other characteristics of the site shall be preserved and
incorporated as distinctive features of the development.
E. Open Space.
(1) Definition.
(a) Open space includes:
§ 6-9 AMHERST CODE § 6-9
1:910
(i) Uncovered and unpaved lands or water areas in
public, common or private ownership, except lots
under single family ownership;
(ii) Lands covered by structures or other improvements
may also be deemed to constitute open space under
the limited conditions specified in this Section;
(iii) Large areas of land in a natural state;
(iv) Areas for active and passive recreation;
(v) Parks and large landscaped or wooded areas;
(vi) Drainage, runoff areas and flood plain areas and areas
for stormwater storage and protection of water
quality;
(vii) Connectors between major open space areas;
(viii) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems;
(ix) Areas for preservation of wildlife, woodlands,
wetlands and outstanding natural features, including
geologic and topographic;
(x) Areas for public or private recreation, public
education, community and cultural facilities when
approved by the Town Board;
(xi) Conservation facilities and areas.
(2) Scale and Character. Such proposed uses must be
appropriate to the scale and character of the new district,
considering its size, density, expected population, topography
and the number and types of dwelling units.
(3) Area and location.
(a) In any PUD a minimum of 25 percent of the total land area,
less the amount used exclusively for nonresidential
purposes, must be in open space.
(i) At least 70 percent of this total open space shall be in
private ownership open to the public or in public or
common ownership.
(ii) Any part of the total open space, either in a natural
state or improved as permitted by and meeting the
standards of this Section, may be offered for
dedication or other disposition without cost to the
Town or other public entity for recreation and other
open space uses for use by the public and acceptable
to the Town Board and other public entity and to the
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:911
owner and if accepted constitutes a credit to
paragraph (a) above. Offers for dedication or other
disposition of major open space for public use may be
made at any time after approval of the development
plan.
(b) Any public or common open space shall be located and
organized to be readily accessible by foot and bicycle to
residential populations served thereby (preferably without
their having to cross limited access and arterial roadways).
In addition, access and parking for vehicles shall be
provided where appropriate.
(c) The location, condition, size and configuration of the open
space must be suitable for its use as proposed in the
development plan and/or site plan. Lakes or other water
areas may not occupy so large a proportion of the major
common open space that other open space and
recreational uses cannot be adequately provided for.
(4) Open Space Alterations. The continued use of common open
space for the purposes contemplated in this Section shall be
assured through appropriate deed restrictions which shall
include a provision that such open space use shall not be
materially altered or abridged without the approval of the
Town Board.
(5) Physical Improvements.
(a) Open space must be suitably improved for its intended
use, but open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved.
(b) The buildings, structures and improvements which are
permitted in the common open space must be appropriate
to the uses which are authorized for the common open
space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the
common open space with regard to its topography and
unimproved condition.
(6) Public Open Space. The standards for the Planning Board's
determination whether to recommend Town Board approval of
an offer for the dedication or other disposition to the Town or
other public entity of public open space lands shall, without
excluding any other applicable requirements of this Section,
include the following:
(a) The need for public open space in the PUD. In determining
the manner of public ownership, the usage by the Town's
population outside the PUD shall be considered.
§ 6-9 AMHERST CODE § 6-9
1:912
(b) The potential for an open space connection with other
public open space areas.
(c) The desirability of public access due to the special physical
and biological characteristics of the area which make it
suitable for public open space uses.
(d) The desirability of public acquisition of floodways,
drainageways and areas subject to flooding for water
management and recreational uses.
(e) Review and acceptability of covenants or similar
provisions proposed for inclusion in dedication instrument,
intended to assure that public use remains consistent with
the objectives of the development plan and site plan.
(7) Perimeter Treatment. The design of improvements and
landscaping along the boundaries of a PUD should be visually
harmonious and functionally compatible with adjoining
development. Extensive parking areas, service areas and other
features likely to have adverse effects on surrounding property
(due, e.g., to adverse views, lights, noise) shall be screened
against viewing from first stories both inside and outside the
district. Screening shall also be provided to protect against
lights, noise or other undesirable conditions in the
surroundings.
F. Utilities. New public and private utilities and those relocated or
replaced shall be generally underground.
G. Signs.
(1) Freestanding signs in a PUD shall be limited to traffic and
pedestrian directional and control signs, street signs and signs
identifying the development.
(2) Pole signs shall be prohibited in a PUD.
(3) One identification sign shall be permitted for each
nonresidential use, identifying use on the premises as
permitted on the site plan, of not more than 20 square feet, not
projecting beyond the building to which it is attached more
than 12 inches, not projecting more than 10 feet in height
above grade. Signs shall be designed as an integral part of a
Coordinated Sign Plan in accordance with § 8-11.
(4) Any illuminated sign visible from any public street or from
adjoining property used for residential purposes shall be so
shaded, shielded, directed or maintained at a sufficiently low
level of intensity and brightness that it shall not adversely
affect neighboring premises nor the safe vision of operators of
vehicles moving on public roads or highways.
§ 6-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:913
§ 6-10. Solar Energy. [Added 12-11-2017 by L.L. No. 24-2017]
1. Purpose. This Solar Energy Law is adopted to provide provisions for, so
far as conditions may permit, the accommodation of solar energy
systems and equipment, including:
A. Taking advantage of a safe, abundant, renewable, and nonpolluting
energy resource;
B. Decreasing the cost of energy to the owners of commercial and
residential properties, including single-family houses;
C. Increasing employment and business development in the region by
furthering the installation of Solar Energy Systems; and,
D. Minimizing adverse impacts on neighboring properties through
thoughtful design and installation of Solar Energy Systems.
2. Definitions.
BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A combination
of photovoltaic and or solar-thermal building components integrated
into any building envelope system such as vertical facades including
glass and other facade material, semitransparent skylight systems,
solar roofing tiles, and shading over windows.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A Solar Energy
System that is anchored to the ground and attached to a pole or
other mounting system, detached from any other structure for the
primary purpose of producing electricity or thermal energy for onsite
consumption.
QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER — A person who has skills and
knowledge related to the construction and operation of solar electrical
equipment and installations and has received safety training on the
hazards involved. Persons who are on the list of eligible photovoltaic
installers maintained by the New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority (NYSERDA), or who are certified as a solar
installer by the North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
(NABCEP), shall be deemed to be qualified solar installers for the
purposes of this definition.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar panel system
located on the roof of any legally permitted building or structure for the
purpose of producing electricity or thermal energy for onsite or offsite
consumption.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or
solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation
as an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of
stored heat.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Electrical or thermal energy storage
devices, material, hardware, inverters, or other electrical/thermal
§ 6-10 AMHERST CODE § 6-10
1:914
equipment and conduit of photovoltaic and solar thermal devices
associated with the production of electrical or thermal energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An electrical or thermal generating system
composed of a combination of both Solar Panels and Solar Energy
Equipment.
SOLAR FACILITY FOOTPRINT — The maximum occupied surface area
taken up by the rows of solar panels and the space between the rows
(as the panels are laid out at the minimum 0° angle) and including any
necessary equipment, access or maintenance roads and pathways.
SOLAR PANEL — A panel designed to absorb solar energy and convert
it into electrical or thermal energy.
SOLAR STORAGE BATTERY — A device that stores energy from the sun
and makes it available in an electrical form.
SOLAR-THERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS — Solar energy systems that
directly heat water or other liquid using sunlight. The heated liquid
is used for such purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot
water, and the heating of pool water.
3. Applicability. The requirements of this law shall apply to all solar energy
systems installed or modified after its effective date, excluding general
maintenance and repair and Building-Integrated Photovoltaic Systems.
4. General Requirements.
A. Building permits are required for all solar energy systems.
B. Qualified Installer. All solar energy systems must be installed by a
qualified solar installer and, prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Compliance, must be inspected by a Town Building Inspector. In
addition, any connection to the public utility grid must be approved
by the appropriate public utility.
C. Storage Batteries. When storage batteries are included as part of
the system, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure
meeting the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code when in use and when no longer
used shall be disposed of in accordance with the laws and
regulations of Erie County and other applicable laws and
regulations.
D. In the event of inconsistency between the provisions in § 203.6-10
and other provisions in Chapter 203, the provisions in § 203.6-10
shall govern.
5. Roof-mounted and Building-Integrated Solar Energy Systems. The
following standards are applicable to rooftop and building-mounted
photovoltaic and solar-thermal energy systems:
A. Permitted in all zoning districts.
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:915
B. No size thresholds, except as limited by the applicable edition of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
C. Site plan approval:
a. Site plan approval or modification is not required for changes
to or the addition of roof-mounted or building-integrated solar
energy systems.
b. Site plan approval or modification is required for any
equipment (i.e. storage batteries) related to roof-mounted or
building-integrated solar energy systems that will be located
on the ground.
D. Roof-mounted solar panels facing a public right-of-way (front yard
or side yard on a corner lot) must be mounted at the same angle as
the roof's surface with a maximum distance of 18 inches between
the roof and highest edge of the system.
E. Roof-mounted solar energy systems mounted on detached
accessory structures (i.e. sheds, covered porches, carports) shall
not exceed the maximum height restrictions for accessory
structures of the underlying zoning district.
F. Glare. Solar energy systems shall be designed and located in order
to limit reflective glare within the airport's approach zones, as well
as towards roads or any habitable or occupiable building on
adjacent properties.
G. Safety. No roof-mounted solar-thermal energy system shall be
located in a manner that would cause the shedding of ice or snow
from the roof into an open porch, stairwell or pedestrian travel
area. If no other alternative is available, the Building Commissioner
may approve such installation with the addition of necessary safety
features, such as snow guards and diverters.
6. Standards applicable to all ground-mounted solar energy systems.
A. Height. The maximum height for all ground-mounted systems is 20
feet when the system is oriented at maximum tilt.
B. Setbacks. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall adhere to
the setback requirements as outlined in Section 7B. below.
C. Siting on the Lot. All such systems shall be installed in the side or
rear yards and shall not be permitted in the front of the building
line in any yard facing a public street.
D. Maintenance. The owner or operator shall maintain the facility in
good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not limited to,
structural repairs and integrity of security measures.
§ 6-10 AMHERST CODE § 6-10
1:916
E. Abandonment. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its
originally intended function for more than 12 consecutive months,
the property owner shall remove the collectors, plates, piping,
mounts and associated equipment and facilities by no later than
150 days after the end of the twelve-month period.
7. Additional standards for ground-mounted solar energy systems.
A. Ground-mounted solar energy systems are divided into three size
categories, as follows:
1) Tier I ground-mounted solar energy systems have a total
facility footprint of 2,000 square feet or less.
2) Tier II ground-mounted solar energy systems have a total
facility footprint of more than 2,000 square feet and less than
7,000 square feet.
3) Tier III ground-mounted solar energy systems have a total
facility footprint equal to or greater than 7,000 square feet.
B. Standards applicable to ground-mounted solar energy systems
based on scale size.
1) Tier I ground-mounted solar energy systems standards:
a) Permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory use.
b) Setbacks. Ten feet minimum from side and rear yard lot
lines.
c) Lot coverage. The footprint of the solar energy system
counts towards the total maximum lot coverage as
prescribed in the underlying zoning district.
d) Glare. Solar energy systems shall be designed and located
in order to limit reflective glare within the airport's
approach zones, as well as towards roads or any habitable
or occupiable building on adjacent properties.
e) With the exception of a single-family lot, Minor Site plan
review required.
f) Screening. Solar energy systems installed on residential
land use shall be screened with a minimum of six feet to
adjacent residential land uses or a public right-of-way.
Screening for non-residential installations shall be
required in accordance with § 203.7-2-4C.
2) Tier II ground-mounted solar energy system standards:
a) Permitted as an accessory use in the following zoning
districts: Rural Residential (RR), Community Facilities
(CF), Recreation Conservation (RC), General Business
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:917
(GB), Motor Service District (MS), Office Building (OB),
Planned Residential District (PRD), Planned Development
District (PDD), Multifamily Residential District Four-A
(MFR-4A), Multifamily Residential District Five (MFR-5),
Manufactured Home Residential District Eight (MFR-8).
b) Permitted as a principal or accessory use in the following
zoning districts: Suburban Agriculture (SA), General
Industrial (GI), Commercial Service (CS), Research and
Development (RD), and Science and Technology (ST).
c) Setbacks. Thirty feet minimum from a side or rear lot line.
d) Lot coverage. The footprint of the solar energy system
counts towards the total maximum lot coverage as
prescribed by the underlying zoning district.
e) Site Plan Review:
1. Minor site plan review is required for districts within
which the system is considered as an accessory use.
2. Major site plan review is required for installations that
will be considered the principal use of the property
and shall provide the additional application
information as required by Subsection 3.e. below.
f) Design Standards:
1. Fencing. When fencing is installed, barbed wire or
similar fence style shall not be utilized.
2. Glare. Solar energy systems shall be designed and
located in order to limit reflective glare within the
airport's approach zones, as well as towards roads or
any habitable or occupiable building on adjacent
properties.
3. Screening. Solar energy systems installed on
residential land use shall be screened with a minimum
of six feet to adjacent residential land uses. Screening
for non-residential installations shall be required in
accordance with § 203.7-2-4C.
3) Tier III solar energy system Special Use Permit standards:
a) Tier III solar energy systems may be permitted as a
Special Use in the following zoning districts: Suburban
Agriculture (SA), Office Building (OB), Commercial
Service (CS), Research and Development (RD), and
Science and Technology (ST); and therefore is subject to
the criteria outlined in Town Code § 203.8-6.
§ 6-10 AMHERST CODE § 6-10
1:918
b) Setback. Fifty feet minimum from any lot line. Roads,
landscaping and fencing may occur within the setback.
c) Maximum foot print and lot coverage. The maximum solar
facility footprint is 10 acres. The footprint of the solar
energy system counts towards the total maximum lot
coverage as prescribed by the underlying zoning district.
Solar facilities located on contiguous or non-contiguous
parcels under the same solar facility ownership or
operator will be counted together towards maximum
footprint calculations.
d) A Special Use Permit approved by the Town Board is
required prior to construction, installation or modification.
In addition to Special Use Permit application requirements
(§ 203.8-6), the following additional information shall be
submitted as part of the application:
1. Ownership and Access. If the property of the proposed
project is to be leased, legal consent between all
parties, specifying the use(s) of the land for the
duration of the project, including easements and other
agreements for use and access.
2. Site Plans. Site plans showing the layout of the solar
energy systems, including all solar panels, significant
components and equipment, mounting systems, and
other important site features as required by the
Subsection f) Design Standards below. Site plans must
be signed by a Professional Engineer or Registered
Architect.
3. Utility notification. Submission of documentation from
the utility company that operates the electrical grid
where the installation is to be located acknowledging
the photovoltaic solar energy systems will be
connected to the utility grid. Off-grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
4. Safety. The owner/operator shall provide evidence
that a copy of the site plan application has been
submitted to the appropriate Fire Safety Division. All
means of shutting down the photovoltaic solar energy
system shall be clearly marked on the site plan and
building permit applications.
5. Operation and Maintenance. Submission of a plan for
the operation and maintenance of the facility, to
include measures for maintaining safe access,
operational maintenance of the solar energy system,
and general property upkeep, such as mowing and
trimming.
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:919
6. Airport Approach Zone. Tier III ground-mounted solar
energy systems within the airport's approach zone
must receive clearance from the Buffalo Niagara
International Airport that the planned facility will not
create a flight safety issue due to reflective glare.
7. Decommissioning Plan. Submission of a
decommissioning plan, to be implemented upon
abandonment, or cessation of activity, or in
conjunction with removal of the facility to ensure that
the site is restored to its original state.
Decommissioning cost estimates shall be prepared by
a professional engineer or licensed contractor, and
take into account inflation. Proof of sufficient
decommissioning funds shall be required prior to
issuance of a permit. Compliance with this plan shall
be made a condition of the issuance of a special use
permit.
e) Major site plan review is required for all Tier III solar
energy systems and shall provide the additional
application information as required by Subsection 3.d.
above.
f) Design Standards.
1. Fencing. When fencing is installed, barbed wire or a
similar style fencing shall not be utilized. Fencing may
be further screened by landscaping needed to avoid
adverse aesthetic impacts.
2. Glare. Photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be
designed to minimize reflective glare toward roads
and any inhabited building on adjacent properties.
3. Screening/Buffering. Based on site-specific conditions,
including topography, adjacent structures, and
roadways, reasonable efforts shall be made to
minimize visual impacts by preserving natural
vegetation, creating berms, and providing landscape
screening to abutting properties and roads, but should
not result in shading solar energy systems. Screening
shall be required in accordance with § 203.7-2-4C.
4. Lighting. All lighting on the site related to the solar
energy system shall comply with the Town's Site
Lighting Standards § 203.7-3 and be limited to that
required for safety and operational purposes.
5. Signage. All signage shall comply with the Town's Sign
Regulations § 203.7-8. A sign shall be displayed on or
near the main access point identifying the owner and
§ 6-10 AMHERST CODE § 6-10
1:920
providing a twenty-four-hour emergency contact
phone number.
6. Utility Connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made
to place all utility lines from the photovoltaic solar
energy system underground, depending on
appropriate soil conditions, shape and topography of
the site, financial feasibility, and any requirements of
the utility provider.
g) Decommissioning.
1. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its
originally intended function for more than 12
consecutive months, the owner and/or operator shall
implement the decommissioning plan, to include, but
not be limited to:
i. Removal of above-ground and below-ground
equipment, structures and foundations.
ii. Restoration of the surface grade and soil after
removal of equipment.
iii. Revegetation of restored soil areas with native
seed mixes, excluding any invasive species.
2. If the owner and/or operator fail to fully implement the
decommissioning plan within 180 days, then in
addition to other remedies provided by this section or
chapter, by New York Town Law § 268, or by law or
equity, the Town may remove the solar energy system
and restore the property according to the
decommissioning plan and impose a lien on the
property to cover these costs to the municipality.
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:921

PART 7.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 7-1. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Stacking
7-1-1. Purpose. Off-street parking, loading and stacking requirements and
regulations are established in order to achieve the following purposes:
A. To relieve congestion so that streets can be utilized more fully for
movement of vehicular traffic;
B. To promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and
shoppers by locating parking areas so as to lessen car movements
in the vicinity of intensive pedestrian traffic;
C. To protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from on-street
parking;
D. To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing
developments which depend upon off-street parking facilities;
E. To insure that parking facilities are designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of access
and developed as an integral part of an overall site design; and
F. To provide regulations and standards for the development of offstreet
parking, loading and stacking facilities in accordance with
the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
7-1-2. Scope of Regulations. Off-street parking, loading and stacking
facilities shall be provided as a condition precedent to occupancy of all
buildings:
A. Whenever a new building is constructed or new use established;
B. Whenever an existing building is altered and there is an increase in
the number of building units, seating capacity or floor area of the
building; and
C. Whenever an existing building is changed to a more intensive use
requiring more off-street parking, loading or stacking facilities.
7-1-3. Continuation of Facilities. Off-street parking, loading and stacking
facilities in existence on May 23, 2006 and those required shall be
continued and maintained in operation and shall not be reduced below
the requirements of this Ordinance during the period that the principal
use is maintained, unless an equivalent number of spaces shall be
provided for said use in another location. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall review the provision of parking spaces, however the
parking lot itself shall be reviewed in accordance with § 8-7. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:923
7-1-4. Rules for Computing Requirements.
A. Fractional Requirements. When units of measurement used in
computing the number of required off-street parking, loading and
stacking spaces result in the requirements of a fractional space, the
nearest whole number of off-street parking spaces shall be
required.
B. Employees. Whenever parking requirements are based on the
number of employees, it shall mean the maximum number of
employees on duty on the premises at one time or any two
successive shifts, whichever is greater.
C. Net Floor Area. For the purpose of calculating the minimum
requirements for off-street parking, net floor area shall be
calculated according to the following:
(1) For a single story, single tenant building — 90 percent of gross
floor area.
(2) For a multistory, single tenant building — 80 percent of gross
floor area.
(3) For a single story, multiple tenant building — 85 percent of
gross floor area.
(4) For a multistory, multiple tenant building — 75 percent of gross
floor area.
D. Seating Capacity. The number of seating units installed or
indicated on the plans, in restaurants and areas devoted to dining,
shall not be less than one unit per 15 square feet of floor area;
where units are not indicated on the plan, it shall be assumed that
seating units will be provided at a ratio of one for each 10 square
feet of floor area. Floor area constitutes the actual area of the
assembly space not including accessory unoccupied space nor the
thickness of walls.
E. Parking for Single- and Multi-Use Buildings or Sites.
(1) A building occupied by one use shall provide the off-street
parking spaces as required for the specific use. A building or
group of buildings occupied by two or more uses, operating
normally during the same hours, shall provide spaces for not
less than the sum of the spaces required for each use.
(2) For a shopping center, parking spaces shall be provided for the
total net floor area of the building or buildings as set forth in
the Schedule of Parking Requirements below, instead of the
requirements based on each separate use. [Amended
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:924
F. Unlisted Uses. Upon receiving a development permit application
for a use not specifically listed in the Schedule of Parking
Requirements, the Commissioner of Building shall apply the offstreet
parking standard specified for the listed use that is deemed
most similar to the proposed use or require a parking study in
accordance with § 7-1-7, Alternative Parking Plan.
7-1-5.No Reduction Below Requirement. Existing parking and loading
spaces may not be reduced below the requirements established in this
Section without approval of an Alternative Parking Plan by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Any change in use that increases applicable offstreet
parking or loading requirements will be deemed a violation of
this Code unless parking and loading spaces are provided in accordance
with the provisions of this Section. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
7-1-6. Schedule of Parking Requirements.
A. Minimum Parking Requirements. Off-street parking facilities
shall be provided in quantities not less than set forth in the
following schedule: [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Schedule of Parking Requirements
OPEN USES Required Parking Spaces
Agricultural use 1 per 2 employees on maximum
shift
Resource extraction 1 per 2 employees on maximum
shift
RESIDENTIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Attached dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Dormitory, fraternity, sorority
house
1 per 2 occupants
Manufactured home 2 per dwelling unit
Single-family detached dwelling 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 per
auxiliary unit
Two-family 2 per dwelling unit
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES Required Parking Spaces
Adult care facility 1 per employee, plus 1 per 3
units
Auditoriums, gymnasiums,
theaters, public assembly not
otherwise listed
1 per 3 seats or per 3 persons of
posted capacity if permanent
seats are not installed
Boardinghouse 1 per employee, plus 1 per bed
Cemetery, columbaria,
mausoleum, memorial park
1 per 50 internment plots
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:925
Schedule of Parking Requirements
Community residential facility,
group home
1 per employee (minimum of 2
spaces for community
residences and 5 for
intermediate care facility), plus
2 per facility vehicles, plus 1
per client vehicle, plus 4 visitor
spaces
Community service 1 per 200 sf
Convalescent or nursing home,
dwellings for elderly persons
(65 or older)
1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per
employee
Day care center, child 1 per employee plus 1 per 8
persons of licensed capacity
Hospital 1 per bed, including emergency
room and ambulatory surgery,
plus 1 per employee
Medical office or medical
facility not otherwise listed
1 per 150 sf [Amended
1-16-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
Parks or open space not
otherwise listed
2 per acre, plus 1 per 250 sf of
park building
Passenger terminal 1 per 300 sf
Place of worship 1 per 3 seats or per 3 persons of
posted capacity if permanent
seats are not installed
Public and semi-public buildings 1 per 200 sf floor area devoted
to office use
School, nursery or primary 2 per classroom or as required
for assembly areas, whichever
is higher
School, post-secondary 1 per 2 classroom seats, plus
spaces required for assembly
area
School, secondary 1 per classroom, plus spaces
required for assembly area
Social service institution 1 per 2 employees on maximum
shift, plus 1 per 3 beds
Taxi dispatch center 1 per employee, plus 2 visitor
spaces
Telecommunication facility 1 per service vehicle
Utility, minor None
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:926
Schedule of Parking Requirements
Utility not otherwise listed 1 per facility, plus 1 per 250 sf,
plus 1 per fleet vehicle
COMMERCIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Athletic, swim or health club 1 per 2 persons of posted
maximum capacity
Bowling alley 6 spaces per alley
Call center 1 per 100 sf
Car wash 1 space per 3 employees on
maximum shift, plus 3 spaces
per stall
Conservation, archery and gun
clubs
Minimum 10 spaces
Dance, art, music or photo
studio or classroom
1 per 75 sf of gross floor area
devoted to activity
Funeral home or mortuary 20 per parlor
Go-cart track 2 per cart plus 1 per 60 sf of
waiting area
Golf course 3 per hole, minimum 10 spaces
Golf driving range 1 per driving stall, plus spaces
as required for retail activities
Hair, tanning, and other
personal care services
2 per chair or operating station
Hotels, motels, tourist houses 1 space per room, plus 1 per 6
seats in restaurant/bar area,
plus 1 per 5 persons of posted
capacity in conference or
meeting room
Indoor recreation not otherwise
listed
1 per 250 sf of floor area
devoted to activity, plus 1 per 3
seats or 3 persons of posted
capacity if there are no seats
Miniature golf 1 per hole, plus spaces required
for assembly space
Office, professional or not
otherwise listed
1 per 200 sf of net floor area
Outdoor recreation fields
(Football, soccer, baseball,
bocce ball, etc.)
1 per 3 seats or per 3 recreation
participants
Parking, commercial 1 space per employee on the
maximum shift
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:927
Schedule of Parking Requirements
Restaurant, take-out only 1 per 10 sf of take-out floor area
[Amended 4-12-2010 by L.L.
No. 2-2010]
Restaurant, bar, banquet hall,
and dining area
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 100 sf
for customer area or takeout
Retail sales and service not
otherwise listed, not exceeding
2,000 square feet
7 per 1,000 sf of net floor area,
minimum 5 spaces
Retail sales and service not
otherwise listed, over 2,000 but
less than 25,000 square feet
5.5 per 1,000 sf of net floor area
Shopping center and retail sales
and service not otherwise listed
(25,000 to 200,000 square feet)
5 per 1,000 sf of net floor area,
plus 1 per 5 seats in sit-down
restaurants and theaters
Shopping center and retail sales
and service not otherwise listed
(200,000 to 600,000 square
feet)
5 per 1,000 sf of net floor area,
plus 1 per 5 seats in theaters
Shopping center and retail sales
and service not otherwise listed
(over 600,000 square feet)
5.5 per 1,000 sf of net floor area
Swimming pool, club or spa 1 per 50 sf of gross floor area
and pool area devoted to
activity
Tennis club 3 per court
Self-service storage 1 per 5,000 sf of area devoted
to storage
Vehicle repair 5 spaces per bay plus 1 space
per employee
Vehicles sales or rental 2 per 300 sf of gross floor area
plus 1 per 2 employees on
maximum shift
Vehicle service, limited
(Automobile collision and repair
shop)
2 spaces per bay, rack, stall or
pit with a minimum of 6 spaces
Vehicle sales and service not
otherwise listed
1 per employee, plus 1 per 200
sf
INDUSTRIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Automobile junkyard 1 space per 2 employees on the
maximum shift plus 10 spaces
for customer parking
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:928
Schedule of Parking Requirements
Industrial, heavy 1 space per employee
Industrial service, light 1 space per employee
Warehouse and storage
occupancies
1 per 1,000 sf of gross floor
area or 1 space per employee,
whichever is greater
Waste-related service not
otherwise listed
1 space per 2 employees plus 1
space per vehicle used in
operation
Wholesale trade 1 space per employee
7-1-7. Alternative Parking Plan. An alternative parking standard may be
approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for specific developments
or uses that are deemed to require a different amount of parking than
the standards shown in the Schedule of Parking Requirements. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall establish conditions necessary to
assure the adequacy of future on-site parking when approving an
alternate parking standard. Potential alternative parking plan
approaches and specific regulations are described below. In the event
that the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that one of the
following alternative approaches produces an inadequate number of
parking spaces, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require the
provision of additional parking or may limit the occupancy of the
subject building to the extent that the existing number of parking
spaces is adequate. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require a revised study and analysis should conditions
change that may result in a change in site parking conditions.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
A. Parking Study Option. Parking studies may be required for
specific uses that have characteristics that reduce the accuracy of
standard requirements. Additionally, as an alternative, petitioners
for uses that appear on the requirements table may choose to
conduct a parking study to determine appropriate parking
requirements. Many uses have widely varying parking demand
characteristics, making it difficult to specify a single off-street
parking standard. This option is intended to allow development to
meet vehicle parking and transportation access needs by means
other than providing parking spaces on-site in accordance with the
Schedule of Parking Requirements.
(1) Parking Study. A petitioner may submit a parking study that
provides justification for the number of off-street parking
spaces proposed in a new development or expanded use if the
proposed number does not meet the requirements of the
Schedule of Parking Requirements above. A parking study
shall include estimates of parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:929
other acceptable estimates as approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, and should include other reliable data
collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same
as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be
determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and
location. The study shall document the source of data used to
develop the recommendations.
(2) Eligible Alternatives. A number of specific parking and
access alternatives may be considered, including off-site,
shared or valet parking or the proximity of public
transportation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be
authorized to consider and approve any alternative to
providing off-street parking spaces on the site of the subject
development if the petitioner demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner of Building that the proposed plan shall
result in an equivalent or better situation with respect to
surrounding neighborhoods, town-wide traffic circulation or
urban design than would strict compliance with otherwise
applicable off-street parking standards.
(3) Review by Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall review the parking study and any
other traffic engineering and planning data relevant to the
establishment of an appropriate off-street parking standard for
the proposed use. After reviewing the parking study, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall establish a minimum offstreet
parking standard for the proposed use.
B. Off-Site Parking. Off-street parking spaces may be located on a
separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if
approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and if the off-site
parking complies with the all of following standards.
(1) Ineligible Activities. Off-site parking may not be used to
satisfy the off-street parking standards for residential uses
(except for guest parking) or convenience stores. Required
parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not
be located off-site.
(2) Location. No off-site parking space may be located more than
500 feet from the primary pedestrian building entrance of the
use served unless shuttle bus service is provided to the remote
parking area. [Amended 12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
(3) Zoning Classification. Off-site parking areas serving uses
located in nonresidential zoning districts shall be located in
nonresidential zoning districts, except for restricted parking
lots per § 7-1-9B(2)(b). Off-site parking areas serving uses
located in residential zoning districts may be located in
residential or nonresidential zoning districts.
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:930
(4) Agreement for Off-Site Parking. In the event that an off-site
parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal
use served, a written agreement will be required. An attested
copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be
submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for recordation
on forms acceptable to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Recordation of the agreement with the Erie County Clerk's
Office shall take place before issuance of a building permit for
any use to be served by the off-site parking area. The
agreement shall run with the land until terminated with the
approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. An off-site parking
agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street
parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this
Section.
C. Shared Use of Parking Facilities. A nonresidential use may make
arrangements with another nonresidential use that normally has
different hours of operation to share off-street parking spaces if
approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The shared parking
shall comply with all of following standards.
(1) Location. Shared parking facilities shall be located within 500
feet from the primary pedestrian building entrance of all uses
served. [Amended 12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
(2) Zoning Classification. Shared parking areas serving uses
located in nonresidential zoning districts shall be located in
nonresidential zoning districts, except for restricted parking
lots per § 7-1-9B(2)(b). Shared parking areas serving uses
located in residential zoning districts may be located in
residential or nonresidential zoning districts.
(3) Shared Parking Study. Those wishing to use shared parking
as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall
submit a shared parking analysis to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared
parking. The study shall be provided in a format acceptable to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer. It shall address, at a
minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the
composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking
turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for
all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
(4) Agreement for Shared Parking. A shared parking plan shall
be enforced through written agreement among the owners of
record. An attested copy of the agreement shall be submitted
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for recordation on forms
acceptable to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Proof of
recordation of the agreement with the Erie County Clerk's
Office shall be presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
prior to issuance of a Building Permit. A shared parking
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:931
agreement may be revoked by the parties to the agreement
only if off-street parking is provided pursuant to this Section.
Should any of the uses be changed or the facilities
discontinued, then the required spaces for the remaining
use(s) shall be provided elsewhere as a condition precedent to
the continuation of the subject use(s).
D. Valet Parking. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may authorize
valet parking as a means of satisfying otherwise applicable offstreet
parking standards, provided that the following conditions
are met:
(1) An automobile shall be retrievable from its parking space with
the movement of a maximum of two additional vehicles;
(2) An equivalent number of valet spaces shall be available to
replace the required parking spaces. Such valet spaces do not
require individual striping, and may take into account the
tandem or mass parking of vehicles. All valet parking areas
shall meet the applicable requirements of § 7-2, Landscaping,
Buffers and Screening.
(3) Valet parking drop-off locations shall meet the requirements of
§ 7-1-10, Vehicle Stacking Areas.
E. Transportation Management Plan. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer may authorize a reduction in the number of required offstreet
parking spaces for developments or uses that institute and
commit to maintaining a transportation management program, in
accordance with the standards of this Section.
(1) Required Study. The petitioner shall submit a study to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer that clearly indicates the types of
transportation management activities and measures proposed.
The study shall be provided in a format acceptable to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(2) Transportation Management Activities. There shall be no
limitation on the types of transportation management activities
for which reductions may be granted from otherwise required
off-street parking ratios. The following measures shall serve as
a guide to eligible transportation management activities.
(a) Transportation Coordinator. The occupant of the
development or use may appoint an employee to act as
Transportation Coordinator with responsibility for
disseminating information on ride-sharing and other
transportation options may be cause for a reduction in
otherwise applicable off-street parking requirements. In
addition to acting as liaisons, Transportation Coordinators
shall be available to attend meetings and training sessions
with the Town or transit providers.
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:932
(b) Off-Peak Work Hours. Employers that institute off-peak
work schedules, allowing employees to arrive at times
other than the peak morning commute period, may be
eligible for a reduction in otherwise applicable off-street
parking requirements. The peak morning commute period
is defined as 7:00-9:00 a.m.
(c) Preferential Parking. The provision of specially marked
spaces for each registered car pool and van pool may be
cause for a reduction in otherwise applicable off-street
parking requirements.
(d) Financial Incentives. The provision of cash or in-kind
financial incentives for employees commuting by car pool,
van pool and transit may be cause for a reduction in
otherwise applicable parking requirements.
7-1-8.Parking, Stacking and Loading Area Design Requirements.
Parking, stacking and loading areas and access driveways shall be
designed, graded, constructed, altered and maintained as follows:
A. Grading and Paving. Parking, stacking and loading areas and
access driveways shall be graded and drained so that the surface
water shall not be allowed to flow onto adjacent properties. Parking
areas and driveways shall be constructed as required by the
Building Construction Administration Code.
B. Features. Parking, stacking and loading areas shall be arranged,
marked and maintained as shown on the parking, loading and
stacking plan approved as a part of the site plan in order to provide
for orderly and safe parking, loading and storage of vehicles. The
Planning Board may also require structural or landscape features,
including, without limitation, bumper guards, curbs, walls or
fences, to provide protection of property and persons and privacy
and screening for adjacent land uses with visual, noise and air
standards considered. A compact evergreen hedge, shrubs or other
screening by a substantially solid fence between parking areas and
the side or rear lot line of a residential district may also be required
in accordance with the standards established in § 7-2.
C. Illumination. Parking, loading and stacking areas shall be
illuminated only to the extent necessary to insure the public safety
and in accordance with § 7-3, Site Lighting.
D. Pedestrian Walks. Pedestrian walks between parking areas and
buildings shall be provided to assure pedestrians' safety.
E. Driveways to Parking, Loading and Stacking Areas. Entrance
and exit driveways serving parking, loading and stacking facilities,
drive-in businesses, fee parking lots and public parking lots shall be
provided in location, size and number so as to interfere as little as
possible with the use of adjacent property and the flow of traffic on
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:933
the streets to which they connect. Driveways located in
nonresidential districts shall be located at least 10 feet from any
residential zoning district.
7-1-9. Off-Street Parking Space and Parking Lot Design.
A. Parking Space Dimensions.
(1) Required off-street parking spaces shall have minimum
dimensions of 9 feet in width by 19 feet in length. Parallel
parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 22
feet.
(2) Minimum aisle width shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of Parking One Way Two Way
Parallel 13 ft
30 degrees 13 ft
45 degrees 13 ft
60 degrees 18 ft
90 degrees 24 ft
24 ft
B. Parking Area Location.
(1) Residential Districts and Uses. Enclosed or open parking
facilities, as required, shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwelling unit served.
(2) Business and Industrial Districts.
(a) General. Except for as provided in § 7-1-7C above, in all
nonresidential districts, off-street parking, loading and
stacking facilities shall be provided on the same lot as the
principal use or on another nonresidentially zoned lot, the
nearest point of which shall be within 200 feet from the
nearest point of the building served or on another
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:934
noncontiguous nonresidentially zoned lot when approved
by the ZBA and located on a street classified as a major
or minor arterial. The noncontiguous lot must contain an
established allowable principal use for the zoning district
in which it is located.
(b) Restricted Parking Lots Permitted Only in R-3, R-4,
MFR-5 and MFR-6 Districts. If the ZBA, after notice and
public hearing in accordance with § 8-2-3 and after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning Board,
finds that the proposed parking, loading or stacking area
in an R-3, R-4, MFR-5 and MFR-6 district to be accessory
to a business use, it may authorize the Commissioner of
Building to issue a permit for the parking, loading or
stacking area in such residential districts, provided that
the proposed parking, loading and stacking area:
(i) Will not increase the congestion on adjoining
residential streets in such a way as to promote a traffic
hazard or a nuisance to adjoining residents;
(ii) Will be properly screened, lighted and designed so as
to prevent nuisance to adjoining residents;
(iii) Will be landscaped as required by this Ordinance;
(iv) Will be suitable for the proposed use;
(v) Shall not provide more than 25 percent of the required
parking, loading and stacking area;
(vi) At least 100 feet of said lot shall abut or be directly
across the street or alley from the business use to
which it is accessory;
(vii) Shall not extend more than 250 feet from the nearest
property line of the business district;
(viii) Shall be used for the purpose of passenger
automobiles only, and no commercial repairs, sales or
services shall be conducted thereon; and
(ix) Shall be designed and constructed with driveways and
parking areas that are located not less than 10 feet
from any adjacent residential lot line.
C. Parking Rooms. Parking serving development over 100,000
square feet of gross floor area shall be visually and functionally
segmented into several smaller parking areas. Each smaller
parking area shall be approximately 180 or fewer parking spaces;
the actual number of spaces required will be determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each smaller parking room shall be
connected to an internal system of roadways. Outparcel and
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:935
parking room access shall be taken from the internal system of
roadways on the site. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008;
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
D. Parking Lot Walkways. Parking Lot Pedestrian Medians with
walkways leading to primary building entrances as designated by
the Planning Director may be required by the Planning Board in
parking lots containing more than 180 spaces in accordance with
§ 7-2-3A(3)(h).
7-1-10.Vehicular Stacking Design Requirements.
A. Minimum Stacking Requirements. In addition to minimum
parking requirements established by § 7-1-6A above, the following
stacking areas are required. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
require an analysis of stacking requirements be provided to
determine if additional stacking spaces will be required for a
specific use or location. The size of each stacking space shall be 20
feet in length by 9 feet in width. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
Specific Use
Minimum Stacking
Spaces Measured From
Automated teller
machine
3 Machine
Bank teller lane 4 Teller window
Car Wash, Coin 5 per stall
Car Wash, Rapid 35 per stall
Entrance
Drive-In Photo
Facilities
2 per service window Service window
Gasoline pump
island
2 Pump island
6 Order box
Restaurant, drivethrough
4 Order box to pick-up
window
Other Drive-In
Facilities
5, or as determined by Commissioner of
Building
B. Location. Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic
movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
C. Design. Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal
driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Planning
Director for traffic movement and safety.
7-1-11. Loading Facility Design Requirements. Loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided and maintained as long as such building is
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-1
1:936
occupied or unless equivalent facilities are provided in conformance
with the regulations of this Section.
A. Allocation of Use. Space required and allocated for any off-street
loading facility shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements
for off-street parking or stacking. An off-street loading space shall
not be used for repairing or servicing of motor vehicles.
B. Location of Facility. All required loading facilities shall be related
to the building and use to be served to provide for loading and offloading
of delivery and other service vehicles and shall be so
arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise
interfering with the use of access ways, parking or stacking
facilities, public streets or sidewalks. A required loading space
shall not face or be visible from the frontage street and shall not be
located in a required front yard or a required side or rear yard if
adjoining a residential district. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
C. Access Driveways. Each required off-street loading space shall be
designed for vehicular access by means of a driveway or driveways
to a public street in a manner which will least interfere with
adjacent traffic movements and interior circulation.
D. Minimum Size Criteria. A required off-street loading space shall
be at least 12 feet wide by at least 20 feet in length. The above area
shall be exclusive of the maneuvering space, and each loading
facility shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
E. Schedule of Required Loading Facilities. Off-street loading
spaces shall be provided as required below.
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of
Loading Spaces
Under 5,000 none
5,000 — 50,000 1
Retail Sales and Service 50,000 — 100,000 2
Each additional
100,000
1 additional space
Under 40,000 2
Printing, warehouse and 40,000 — 100,000 4
storage establishments Each additional
50,000
1 additional space
Under 20,000 2
Industrial
20,000 — 40,000 4
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:937
§ 7-2. Landscaping, Buffers and Screening
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of
Loading Spaces
Each additional
25,000
1 additional space
F. Unlisted Uses. Any use not listed in § 7-1-11E may provide any
number of loading spaces provided that such spaces are
constructed in accordance with the standards of this subsection.
7-1-12.Vehicle Parking and Storage on Parcels Used for Residential
Purposes.
A. Parking or storage of any vehicle or trailer being used for
commercial purposes shall not be permitted on a residential parcel,
except that one commercial vehicle, the rated capacity of which
does not exceed 3/4-ton, may be parked inside or outside of a
completely enclosed building. When parked outside of a completely
enclosed building, the commercial vehicle shall not have any
commercial advertisement affixed thereto.
B. In the S-A district, commercial vehicles shall be allowed only when
directly associated with permitted principal uses on the same
premises.
7-2-1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to:
A. Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
by requiring the landscaping of all applicable development meeting
the criteria in § 8-7-1 including parking, stacking and loading
areas (Vehicle Use Areas).
B. Establish minimum standards and criteria for the landscaping of all
applicable development to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and
disturbing of land so as to preserve the natural and existing growth
of vegetation and to replace removed vegetation or plant new
vegetation indigenous to the Western New York region.
C. Reduce the effects of wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and
the glare of motor vehicle lights and parking area lights.
D. Provide unpaved areas for the absorption of surface waters.
E. Reduce the level of carbon dioxide and airborne pollutants and
return oxygen to the atmosphere.
F. Prevent soil erosion.
G. Provide shade.
§ 7-1 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:938
H. Conserve and stabilize property values and to otherwise facilitate
the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community.
I. Relieve the blighted appearance of parking areas.
J. Generally preserve a healthful and pleasant environment.
K. Implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
7-2-2. General Provisions.
A. All developments subject to site plan review in accordance with
§ 8-7 shall meet the requirements of this Section. A separate
landscape plan shall be submitted and approved, approved with
conditions or denied as a part of this review procedure.
B. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect unless the landscape plan is submitted as part of a minor
site plan as defined in § 8-7. The contents of the landscaping plan
shall be established by the Planning Director.
C. A revised site plan shall not diminish the landscaping of the site
below the requirements of this section.
7-2-3. Landscape Regulations.
A. Standards and Criteria.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Required landscaped areas shall be designed as an
integral part of the site development and shall be
dispersed throughout the development site and VUA.
(b) Landscaping shall provide screening for adjacent land
uses in accordance with § 7-2-4 below, with visual, noise
and air quality factors considered.
(c) Vegetation shall be compatible with soil conditions on the
development site and the regional climate.
(d) Existing and natural features and vegetation shall be
preserved and incorporated in the landscaped area
wherever possible.
(e) The primary emphasis of the landscape treatment shall be
on trees. Shrubbery, hedges, grass and other vegetation
may be used to complement the use of trees but shall not
be the sole contribution to the landscape treatment.
(f) Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation
shall not be permitted.
(g) All large and small deciduous trees planted shall have a
minimum caliper of two and one-half inches, measured six
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:939
inches above the ground. All large deciduous trees planted
in multi-stem form shall have a minimum height of 12 feet
above the finished grade. All small deciduous trees planted
in multi-stem form shall have a minimum height of 10
feet above the finished grade. All coniferous trees planted
shall have a minimum height of five feet above the finished
grade. All ornamental trees planted shall have a minimum
caliper of one and three-quarters inches measured six
inches above the ground. All ornamental trees planted in
multi-stem form shall have a minimum height of eight feet
above the finished grade. All shrubs planted shall have
a minimum height of 24 inches above the ground except
when being used as a ground cover. All evergreen shrubs
used for screening shall have a minimum height of 48
inches (4 feet) above the finished grade.
(2) Required Landscaped Area Adjacent to Buildings. A
landscaped area with a minimum average width of three feet
shall be provided between each and every side of the proposed
principal use building and any off-street parking or internal
access road with the exception of building entrances/exits,
drive-throughs and covered pedestrian walkways. A minimum
of 50 percent of this landscaped area shall be planted with
small trees, shrubs, perennials or combinations thereof. The
balance of the landscaped area not planted with trees, shrubs
or perennials shall be lawn or groundcover (see subsection (3)
below). [Amended 4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010; 8-1-2011
by L.L. No. 19-2011; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
Where the side or rear facade of a principal building or
accessory structure faces a public or private street/right-ofway,
the entire area of the required yard (with the exception
of building entrances/exits and loading areas) between the
street/right-of-way and the building shall be landscaped with
a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs and
perennial plants sufficient to mitigate the visual impact of
the building on the adjacent street/right-of-way as determined
by the Planning Board or Planning Director, as applicable.
[Added 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 39-2014]
(3) Interior Landscaped Area.
(a) Minimum interior landscaped areas shall be provided in
accordance with the following table.
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:940
Parking Area
Minimum Interior
Landscaped Area
(percent of Parking
Area)
0 — 2,999 Square Feet 0%
3,000 — 7,500 Square Feet 5%*
7,501 — 43,560 Square Feet 5%
More than 43,560 Square Feet
(one acre)
10%
* For Parking Areas of 7,500 square feet or less, where
the configuration of the site permits, yard area at least
5 feet wide in excess of the minimum required yard in
the district shall be credited to the interior landscaped
area requirement.
(b) An interior landscaped island shall be provided for every
15 spaces. Each island shall have a minimum width of
eight feet inside the curb and a minimum length of 16 feet
for a single row and 32 feet for a double row. Interior
islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded
in order to preserve existing trees or facilitate snow
plowing if approved by the Planning Board or Planning
Director, as applicable. [Amended 4-12-2010 by L.L.
No. 2-2010]
(c) All rows of spaces shall terminate in a landscaped island.
Each island shall conform to the specifications described
in (b) above. Terminal island intervals may be modified in
order to preserve existing trees or facilitate snow plowing
if approved by the Planning Board or Planning Director, as
applicable.
(d) Divider medians may be substituted for landscaped islands
described in (b) above. Divider medians are landscaped
areas located between rows of parking spaces, between
parking spaces and driveways or between areas of
parking. Divider medians shall have a minimum width of
six feet.
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:941
(e) A minimum of one large deciduous tree shall be provided
for each landscaped island that exceeds 128 square feet.
One additional large deciduous shade tree shall be
provided within landscaped islands for each 100 square
feet in excess of 128 square feet. The Planning Board or
Planning Director may, permit the substitution of smaller
ornamental trees within landscaped islands. A minimum of
2 small ornamental trees shall be provided for each
landscaped island that exceeds 128 square feet. One
additional small ornamental tree shall be provided within
landscaped islands for each 90 square feet in excess of 128
square feet.
(f) A minimum of one large deciduous shade tree shall be
planted for every 200 square feet of landscaped area
within any divider median, planted individually or in
groups separated by a maximum of 40 feet. The Planning
Board or Planning Director may, permit the substitution of
smaller ornamental trees within divider medians. A
minimum of one small ornamental tree shall be provided
for every 90 square feet of landscaped area within any
divider median.
(g) When divider medians and mid row islands have a width of
10 feet or greater, evergreen trees may be provided in
addition to large deciduous trees. Evergreen trees should
be spaced a maximum of 10 feet on center.
(h) Parking Lot Pedestrian Medians (as required by § 7-1-9D)
shall have a minimum dimension of 16 feet and contain a
concrete walkway with a minimum width of six feet.
Planting areas with a minimum width of five feet shall be
provided on both sides of the walkway. At each point the
walkway crosses a parking lot or internal driveway, the
walkway shall be clearly defined through a change in the
texture, color or height of the paving materials.
(i) In addition to trees, all landscaped islands and divider
medians shall be landscaped with grass, groundcover,
shrubs or other landscape material acceptable to the
Planning Board or Planning Director.
(j) All interior landscaped areas shall have a minimum
planting soil depth of three feet and be free from all forms
of construction debris and foreign material.
(k) All islands and medians shall have six inch high concrete
curbing as a minimum to protect plant materials from
damage.
(l) The dimensions of all islands and medians shall be
measured from the landscaped side of the curb.
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:942
B. Preservation of Existing Trees.
(1) Efforts shall be made to preserve trees in a manner consistent
with the Town of Amherst Tree Law (also known as Chapter
179 of the Amherst Town Code, as amended) and subsections
(2) through (4) of this Section.
(2) An existing tree can qualify for credit in accordance with
subsection (4) of this Section if it meets all of the following
criteria:
(a) The tree is healthy, free from disease, damage or active
insect infestation which is potentially lethal to the tree;
(b) The tree is not a variety that has weak or brittle wood, or
one which has excessive or noxious seed, pollen or fruit;
(c) The tree is expected to live for a minimum of 10 years;
(d) The tree is not seriously deformed or contorted; and
(e) The tree is preserved in accordance with Section (3) below.
(3) A root protection zone shall be established around any tree
which is identified on the landscape plan as a tree to be
preserved. The root protection zone is identified by creating a
circle around the tree, the size of which is determined by
providing one foot of radius for every inch of diameter of the
tree measured at breast height (DBH). The root protection
zone shall be marked in the field with a physical barrier such as
temporary fencing or other means which shall prevent
construction activities from occurring within the tree root
protection zone. Methods for preserving and protecting
existing trees shall be included as part of the landscape plan.
(4) Existing trees preserved in accordance with this Section will
be credited towards the fulfillment of a portion of the
requirements for tree planting contained in these regulations
in accordance with the following schedule:
Size of Existing Tree that is Preserved
Deciduous Trees
(DBH)
Evergreen Trees
(height)
Credits Toward
Number of
Required New
Trees
Less than 4 in. Less than 5 ft. 0.5
4 in. or more but
less than 6 in.
5 ft. or more but less
than 10 ft.
1
6 in. or more but
less than 12 in.
10 ft. or more but
less than 15 ft.
2
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:943
Size of Existing Tree that is Preserved
Deciduous Trees
(DBH)
Evergreen Trees
(height)
Credits Toward
Number of
Required New
Trees
12 in. or more 15 ft. or more 3
(5) The diameter of a single-stem tree that has a crotch between
two feet and four and one-half feet above the ground shall be
measured at the narrowest point between the ground and the
crotch. The size of multi-stem trees shall be determined by
adding together the diameter of the three largest stems as
measured four and one-half feet above ground level.
7-2-4. Buffers and Screening.
A. General [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 8-1-2011 by
L.L. No. 19-2001; 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011;
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 30-2011]
(1) The portion of the required front yard area which cannot be
utilized for parking, loading, stacking or driveways shall be
suitably landscaped and maintained by the owner in
accordance with § 7-2-4A(2) of these regulations. [Amended
11-5-2012 by L.L. No. 17-2012]
(2) Vehicle Use Areas (VUAs) located adjacent to a public street
shall be screened from the street with tree and shrub
plantings, earthen berms, walls or a combination of these
methods so as to establish an effective visual screen which is
not less than 36 inches above the grade at the adjacent VUA
within two years of installation. A minimum of one large
deciduous tree, two small deciduous/ornamental trees or three
evergreen trees or any combination thereof shall be planted
within the required yard area for each 40 linear feet of
frontage along a street.
(3) Standards for dumpsters and other refuse collection container
areas are provided in § 7-2-4D. [Amended 11-5-2012 by L.L.
No. 17-2012]
(4) Standards for mechanical equipment, utility structures,
multiple meter boards, generators, air conditioning units and
Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) backflow preventor hot boxes
are provided in § 7-2-4C.
(5) Developments shall provide sufficient buffering and screening
for the VUA. Buffering and screening may consist of trees and
shrubs existing on the site prior to development. Supplemental
plantings may be required in addition to the existing
vegetation as determined by the Planning Board or Planning
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:944
Director in order to improve the screening properties of the
buffer. Buffering and screening may also consist of tree and
shrub plantings, earthen berms, fences, walls or a combination
of these methods so as to establish an effective visual screen.
When fences or walls are utilized for screening, trees and other
plant materials (shrubs, vines, ground covers, perennials) shall
also be used. Standards for landscaping are provided in
§ 7-2-4B. [Amended 11-5-2012 by L.L. No. 17-2012]
(6) All fences provided or required shall have an attractive,
finished appearance facing any public right-of-way or adjacent
property.
B. Minimum Impact of Screening Required. The following table
and criteria shall be used to determine the level of screening
between adjoining land uses. Single Family Residential districts
include the R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3 and R-4 districts.
Multifamily Residential districts include the MFR-4A, MFR-5,
MFR-6, MFR-7 and MHR-8 districts. For circumstances falling
outside of these categories, the level of screening required will be
determined during site plan review. For the RC district, the amount
of screening required will be determined during site plan review.
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 12-12-2011 by L.L.
No. 30-2011; 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
Existing Adjacent Zoning
Proposed
Land Use
SF
Res.
MF
Res. Office CommercialIndustrial
Community
Facility
MF Res. High Medium High High High High
Office High High Low*
Medium†
Medium Medium Medium
Commercial High High Medium Low*
Medium†
Low*
Medium†
Medium
Industrial High High Medium Low*
Medium†
Low*
Medium†
Medium
Public and
Civic
High High Medium Medium Medium Low*
Medium†
Key:* = 0-3 acres † = 3+ acres (proposed use)
(1) High Impact Screening. When the proposed development is
considered to have a high impact on the existing adjacent
zoning according to the table in § 7-2-4B, one of the following
methods for buffering and screening shall be provided between
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:945
the VUA and the nearest property line. [Amended 11-5-2012
by L.L. No. 17-2012]
(a) Buffering and screening may consist of healthy trees and
shrubs existing on the site prior to development providing
that they form an immediately effective visual screen at
least 36 inches above the grade at the adjacent VUA and
that the existing trees and shrubs are thoroughly
protected from damage during construction by
establishing a work limit line on all site plan drawings. The
work limit line shall be delineated in the field prior to site
clearing in the vicinity of the required yard area.
Supplemental plantings may be required in addition to the
existing vegetation as determined by the Planning Board
or Planning Director in order to improve the screening
properties of the buffer.
(b) Buffering and screening may consist of an earthen berm,
masonry/stone wall or opaque wooden/vinyl fence with a
minimum height of 36 inches above the grade at the
adjacent VUA and one medium impact landscape screen
evenly distributed within the required yard area (refer to
Medium Impact Screen table below).
(2) Medium Impact Screening. When the proposed
development is considered to have a moderate impact on the
existing adjacent zoning according to the table in § 7-2-4B, one
of the following methods for buffering and screening shall be
provided between the VUA and the nearest property line.
[Amended 11-5-2012 by L.L. No. 17-2012]
(a) Buffering and screening may consist of healthy trees and
shrubs existing on the site prior to development, providing
that they form an immediately effective visual screen at
least 36 inches above the grade at the adjacent VUA and
that the existing trees and shrubs are thoroughly
protected from damage during construction by
establishing a work limit line on all site plan drawings. The
work limit line shall be delineated in the field prior to site
clearing in the vicinity of the required yard area.
Supplemental plantings may be required in addition to the
existing vegetation as determined by the Planning Board
or Planning Director in order to improve the screening
properties of the buffer.
(b) Buffering and screening may consist of either: (1) one
medium impact landscape screen evenly distributed
throughout the required yard area; or (2) an earthen berm,
masonry/stone wall or opaque wooden/vinyl fence with a
minimum height of 36 inches above the grade at the
adjacent VUA and one low impact landscape screen evenly
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:946
distributed throughout the required yard area (refer to
Medium and Low Impact Screen tables below).
Medium Impact Landscape Screen
Options
Plant Type
Screen
1
Screen
2
Screen
3 Screen 4
Large
Deciduous
Trees
1/25 L.F. 1/40 L.F 1/50 L.F 1/50 L.F
Small
Deciduous/
Ornamental
Trees
0 0 1/60 L.F 1/60 L.F
Evergreen
(Coniferous)
Trees
0 1/40 L.F 1/15 L.F 1/20 L.F
Evergreen &
Deciduous
Shrubs
1/5 L.F 1/5 L.F 0 1/15 L.F
(c) Screen One shall be utilized only when yard area is less
than 10 feet in width.
(d) Trees and shrubs shall be provided based on number of
linear feet per applicable side or rear yard.
(e) Fractions of trees or shrubs shall be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
(3) Low Impact Screening. When the proposed development is
considered to have a low impact on the existing adjacent
zoning according to the table in § 1-1-1B, one of the following
methods for buffering and screening shall be provided within
the required minimum rear and side yards for the VUA’s (for
yard dimensions, refer to the Dimensional Standards for each
zoning district).
(a) Buffering and screening may consist of healthy trees and
shrubs existing on the site prior to development, providing
that they form an immediately effective visual screen at
least 36 inches above the grade at the adjacent VUA and
that the existing trees and shrubs are thoroughly
protected from damage during construction by
establishing a work limit line on all site plan drawings. The
work limit line shall be delineated in the field prior to site
clearing in the vicinity of the required yard area.
Supplemental plantings may be required in addition to the
existing vegetation as determined by the Planning Board
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:947
or Planning Director in order to improve the screening
properties of the buffer.
(b) Buffering and screening may consist of one low impact
landscape screen evenly distributed within the required
yard area (refer to low impact screen table below).
Low Impact Landscape Screen
Options
Plant Type
Screen
1
Screen
2
Screen
3 Screen 4
Large
Deciduous
Trees
1/40 LF 1/60 L.F 1/80 L.F 1/75 L.F
Small
Deciduous/
Ornamental
Trees
0 0 1/100
L.F
1/75 L.F
Evergreen
(Coniferous)
Trees
0 1/50 L.F 1/25 L.F 1/50 L.F
Evergreen &
Deciduous
Shrubs
1/10 L.F 1/10 L.F 0 1/20 L.F
(c) Trees and shrubs shall be provided based on number of
linear feet per applicable side or rear yard.
(d) Fractions of trees or shrubs shall be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
(4) Screening Adjacent to Residential Zoning. When adjacent
to the following districts: R-R, S-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, CR-3A, TR-3,
R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7 PRD, PDD, PRD, or NCD,
any building or structure in the MFR-6, MFR-7, OB, GB, NB,
CS, MS, SC, RD, ST, GI, AG, CF, R-R, S-A or RC districts must
provide the following landscape buffering and screening within
the required side and/or rear yard(s): [Added 11-3-2014 by
L.L. No. 39-2014]
(a) An earthen berm with a minimum height of three (3) feet
(measured at the top of a 1:3± grade) or an opaque wood
or vinyl fence, brick, stone or ornamental concrete
masonry unit wall with a minimum height of 5 feet and the
following plant materials: a minimum of one evergreen
tree per each 10 linear feet of property line adjacent to
single-family residential zoning, one small deciduous or
ornamental tree per each 15 linear feet of property line
adjacent to residential zoning and one large deciduous
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:948
tree per each 40 linear feet of property line adjacent to
single-family residential zoning.
[Image not available for print. If you would like to
view, please call or come into the Planning Office,
(716-631-7052).]
C. Screening of Mechanical Equipment.
(1) Non-single-family residential properties which may be viewed
from residential uses, public streets or public park areas shall
screen all roof, ground and wall mounted mechanical
equipment (utility structures, multiple meter boards,
generators, air conditioning units, backflow preventor [RPZ]
hot boxes, etc.) from view at ground level of the property line.
[Amended 10-9-2017 by L.L. No. 21-2017]
(2) All mechanical equipment shall be limited to that area shown
on an approved site and development plan.
(3) Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened or
arranged so as to not be visible from residential uses, public
streets or park areas and be shielded from view on four sides.
Screening shall consist of materials consistent with the
principal building materials, and may include metal screening
or louvers which are painted to blend with the principal
building.
(4) Wall or ground-mounted equipment screening shall be
constructed of:
(a) Planting screens; or
(b) Brick, stone, reinforced concrete, vinyl stockade or other
similar material as approved by the Planning Board or
Planning Director; [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
(c) Redwood, cedar, preservative pressure treated wood, or
other similar materials; and
(d) All fence posts shall be rust-protected metal, concretebased
masonry or concrete pillars, or an equivalent
material as approved by the Commissioner of Building.
(5) Mechanical equipment shall not be mounted on the roof or
located in the front yard in any single-family residential
district. [Added 10-9-2017 by L.L. No. 21-2017]
D. Dumpsters and Other Refuse Containers. The following
standards shall apply to dumpsters and other refuse collection
areas in the R-4, MFR-4A, MFR-5, MFR-6, MFR-7, MHR-8 and
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:949
nonresidential districts. [Amended 12-12-2011 by L.L. No.
29-2011]
(1) All dumpster areas shall be limited to that area shown on an
approved site and development plan. Such areas Dumpsters
and other refuse containers may be located between the front
face of the building and the adjacent roadway only with the
approval of the Planning Board or Planning Director, as
applicable.
(2) Dumpster containers, other refuse containers, and all refuse
shall be visually screened on all sides from adjacent properties
and private or public rights of way with an opaque material,
which may include shrubs, walls, fences or berms. Materials
and dumpsters stored in said areas shall not protrude above
the screen.
(3) Where vegetative material is used, said material shall form an
opaque screen within two years from the time of first planting.
(4) When dumpster enclosure gates are used to address (2) above,
the gate shall consist of materials that visually conceal 100
percent of the contents of the enclosure. Gates shall remain in
the closed position except when the dumpster is being loaded
or unloaded or when access to the interior of the enclosure is
needed for maintenance or other purposes.
(5) Dumpster containers and other refuse containers in residential
districts shall meet the setbacks established in § 3-15-6.
(6) The setbacks for dumpsters in nonresidential districts shall be
five (5) feet from the property line of adjacent nonresidential
districts and ten (10) feet from the property line of adjacent
residential districts.
7-2-5.Parking Credits for Landscaping. The Planning Board or Planning
Director, as applicable, may reduce the minimum number of off-street
parking spaces required in § 7-1-6 by not more than 25 percent,
provided that the land area so removed is not used to meet the
landscape area required in this Section and is used exclusively for
landscaping in accordance with the standards and criteria of this
Section. If, at any time thereafter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
determines that the land area so removed is suitable for and is needed
to provide necessary off-street parking, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
may order the installation of such parking. The issuance of any
Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Compliance by the
Commissioner of Building shall be deemed conditional upon the
possible requirement for the future installation of the additional offstreet
parking, upon such order by the applicable site plan approval
authority. Failure to comply with such order within the time fixed
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-2
1:950
thereby shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
7-2-6. Existing Development. Where an existing development that
requires site plan review proposes an increase in the Parking Area of
3,000 or more square feet, the proposed site plan shall provide interior
landscaped areas for the added Parking Area as required by
§ 7-2-3A(3). The proposed site plan shall also provide buffering and
screening for the added Parking Area consistent with the standards in
§ 7-2-4.
7-2-7. Enforcement and Maintenance.
A. All landscaped areas required and/or permitted by these
regulations shall be maintained and preserved according to the
approved landscape plan. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of
trash, litter, weeds and other such materials. Failure to maintain
the landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan or
to keep landscaped areas free of trash, litter, weeds and other such
materials shall be a violation of this Ordinance, and this
requirement shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
B. All plant materials provided for a development in accordance with
the approved landscape plan shall be in a healthy and vigorous
growing condition, exhibit good form, and display in excess of 75
percent leaf cover, as determined by the Division of Forestry, in
order to be considered acceptable for the purposes of compliance
with the site plan at the time of inspection for Certificate of
Occupancy or Certificate of Compliance. All plant materials which
are considered to be unacceptable for the purposes of compliance
with these regulations shall be replaced with acceptable plant
material prior to the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy or
Certificate of Compliance by the Commissioner of Building.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
C. Trees which existed on the site prior to development and are
identified on the landscape plan as trees to be preserved cannot be
removed during construction without first obtaining a Tree
Removal Permit or an amendment to the site plan. The removal of
existing trees to be preserved without Town approval shall be
considered a violation of the Town of Amherst Tree Law, also known
as Local Law 8-1992, as amended.
D. After the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate
of Compliance by the Commissioner of Building, plant materials
which die or are not maintained in a healthy and growing condition
with at least 50 percent leaf cover shall be replaced within the next
growing season with plantings of a similar nature. Plantings
intended to serve as a visual screen which die or are not
maintained in a healthy and growing condition after three years
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:951
§ 7-3. Site Lighting
from the date of issuance of the final Certificate of Occupancy or
Certificate of Compliance by the Commissioner of Building shall be
replaced with plantings of a size and nature sufficient to achieve
the visual screen intended. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
E. All trees shall be planted in accordance with the methods
illustrated by the planting details required to be shown on the
approved landscape plan. Trees not planted in accordance with
these methods will not be considered acceptable for the purposes
of compliance with the Site Plan and shall be replanted in
accordance with the methods illustrated in the details, or the
method of planting otherwise corrected so as to be acceptable to
the Town prior to the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy or
Certificate of Compliance by the Commissioner of Building. Where
tree stakes and guy wires are used, they shall be removed from
newly planted trees no sooner than 12 months after planting and no
later than 18 months after planting. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L.
No. 6-2019]
F. Inspections required by this Section shall be the responsibility of
the Division of Forestry. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
7-3-1. Purpose. Nonresidential and multifamily buildings and projects shall
be designed to provide safe, convenient, and efficient lighting for
pedestrians and vehicles. Lighting shall be designed in a consistent and
coordinated manner for the entire site. The lighting and lighting
fixtures shall be integrated and designed so as to enhance the visual
impact of the project on the community and/or should be designed to
blend into the surrounding landscape. Lighting fixtures shall be
designed, sized and located so as not to cast direct rays of light upon
adjoining premises or cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or persons
using adjacent public streets. Illumination shall not be used for the
purpose of advertising or attracting attention to the principal use,
except as permitted by § 7-8, Sign Regulations.
7-3-2. Applicability. A site lighting plan shall be required during review of
any nonresidential or multifamily site and development plan. The
contents of the site lighting plan shall be established by the Planning
Director.
7-3-3. Site Lighting Design Requirements. Lighting shall be used to
provide safety while accenting key architectural elements and to
emphasize landscape features. Light fixtures shall be designed as an
integral design element that complements the design of the project.
This can be accomplished through style, material or color. All lighting
fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall
meet the following requirements:
§ 7-2 AMHERST CODE § 7-3
1:952
A. Fixture (Luminaire). The light source shall be concealed and
shall not be visible from any street right-of-way or adjacent
properties. In order to direct light downward and minimize the
amount of light spillage into the night sky and onto adjacent
properties, all lighting fixtures shall be cutoff fixtures. Only
architectural lighting may be directed upward provided that all
other provisions of this Section are met.
B. Fixture Height. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 25 feet in
height within parking lots and shall be a maximum of 15 feet in
height within non-vehicular pedestrian areas. For additional
requirements, see § 7-3-5A.
C. Light Source (Lamp). The same light source type shall be used
for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site throughout
any development. See § 7-3-6 for prohibited light sources.
D. Mounting. Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the
cone of light is contained on-site and does not cross any property
line of the site.
E. Footing. All footings for light poles shall have an attractive
architectural treatment, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or be located entirely below finished grade so as not to be
visible. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
F. Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity. The use of sensor
technologies, timers or other means to activate lighting during
times when it will be needed may be required by the Commissioner
of Building to conserve energy, provide safety, and promote
compatibility between different land uses.
7-3-4. Illumination Level.
A. Illumination levels shall be measured in footcandles.
B. All site lighting shall be designed so that the level of illumination,
as measured in footcandles at any one point, meets the standards in
the table below.
C. Minimum and maximum levels are measured on the pavement
within the lighted area. Average level is the overall, generalized
ambient light level, and is measured as a not-to-exceed value. The
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:953
average level shall be calculated using only the area of the site
intended to receive illumination.
Lighting Level (footcandles)
Lighting Type Minimum Average Maximum
Architectural 0.0 1.0 5.0
Canopy Area 2.0 10.0 15.0
Multifamily Parking
Lots
0.20 1.0 8.0
Nonresidential and
Multifamily Entrances
and Exits
1.0 5.0 15.0
Nonresidential Parking
Lots
0.2 1.5 10.0
Security 0.2 1.0 10.0
Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Leasing
0.2 3.0 15.0
Walkways, Landscape
or Decorative
0.2 0.8 5.0
D. All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located such that the
maximum illumination measured in footcandles at the property line
does not exceed 0.2 on adjacent residential use, and 0.5 on
adjacent commercial sites and public rights-of-way.
E. No direct light source shall be visible at the property line at ground
level or above.
F. Lighting shall not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive
illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere
with the vision of drivers on such streets.
7-3-5. Lighting Required for Specific Uses.
A. Sites Adjacent to Residential Uses. [Amended 1-16-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007]
(1) All lights shall be shielded so as to deflect light away from any
residential use.
(2) Illumination at the public right-of-way line when a
nonresidential use is across the public right-of-way from a
residential use shall not exceed one footcandle.
(3) All light fixtures located within 50 feet of any residential use
shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(4) Unless properly shielded, security lighting fixtures such as wall
packs shall not face a residential use.
§ 7-3 AMHERST CODE § 7-3
1:954
§ 7-4. Outdoor Storage and Display
B. Canopy Area Lighting. All development that incorporates a
canopy area over fuel sales, automated bank machines, or similar
installations shall use a recessed lens cover flush with the bottom
surface of the canopy that provides a cutoff or shielded light
distribution. Areas under a vehicular canopy shall have an average
of 10 foot candles as measured at ground level at the inside of the
outside edge of the canopy.
C. Automated Teller Machines. An automated teller machine (ATM)
shall be illuminated in accordance with the ATM Safety Act (NYS
Banking Law, Article II-AA).
7-3-6. Prohibited Light Sources. Except as otherwise provided in this
Section, the following light sources and light fixtures and sources shall
not be used within the Town where the direct light emitted is visible
from adjacent areas.
A. Low-pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources.
B. Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors
which house other than incandescent sources.
C. Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
D. Lighting fixtures that have flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or
alternating colored sources, except between Thanksgiving Day and
January 15, as provided in § 7-8, Sign Regulations.
7-4-1. General. Outdoor display and storage shall be allowed in
nonresidential districts in accordance with this Section. Any
merchandise, material or equipment situated outdoors in
nonresidential districts shall be subject to the requirements of this
Section.
7-4-2. Allowed Outdoor Storage and Display.
A. Three types of outdoor storage and display shall be allowed in the
districts designated in the Table below. [Amended 4-12-2010 by
L.L. No. 2-2010]
Districts
Category NB GB, SC CS, MS RD, GI
Outdoor Display
Limited Outdoor
Storage
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:955
Districts
Category NB GB, SC CS, MS RD, GI
General Outdoor
Storage
B. Allowed outdoor storage and display shall meet the vehicle use
area setbacks provided in each district or a minimum of 20 feet
from any lot line, whichever is greater.
C. In the NB district, all outdoor display shall be returned to a
completely enclosed structure when the associated business is not
open.
D. In the ST district, outdoor storage and display shall not be
permitted except for the measurement of climatic effects on stored
materials. No such storage area shall be located in any required
front, side or rear yard.
7-4-3. Categories of Outdoor Storage and Display.
A. Outdoor Display.
(1) Outdoor display constitutes the display of items actively for
sale.
(2) Outdoor display shall be allowed adjacent to a principal
building wall and may only extend a distance no greater than
five feet from the wall. Such display shall not be permitted to
block windows, entrances or exits, and shall not impair the
ability of pedestrians to use the building and sidewalk.
(3) Outdoor display may not occupy more than 30 percent of the
linear distance along any principal building wall facing a public
right-of-way.
B. Limited Outdoor Storage.
(1) Limited outdoor storage is temporary storage of goods in
individual packaging and not in storage containers. Organic
materials stored on pallets are considered limited outdoor
storage.
(2) Limited outdoor storage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or
10 percent of the total site area (whichever is greater), except
in the CS and GI districts where additional outdoor storage and
display is allowed provided that the storage and display is
completely screened from view outside the site by a solid
opaque wall or fence at least six feet in height. Such area may
extend from the principal building, but not for a distance
greater than 50 feet.
§ 7-4 AMHERST CODE § 7-4
1:956
(3) Limited outdoor storage may not occupy more than 30 percent
of the linear distance along any principal building wall facing a
public right-of-way.
(4) Limited outdoor storage shall not be allowed in required offstreet
parking spaces.
C. General Outdoor Storage.
(1) General outdoor storage consists of all remaining forms of
outdoor storage not classified as outdoor display or limited
outdoor storage, including the storage of combustible or
flammable liquids, items stored in shipping containers,
conexes and semi-trailers not attached to a truck.
(2) General outdoor storage shall be allowed in unlimited quantity,
provided that the storage area is completely screened from any
public right-of-way or adjacent residentially zoned property
and meets the location restrictions below.
(3) No general outdoor storage shall be permitted within the
following areas:
(a) The public right-of-way;
(b) Any required landscape area;
(c) A required front or side setback;
(d) Between a front setback and the building front;
(e) Between a side setback along a public right-of-way and any
structure; and
(f) Any required off-street parking areas.
(4) Areas intended for general outdoor storage shall be paved, or
have an alternate surface as approved by the Commissioner of
Building.
7-4-4. Exceptions.
A. Vehicles for sale as part of a properly permitted vehicle sales use
(including boats and manufactured housing) shall not be
considered merchandise, material or equipment subject to the
restrictions of this Section. Such vehicles shall be located and
displayed on a paved vehicle use area, or on an alternate surface as
approved by the Commissioner of Building, clearly indicated on the
site plan, and screened under the same requirements for a parking
lot.
B. Waste generated on-site and deposited in ordinary refuse
containers shall not be subject to the restrictions of this Section.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:957
§ 7-5. Fences and Walls
§ 7-6. Access and Circulation
7-5-1. No fence or wall in a residential district shall exceed six feet in height,
except where it abuts a nonresidential district, in which event it shall
not exceed eight feet in height, provided, however, that a fence or wall
not exceeding 12 feet in height enclosing a tennis court shall be
permitted. For the purpose of screening, the Planning Board or
Planning Director as applicable, may require fences, vegetation or
other appropriate material in nonresidential districts where they abut
residential districts to assure privacy for adjacent land uses with visual,
noise and air quality factors considered. [Amended 8-1-2011 by L.L.
No. 19-2011]
7-5-2.With the exception of those used for screening loading docks,
dumpsters, refuse containers, outdoor storage and mechanical
equipment as required by this Ordinance, no fence or wall in a
nonresidential district shall exceed eight feet in height. [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
7-5-3. No fence or wall, other than a necessary retaining wall, over three
feet in height shall extend into the front yard of any lot, except in an
industrial district. For the purposes of administration of this Section,
the front yard of a principal structure shall be the yard abutting the
street that is directly associated with the primary entrance to the
structure.
7-5-4. The height of all fences or walls shall be measured from the average
finished grade as determined by the Commissioner of Building. Average
height should generally follow the lay of the land.
7-6-1. Location of Existing and Planned Transit Routes. Any proposed
development shall take into account the location of existing and
planned transit routes and provide vehicular and pedestrian
connections to any transit points within or adjacent to the development.
7-6-2. Street, Road and Highway Barricades. Unless authorized by the
Planning Board, the erection or maintenance of a barricade preventing
access to or from a town highway or private road or street on or
adjacent to such property shall not be permitted. Any barricade
installed shall comply with the provisions of § 7-6-7B.
7-6-3. Public Access. No use shall be permitted to take direct access to a
street except as permitted in this Section.
A. Local Streets. All residential uses may take direct access to local
streets. Nonresidential uses shall not take direct access to local
streets, except when no higher street classification is available.
B. Collector Streets. No single-family dwelling shall take direct
access to collector streets, except when no local street is available.
§ 7-5 AMHERST CODE § 7-6
1:958
C. Arterial Streets. No residential use, other than multifamily, shall
take direct access to major or minor arterial streets. When uses
take access to an arterial street, the point of access shall be directly
across from another existing point of access, or spaced at least 200
feet from any intersecting street or other point of access to the
arterial.
7-6-4. Private Access. Buildings and land shall either abut a dedicated
street or be arranged in groups or clusters so that groups or clusters
abut a dedicated street for the required lot width, provided that:
A. Each building is accessible by means of a private street to service
and emergency vehicles.
B. The standards of design and construction for private streets shall
meet applicable town specifications for public streets unless
modified by the approved site plan.
C. The location, design and construction of all utilities meet all
applicable specifications and are adequate to serve the needs of the
group or cluster.
D. The procedures for the preservation and maintenance of private
streets, pedestrian ways and common open space comply with all
applicable laws.
7-6-5. Private Access Easements.
A. Cross-Access. Private cross-access easements may be required
across any lot fronting on an arterial or collector street in order to
minimize the number of access points and facilitate access between
and across individual lots. The easement shall meet the following
design requirements.
(1) If a parcel is to be developed for any nonresidential land use, a
cross-access easement shall be provided to adjoining
properties that front on the same street and that are, or may
be, developed as nonresidential land uses. The easement shall
be clearly identified on any site plan submitted pursuant to this
Ordinance. The easement shall be filed with the Erie County
Clerk's Office for recordation.
(2) Cross-access easements shall have a minimum width of 24 feet
and shall be generally parallel to the street right-of-way line
abutting both parcels. Access easement facilities shall be
maintained by the property owner.
(3) The property owner shall provide appropriate documentation
of a good faith effort to extend the access easement through all
immediately abutting properties. If such an effort fails, the
portion of the easement on the subject site shall be developed
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:959
and designed to provide for future connection to the
neighboring properties.
(4) Where a cross-access easement is granted, no permanent
structures that would interfere with the proposed access shall
be permitted in the easement. Some improvements such as
medians and parking islands may be constructed within an
access easement if it has been demonstrated that adequate
circulation and cross access has been accomplished, and that
all applicable standards of this Ordinance have been met.
(5) All cross-access improvements shown on a site plan shall be
constructed and stubbed, and future development of adjacent
property shall complete a connection to any existing stub.
(6) The Planning Board may waive the requirement for a crossaccess
easement required above in those cases where unusual
topography or site conditions would render such an easement
of no useable benefit to adjoining properties.
(7) The Planning Board may approve the closure of a cross-access
easement in those cases where adjoining parcels are
subsequently developed with a residential use.
B. Shared Access. A joint private access easement may be required
between adjacent lots fronting on arterial and collector streets in
order to minimize the total number of access points along those
streets and to facilitate traffic flow between lots. The location and
dimensions of said easement shall be determined by the Planning
Board or Director, as applicaple.78 [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008]
7-6-6. Access Design Requirements.
A. Minimum Access. Each parcel of land which lawfully exists and
which abuts a street right-of-way shall be permitted at least one
access point, except where otherwise restricted by the Town.
B. Additional Access. The Planning Board may require more than
one access point onto a collector or arterial street for a single
parcel during site plan review provided that the number and
location of access points onto local streets and the additional
access points onto collector and arterial streets shall be approved
by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the roadway from
which access is being taken.
C. Width of Access. The width of access driveways shall be
determined by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the
roadway from which access is being taken. However, in no case
shall an individual driveway width be greater than 45 feet, except
78.So in original.
§ 7-6 AMHERST CODE § 7-6
1:960
that the width of a landscaped center median shall not count
towards this standard.
D. Closure or Relocation of Existing Access Points. The Planning
Board, in conjunction with the authority having jurisdiction over
the roadway from which access is being taken, shall have the
authority to require the closure or relocation of existing access
points where multiple access points to the site are available.
E. Curb Cuts at Intersections. A curb cut for a corner parcel at the
intersection of any streets shall be located the maximum practical
distance from the intersection point of the rights-of-way of the
intersecting streets, without intrusion into any required buffer. The
number and location of the curb cuts shall be approved by the
highway authority having jurisdiction over the street from which
access is being taken.
7-6-7. Fire Apparatus Access Road Requirements. All developments
shall be required at least one means of fire apparatus access.
Developments exceeding the thresholds set forth in § 7-6-7C shall
require at least two means of fire apparatus access. Access lanes shall
be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the
maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be
served (measured in a straight line between access points).
A. Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Road Dimensions.
(1) Height. Where required, buildings or portions of buildings or
facilities exceeding 30 feet in height above the lowest level of
fire department vehicle access shall be provided with approved
fire apparatus access roads capable of accommodating fire
department aerial apparatus. Overhead utility and power lines
shall not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access
roadway.
(2) Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum
unobstructed width of 26 feet in the immediate vicinity of any
building or portion of building more than 30 feet in height.
(3) Proximity to Building. At least one of the required access
routes meeting this condition shall be located within a
minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 30 feet from the
building, and shall be positioned parallel to the building. Such
access shall be either paved as part of the sidewalk system or
be part of the parking lot pavement. Required access routes
shall not be used as snow storage areas that would impede
emergency access. If such access is part of the parking lot
pavement, these areas shall be striped or otherwise delineated
with pavement markings and "No Parking" signs to prevent
parked cars or delivery vehicles from impeding emergency
access.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:961
§ 7-7. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction [Amended 6-3-2019 by
L.L. No. 13-2019; 7-1-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
B. Fire Apparatus Road Gates.
(1) The minimum gate width shall be 20 feet.
(2) Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type and of a
triangular shape.
(3) Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual
operation by one person.
(4) Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition
at all times and replaced or repaired when defective.
(5) Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the
gate by fire department personnel for emergency access.
Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the code
official. Locking device specifications shall be submitted for
approval by the code official.
C. Second Access. Approval of a site plan or subdivision, including
individual phases of a site plan or subdivision, shall not be granted
where a cul-de-sac, dead-end or any street with only one point of
access from an improved public right-of-way exceeds the
requirements established in the current International Fire Code.
The purpose of this paragraph is to comply with the International
Fire Code as it may change by amendment over time. [Added
4-21-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008; amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
7-2017]
7-7-1. Findings. The Town Board of the Town of Amherst finds that the
potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Town of Amherst and that such damages
may include: destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage
to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and
loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this local
law is adopted.
7-7-2. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this local law to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
A. regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
§ 7-6 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:962
B. require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
C. control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;
D. control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages;
E. regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands, and
F. qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
7-7-3. Objectives. The objectives of this section are:
A. to protect human life and health;
B. to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
D. to minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
G. to provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and,
H. to ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
7-7-4. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this local law shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this local law its most
reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure used solely for parking (twocar
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage, represent a
minimal investment of not more than 10 percent of the value of the
primary structure, and may not be used for human habitation.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:963
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Local Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Local Law or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred
to as the base floodplain or 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this
Local Law, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous
in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "Structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "Basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
eighteen inches or more in height, which is used to service the
underside of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this
enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material,
must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The
enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during
periods of flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:964
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure at the time
of the improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for a 10 year
period.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The Federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a Regulatory Floodway along water courses studied
in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:965
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
"Flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "Regulatory Floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in (1) above.
(2)
listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:966
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this
Local Law.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "Recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "Manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "Base Flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least 51 percent of the actual
cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(i)
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(ii)
(4)
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:967
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 7-7-6D(2) of this Law.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
installation of pilings or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage
also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds
25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
(1) built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:968
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. Substantial improvement
also means "cumulative substantial improvement." The term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this local law
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this local law.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's flood plain management
regulations.
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
any alteration of a "Historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"Historic structure."
(2)
7-7-5. General Provisions.
A. Lands to Which This Local Law Applies. This local law shall
apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of
the Town of Amherst.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The
areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Maps: 36029C0058H, 36029C0059H,
36029C0062H, 36029C0064H, 36029C0066H, 36029C0067H,
36029C0068H, 36029C0069H, 36029C0078H, 36029C0079H,
36029C0086H, 36029C0087H, 36029C0088H, 36029C0089H,
36029C0205H, 36029C0206H, 36029C0207H, 36029C0208H,
36029C0209H, 36029C0226H, 36029C0227H, 36029C0228H,
36029C0229H; whose effective date is June 7, 2019, and any
subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect
areas under our community's jurisdiction.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:969
A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study, Erie County, New York (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 7,
2019.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to
be a part of this Local Law. The Flood Insurance Study and/
or maps are on file at the offices of the Town Clerk and the
Building Department, 5583 Main Street, Williamsville, New
York 14221.
C. Interpretation and Conflict with Other Laws.
(1) This Local Law includes all revisions to the National Flood
Insurance Program through October 27, 1997 and shall
supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of flood
damage prevention.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
local law shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this local law are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this local
law shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for Non-compliance. No structure in an area of special
flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled
without full compliance with the terms of this local law and any
other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this
local law by failure to comply with any of its requirements,
including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a
violation. Any person who violates this local law or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
no more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days or
both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Amherst from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant
with the requirements of this local law for which the developer and/
or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance
under 7-7-8 will be declared non-compliant and notification sent to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this local law is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:970
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This local law does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This local law shall not create
liability on the part of the Town of Amherst, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this local law or any
administrative decision lawfully made there under.
7-7-6. Administration.
A. Designation of the Local Administrator. The Commissioner of
Building is hereby appointed Local Administrator to administer and
implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
B. The Floodplain Development Permit.
(1) Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby
established for all construction and other development to be
undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this community
for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood
hazards and insuring that new development is constructed in a
manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be
unlawful to undertake any development in an area of special
flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 7-7-5B, without a valid floodplain development
permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Local Administrator and may include, but not
be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing:
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
(2) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall
be accompanied by an application fee of $300.00 for the first
acre of lot area plus an additional $150.00 for each contiguous
acre thereafter or $150.00 for accessory structures not
exceeding 600 square feet in floor area associated with 1 & 2
family homes. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible
for reimbursing the Town of Amherst for any additional costs
necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project.
The Local Administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500.00 to cover these additional costs.
C. Application for a Permit. The applicant shall provide the
following information as appropriate. Additional information may
be required on the permit application form.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:971
(a) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or
substantially improved structure to be located in Zones
A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permitee
shall submit to the Local Administrator the as-built elevation,
certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
(b) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which
any new or substantially improved non-residential structure
will be floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed
portion of the structure, the permitee shall submit to the Local
Administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a
professional engineer or surveyor.
(c) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in 7-7-7B(3),
UTILITIES.
(d) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that any non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in 7-7-7D, NON-RESIDENTIAL
STRUCTURES.
(e) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be
submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated
segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the
original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps,
computations or other material required by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 7-7-5B, when notified by the Local
Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed
by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide
assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(f) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if
required by the Local Administrator, which shows whether
proposed development to be located in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property.
(g) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by
the permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured
home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are
greater than either 50 lots or 5 acres.
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:972
D. Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Administrator. Duties
of the Local Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Permit Application Review. The Local Administrator shall
conduct the following permit application review before issuing
a floodplain development permit:
(a) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with
the requirements of 7-7-6C, APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT,
and for compliance with the provisions and standards of
this law.
(b) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an area of
special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the applicable standards of
7-7-7, CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS and, in particular,
7-7-7A(1) SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(c) Determine whether any proposed development in an area
of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to
any other property (e.g., stream bank erosion and
increased flood velocities). The Local Administrator may
require the applicant to submit additional technical
analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination.
If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the
requirements of 7-7-7, CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, no
permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate
the adverse effects and re-submit the application.
(d) Determine that all necessary permits have been received
from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by State or Federal law.
(2) Use of Other Flood Data.
(a) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
designated areas of special flood hazard on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate map (FIRM) but has
neither produced water surface elevation data (these
areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the Local Administrator shall obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a Federal, State or other
source, including data developed pursuant to 7-7-6C(g), as
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:973
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the
requirements of this law.
(b) When base flood elevation data are not available, the Local
Administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish
flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard,
for the purposes of this law.
(c) When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation,
and/or floodway data are available from a Federal, State or
other authoritative source, but differ from the data in the
documents enumerated in 7-7-5B, the Local Administrator
may reasonably utilize the other flood information to
enforce more restrictive development standards.
(3) Alteration of Watercourses.
(a) Notification to adjacent municipalities that may be
affected and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional
Administrator, Region II, Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(b) Determine that the permit holder has provided for
maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(4) Construction Stage.
(a) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest
floor or completion of floodproofing of a new or
substantially improved structure, obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest
floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the
certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on
the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted
for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and
ready for highway use).
(b) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and
approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:974
risk. The Local Administrator shall review all data
submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue
a stop work order for the project unless immediately
corrected.
(5) Inspections. The Local Administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in
order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable
said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is
in compliance with the requirements of the floodplain
development permit and/or any variance provisions.
(6) Stop Work Orders.
(a) The Local Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued,
a stop work order for any floodplain development found
ongoing without a development permit. Disregard of a stop
work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in 7-7-5E of this local law.
(b) The Local Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued,
a stop work order for any floodplain development found
non-compliant with the provisions of this law and/or the
conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop
work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in 7-7-5E of this local law.
(7) Certificate of Compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by
documents enumerated in 7-7-5B, it shall be unlawful to
occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building
or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Local Administrator
stating that the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this local law.
(b) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Local
Administrator upon satisfactory completion of all
development in areas of special flood hazard.
(c) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the
inspections conducted as prescribed in 7-7-6D(5),
INSPECTIONS, and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic
data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analyses which may have been required as
a condition of the approved permit.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:975
(8) Information To Be Retained. The Local Administrator shall
retain and make available for inspection, copies of the
following:
(a) Floodplain development permits and certificates of
compliance;
(b) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of
structures required pursuant to 7-7-6D(4)(a) and
7-7-6D(4)(b), and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
(c) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to
7-7-6D(4)(a) and whether the structures contain a
basement;
(d) Variances issued pursuant to 7-7-8, VARIANCE
PROCEDURES; and,
(e) Notices required under 7-7-6D(3), ALTERATION OF
WATERCOURSES.
7-7-7. Construction Standards.
A. General Standards. The following standards apply to new
development, including new and substantially improved structures,
in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map designated in 7-7-5B.
(1) Subdivision Proposals. The following standards apply to all
new subdivision proposals and other proposed development in
areas of special flood hazard (including proposals for
manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and
subdivisions):
(a) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
(b) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems shall be located and constructed to
minimize flood damage; and,
(c) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
(2) Encroachments.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a
regulatory floodway, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development (including fill) shall
be permitted unless:
(i) the applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:976
other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any location, or,
(ii) the Town of Amherst agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received
and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Town of
Amherst for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data,
analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Amherst for all costs related to the final map revision.
(b) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance
Rate Map adopted in 7-7-5B, no new construction,
substantial improvements or other development in the
floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(i) a technical evaluation by a licensed professional
engineer demonstrates through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that such an
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during occurrence of the base flood, or,
(ii) the Town of Amherst agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA
approval is received, and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses
the Town of Amherst for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse
the Town of Amherst for all costs related to the final
map revisions.
(c) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, if any development is found to
increase or decrease base flood elevations, the Town of
Amherst shall as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available,
notify FEMA and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data in accordance with standard
engineering practice.
B. Standards for All Structures. The following standards apply to
new development, including new and substantially improved
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:977
structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map designated in 7-7-5B.
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the
base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction Materials and Methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to
structures shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to
structures shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure
within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially
improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) a minimum of two openings of each enclosed area
having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(ii) the bottom of all such openings no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade and;
(iii) openings not less than three inches in any direction.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves,
screens or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Enclosed areas sub-grade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and
other service equipment shall be located at least two feet
above the base flood elevation, or at least three feet above
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:978
the highest adjacent grade in a Zone A without an
available base flood elevation, or be designed to prevent
water from entering and accumulating within the
components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and
outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be
elevated or designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components unless they conform
to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of
New York State for location of such items in wet locations;
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for
buildings that have openings below the base flood
elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves
or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior
wall; and,
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(4) Storage Tanks.
(a) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement during conditions of the
base flood.
(b) Above-ground tanks shall be:
(i) anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral
movement during conditions of the base flood or;
(ii) installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
7-7-5B plus two feet.
C. Residential Structures.
(1) Elevation. The following standards apply to new and
substantially improved residential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in
7-7-7A(1), SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS, and 7-7-7A(2),
ENCROACHMENTS, and 7-7-7B, STANDARDS FOR ALL
STRUCTURES.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:979
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available, new construction and
substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above two feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are
available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(c) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
7-7-5B plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth number
is specified).
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures on slopes.
(2) Residential Basement Exception. Upon approval by FEMA
of a basement exception policy for the Town of Amherst and
where a site-specific variance from Uniform Code has been
granted, when the local Administrator has determined that the
flood depth, measured from the base flood elevation to the
original grade, is five feet or less for developable lots that are
contiguous to land above the base flood elevation and three
feet or less for other lots; and where the flood velocities are
five feet per second or less; the local floodplain administrator
may issue building permits for residential structures
containing basements in Zones A1-30, AH, AO, or AE, provided
that such structures shall:
(a) Be designed and built so that any basement area together
with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities below the
floodproofed design level, is watertight with walls that are
impermeable to the passage of water without human
intervention. Basement walls shall be built with the
capacity to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy resulting from flooding to the
floodproofed design level, and shall be designed so that
minimal damage will occur from floods that exceed that
level. The floodproofed design level shall be an elevation
two feet above the base flood elevation.
(b) Have the top of the floor of any basement area no lower
than five feet below the base flood elevation.
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:980
(c) Have the area surrounding the structure on all sides filled
to or above the base flood elevation. Fill must be
compacted with slopes protected by vegetative cover.
(d) Have a registered professional engineer or architect
develop or review the building's structural design
specifications and plans, including consideration of the
depths, velocity and duration of flooding and type and
permeability of soils at the building site, and certify that
the basement design and methods of construction
proposed are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection.
(e) Be inspected by the Floodplain Administrator or his/her
designee to verify that the structure is built according to
its design and the provisions of this section which are
verifiable.
D. Non-Residential Structures. The following standards apply to
new and substantially improved commercial, industrial and other
non-residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in 7-7-7A(1), SUBDIVISION
PROPOSALS, and 7-7-7A(2), ENCROACHMENTS, and 7-7-7B,
STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any non-residential structure shall either:
(i) have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood
elevation; or
(ii) be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below
two feet above the base flood elevation, including
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components located below the base flood level
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(b) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial
improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(i) have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM plus
two feet (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified), or
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:981
(ii) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the
floodproofing standard specified in 7-7-7D(a)(ii).
(c) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for construction. A
Floodproofing Certificate or other certification shall be
provided to the Local Administrator that certifies the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
7-7-7D(a)(ii), including the specific elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures on slopes.
(e) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least
three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
E. Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. The
following standards in addition to the standards in 7-7-7A,
GENERAL STANDARDS, and 7-7-7B, STANDARDS FOR ALL
STRUCTURES apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard
to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are
located in areas of special flood hazard.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE
and AH shall either:
(i) be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii) meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
7-7-7E(b), (c) and (d).
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and
has no permanently attached additions.
(b) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved
in Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the bottom of the frame of the
manufactured home chassis is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:982
(c) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured
home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(d) Within Zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured
home chassis shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in 7-7-5B plus two feet
(at least three feet if no depth number is specified).
F. Accessory Structures Including Detached Garages. The
following standards apply to new and substantially improved
accessory structures, including detached garages, in the areas of
special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in 7-7-5B.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, A, accessory structures
must meet the standards of 7-7-7B(1), ANCHORING.
(b) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, areas below two feet above the
base flood elevation shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) Within Zones AO and Zone A, if base flood elevation data are
not available, areas below three feet above the highest
adjacent grade shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(d) Structures must be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with 7-7-7B(2)(c).
(e) Utilities must meet the requirements of 7-7-7B(3), UTILITIES.
G. Critical Facilities. In order to prevent potential flood damage to
certain facilities that would result in serious danger to life and
health, or widespread social or economic dislocation, no new
critical facility shall be located within and Area of Special Flood
Hazard, or within any 500-year flood zone shown as a B zone or a
Shaded X zone on the Community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
7-7-8.Variance Procedure.
A. Appeals Board.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:983
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Town of
Amherst shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this local law.
(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Local Administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this local law.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this local law
and:
(i) the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
(ii) the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(iii) the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(iv) the importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(v) the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(vi) the availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(vii) the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(viii) the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(ix) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(x) the costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during
periods of flooding;
(xi) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-7
1:984
(xii) the costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including search and rescue
operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of 7-7-8A(d) and the
purposes of this local law, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this local law.
(f) The Local Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions including technical information and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
B. Conditions for Variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing items (i-xii) in 7-7-8A(d) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon determination that:
(i) the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "Historic
structure"; and
(ii) the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(c) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use
provided that:
(i) the criteria of subparagraphs (a), (d), (e) and (f) of this
Section are met; and
(ii) the structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threat to public safety.
(d) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:985
§ 7-8. Sign Regulations [Amended 1-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007;
2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 9-21-2009 by L.L. No. 14-2009;
4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010; 7-6-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010; 8-1-2011
by L.L. No. 19-2011; 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 31-2011; 6-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 13-2012; 2-24-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014; 4-8-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014]
Note: See § 8-10 and § 8-11 for additional sign regulations.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(f) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written
justification of:
(i) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(g) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:
(i) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage; and
(ii) such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of
all variance actions as required in 7-7-6D(8) of this Local
Law.
7-8-1. Purpose. Sign regulations, including provisions to control the type,
design, size, location, motion, illumination and maintenance, are
designed to achieve the following purposes:
A. To protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate and protect the physical appearance of the
community from the effects of inharmonious and out-of-scale signs.
B. To preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas and
provide a more enjoyable and scenic community.
§ 7-7 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:986
C. To reduce signs or advertising distractions or obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents.
D. To provide reasonable, yet appropriate, conditions for advertising
goods sold or services rendered in business districts by relating the
size, type and design of signs to the type of establishment.
E. To control signs so that their appearance will be aesthetically
harmonious with the overall design of the area.
F. To reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or
projecting over public rights-of-way.
G. To curb the deterioration of natural beauty in the community's
environment.
7-8-2. Prohibited Signs. All signs not expressly permitted or exempt from
regulation under this Section are prohibited in all districts. Such signs
include, but are not limited to:
A. Banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices or strings of lights
are prohibited.
B. Rotating or revolving signs;
C. Beacons;
D. Any sign mounted, attached or painted on a trailer, boat, or motor
vehicle when parked, stored, or displayed conspicuously on the
public right-of-way or private premises in a manner intended to
attract attention of the public for advertising purposes. If on-site
parking is available, such vehicles must be parked to the interior
side yard or rear yard of the building, or in a location as directed by
the Commissioner of Building. This provision expressly excludes
business signs that are permanently painted on, or magnetically
attached to, motor vehicles or rolling stock that are regularly and
consistently used to conduct normal business activities.
E. Signs, as regulated by this Ordinance, used to attract attention to
an object, product, place, activity, institution, organization or
business not available or located on the premises where the sign is
located, unless part of a unified development and a coordinated
sign plan is approved.
F. Signs advertising or identifying a business which is no longer
operating. Any sign accessory or incidental to a business shall be
removed within 30 days after the business ceases to operate;
G. Roof signs placed, inscribed or supported upon or above the
highest part of the roofline except such directional devices as may
be required by the FAA;
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:987
H. Signs that create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view at any
street intersection or by design resemblance through color, shape
or other characteristics common to traffic control devices;
I. Signs that encroach into the clear sight triangle as described in
§ 2-5-1;
J. Signs in the public right-of-way or on other public property; and
K. A sign attached to any accessory structure, including but not
limited to, a screen wall, refuse enclosure, fence or cart corrals.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
7-8-3. Signs Exempt from Regulation.
A. Exempt Signs. The following signs shall be exempt from
regulation under this Section and shall not require a building
permit for a sign as described in § 8-10. [Amended 4-8-2014 by
L.L. No. 8-2014]
(1) Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of
any governmental function;
(2) Signs prohibiting trespassing;
(3) integral, decorative or architectural features of building,
except letters or trademarks;
(4) Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door,
that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet
beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel on which such sign is
located; and
(5) Temporary signs proposed by civic or non-profit groups in
conjunction with a Town Board resolution permitting a limited
activity.
B. Signs Not Requiring a Permit. The following signs shall be
exempt from regulation under this Section and shall not require a
building permit for a sign as described in § 8-10, provided that the
sign meets the additional standards given below.
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
1. ADDRESS SIGN
A sign that identifies the occupant and
address of a residential structure.
Standards:
(a) There shall be only one address sign
indicating the name and address of the
occupants of a dwelling.
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:988
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(b) Such sign shall not exceed two square
feet in area.
(c) Such sign shall not be internally
illuminated.
2. CONSTRUCTION SIGN
Any freestanding sign intended to provide
information about current construction on
a site and the parties involved in the
project.
Standards
(a) There shall be only one on-premises
construction sign indicating the
project name and the names of the
architect, engineer, contractor and
participating public and governmental
agencies and officials.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area.
(c) Such sign shall be a maximum of 15
feet in height.
(d) Such sign shall be located a minimum
of 25 feet from the lot line and 75 feet
from any dwelling not within the
project.
3. FUEL PUMP SIGN
A sign attached to a fuel pump advertising
the cost of fuel.
Standards:
(a) The total area of fuel pump signs shall
not exceed one square foot per pump.
(b) Operational and payment instructions
on the face of the pump shall be
exempt from this limitation.
4. HANGING SIGN
A sign that hangs perpendicular to a
building wall and is supported by or
attached to the underside of a structure
canopy, covered entrance or walkway,
awning or marquee.
Standards:
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:989
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(a) Only one hanging sign shall be
permitted per customer entrance.
(b) The bottom edge of such signs shall be
located a minimum of eight feet above
the finished grade.
(c) Such sign shall not exceed two square
feet in area.
(d) Such sign shall have a maximum
vertical dimension of 18 inches.
5. HOME OCCUPATION SIGN
A sign attached to the wall of a permitted
home-based business.
Standards:
(a) There shall be only one nonilluminated
home occupation sign that
is physically attached to the exterior
wall of the dwelling.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed two square
feet in area.
(c) The home occupation with which the
sign is associated shall meet the
requirements of § 6-8-6.
6. INCIDENTAL SIGN
A sign that includes information assisting
in the flow of vehicular traffic.
Standards:
(a) Incidental signs shall not exceed two
square feet in area.
(b) Such sign shall be used to direct and
guide traffic and parking on private
property.
(c) Such sign shall not bear any
advertising.
7. POLITICAL SIGN
A temporary sign that supports or opposes
any political candidate, political issue,
political referendum or political party.
Standards:
(a) Political signs shall be placed only on
private property.
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:990
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(b) Such signs shall not block any
intersection clear sight triangle.
(c) Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after an election.
8. REAL ESTATE SIGN
A temporary sign that advertises the sale
or lease of the premises on which it is
located.
Standards:
(a) There shall be only one on-premises
real estate sign for each building or lot
advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises on which the sign is
displayed.
(b) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
(c) Such sign shall be removed within 15
days after property closing or lease
signing.
(d) Such sign shall not exceed eight
square feet per face in residential
districts.
(e) Such sign shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area in nonresidential districts.
(f) One additional real estate sign shall be
allowed on a site abutting more than
one roadway.
9. WINDOW SIGN
A temporary, non-structural sign located in
the interior of a window or door or any
other sign inside the building containing a
message legible from the public right-ofway
or adjacent property clearly intended
for public recognition outside the building.
Standards:
No window sign or advertising poster shall
occupy more than 20 percent of the area of
an individual window pane.
7-8-4. Signs Requiring a Permit. Upon issuance of a building permit for a
sign in accordance with § 8-10, Building Permit for Signs, the following
signs shall be permitted subject to the following requirements.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:991
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
A. BUILDING SIGNS
1. AWNING SIGN
A sign painted on, attached to or otherwise
displayed on an awning. This sign type does
not include canopies over gas pumps.
Standards:
(a) No such signs shall exceed 20 percent of
the area of each awning or canopy (top
plus all sides).
(b) Backlit awnings are not permitted per
§ 4-8-6F(4)(d)(ii) of this Ordinance.
(c) For awning signs in the LW-1 district, see
§ 5-8-4C.
2. MARQUEE SIGN
A sign attached to the face of a marquee and
not projecting above or beneath said marquee
face. A marquee is a permanent roof-like
structure that projects from the wall of a
building and may overhang the public way.
Standards:
(a) No more than one marquee sign shall be
permitted for each building frontage that
includes an entrance serving the general
public.
(b) Such sign shall not extend beyond the top
or sides of the building.
(c) Such sign shall not be oriented toward
any residential district.
(d) Such signs shall not project into any
adjacent right-of-way, unless approved by
the appropriate federal, state, county, or
local highway official.
(e) The bottom of such signs shall be a
minimum of eight feet above the
walkway.
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:992
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
A. BUILDING SIGNS
3. MENU BOARD SIGN
A permanently mounted sign displaying the
bill of fare for a drive-through or drive-in
restaurant.
Standards:
(a) The text of the sign shall not be legible
from the public right-of-way or any
adjacent residential district.
(b) There shall be a maximum of two menu
board signs per drive through lane.
(c) Each menu board sign shall not exceed
36 square feet in area. The area devoted
to menu board signs shall not be counted
toward the total sign allotment for the
restaurant. [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L.
No. 2-2016]
4. PROJECTING SIGN
A sign attached perpendicular to a building or
other structure. This definition shall not
include hanging signs.
Standards:
(a) Only one projecting sign is permitted per
building frontage with an entrance
available to the general public.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet
per side.
(c) Such signs shall not project into any
adjacent right-of-way, unless approved by
the appropriate federal, state, county, or
local highway official.
(d) The bottom of such signs shall be a
minimum of eight feet above the
walkway.
5. WALL SIGN
A sign integral with or attached to and
supported by the exterior wall of a building.
Standards:
(a) Wall signs shall not be placed over glazed
areas.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:993
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
A. BUILDING SIGNS
(b) A wall sign shall not project above or
beyond the ends of the building or its
parapet or the highest point of the roof,
whichever is higher.
(c) Such sign shall not project more than 12
inches from the exterior supporting wall.
(d) On a multi-occupancy building, each
occupant with an outside entrance
serving the general public may have a
separate wall sign. Corner tenants with a
second outside entrance in a side wall
shall be allowed one additional wall sign.
(e) Such sign shall have a maximum area in
accordance with the table in § 7-8-8A.
(f) In the R-R, S-A and AG districts, a wall
sign may be used in connection with a
roadside stand to advertise the sale of
produce on farms within this district,
provided that the produce being sold is
produced on the farm or by the occupant
of the farm. The sign face area shall not
exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall be
removed when the roadside stand is not
in use.
(g) For wall signs in the LW-1 district, see §
5-8-4C.
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
1. GROUND SIGN
A sign supported by uprights or braces
placed upon or in the ground and not
attached to any building.
Standards:
(a) One ground sign shall be permitted for
each individual building not a part of a
multiple development.
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:994
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
(b) For properties where a pole sign is
permitted, a ground sign may be placed
along the same street frontage as that of
the pole sign provided that the ground
sign is 250 feet from the pole sign and
meets all other applicable regulations of
this ordinance, or a ground sign may be
placed along each other non-local street
frontage.
(c) Such sign shall be no higher than eight
feet above the average finished grade
and shall be permanently attached to the
ground.
(d) Such sign shall not exceed 160 square
feet in total face area. The size of any
single face shall not exceed 50 percent of
the total area permitted.
(e) Such sign shall be located a minimum of
25 feet from any nonresidential lot or 50
feet from any residential lot, 15 feet from
a street right-of-way, and not within the
clear vision triangle as described in §
2-5-1.
(f) At each location where motor vehicle
fuels are sold at retail, 32 square feet of
additional face area limited to advertising
the brand name and price of the fuel
shall be permitted. This area may be used
for a separate ground sign or as an
addition to the face area of a ground sign
otherwise permitted in this Section. In no
event shall more than 16 square feet of
this allowed area be displayed or added
to any single face area.
(g) In the R-R, S-A and AG districts, a ground
sign may be used in connection with a
roadside stand to advertise the sale of
produce on farms within this district,
provided that the produce being sold is
produced on the farm or by the occupant
of the farm. The sign face area shall not
exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall be
removed when the roadside stand is not
in use.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:995
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
(h) The base shall be no less than 75 percent
of the width of the sign.
(i) For ground signs in the LW-1 district, see
§ 5-8-4C.
2. MESSAGE CENTER SIGN
A sign supported by uprights or braces
placed upon or in the ground and not
attached to any building which contains an
illuminated, programmable message or
graphic, whether fixed or moving.
Standards:
(a) Message center signs may only be
included as a part of a permitted
freestanding sign.
(b) Message center signs are not permitted
in the - TNB, PRD, PDD or TND overlay
districts or on any parcel within 500 feet
of a residential district.
(c) The information displayed on a message
center sign for advertisement purposes
shall remain static for a period of no less
than ten minutes. The display of time and
temperature information may change at
no less than one minute intervals.
(d) The transition between successive
messages shall be instantaneous and
shall not contain such visual effects as
fading, dissolve, flashing, or animation.
(e) Each message displayed shall be
complete in itself, without continuation in
content to the next message or to any
other sign.
(f) All message center signs shall be
equipped with manual and automatic
dimming devices which the
Commissioner of Building shall regulate
in accordance with § 7-8-5.
3. POLE SIGN
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:996
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole
or other support so that the bottom edge of
the sign face is a minimum of eight feet above
the finished grade of a paved walk, drive, or
parking area.
Standards:
(a) One pole sign for each individual building
not part of a multiple development shall
be permitted in the General Business
(GB), Commercial Service (CS) and
Motor Service (MS) districts; or one pole
sign for each multiple development in the
General Business (GB) or Shopping
Center (SC) districts.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed 25 feet in
height.
(c) Such sign shall be located a minimum of
50 feet from an adjacent residential lot
line.
(d) Such sign shall not project over any
public right-of-way or lot line.
(e) The pole support for such signs shall be
fully encased or skirted. A sign with a
single support shall have a minimum
support width of 30 percent and a
maximum support width of 50 percent of
the width of the sign face. Each support
for a sign with double supports shall be a
minimum of 15 percent and a maximum
of 25 percent of the width of the sign.
(f) For a sign support that exceeds 50
percent of the width of the sign face, the
sign shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from any nonresidential lot or 50
feet from any residential lot, 15 feet from
a street right-of-way, and not within the
clear vision triangle as described in §
2-5-1.
(g) For properties with multiple non-local
street frontage, one pole sign is
permitted. A ground sign may be placed
along each other non-local street
frontage.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:997
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
(h) At each location where motor vehicle
fuels are sold at retail, 32 square feet of
additional face area limited to advertising
the brand name and price of the fuel
shall be permitted. This area may be used
for a separate ground sign or as an
addition to the face area of a ground or
pole sign otherwise permitted in this
Section. In no event shall more than 16
square feet of this allowed area be
displayed or added to any single face
area.
4. SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN
A sign indicating the name of the subdivision
or residential development.
Standards:
All Permitted Districts
(a) A subdivision or residential development
identification sign shall be maintained in
good repair by a homeowners
association.
(b) Such sign shall be located on private
property a minimum of 15 feet from any
lot line and not in a clear vision triangle
as described in § 2-5-1.
Single-Family Districts
(c) One non-internally illuminated
permanent subdivision identification sign
may be permitted for each side of a
subdivision or residential development
entryway.
(d) Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area and eight feet in height.
Multifamily Districts
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:998
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
B. FREESTANDING SIGNS
(e) One non-internally illuminated
permanent identification sign may be
permitted at each entrance to the
development.
(f) Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet
in area and six feet in height.
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
C. MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS
1. DIRECTORY SIGN
A sign or group of signs attached to a
building or freestanding which identifies or
directs traffic to the business, owner, address,
or occupation of a group of businesses.
Standards:
(a) Only one directory sign shall be
permitted at each entrance, and one
additional directional sign elsewhere on
the premises, unless approved as part of
a coordinated sign plan.
(b) No such sign shall exceed 16 square feet
in area and 8 feet in height.
(c) Additional internal directory signs not
visible from the street may be permitted
as part of a master sign plan.
(d) Such sign may contain business names
with arrows or other directional
information.
7-8-5. Sign Lighting Standards.
A. Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights
emitting a light of constant intensity and no sign shall be
illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving
light or lights.
B. In no event shall any illuminated sign or lighting device be placed
so as to permit its beams and illumination to be directed upon a
public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to
cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
C. The full number of illuminating elements of a sign shall be kept in
working condition or immediately repaired or replaced.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:999
7-8-6. Sign Area Computation. The following principles shall control the
computation of sign area and sign height.
A. Computation of Area of Individual Signs.
(1) The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, or triangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
determined by the Commissioner of Building to form an
integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against
which it is placed. The supporting structure or bracing of a
sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless
such structure or bracing is made part of the message or face
of the sign.
(2) Where a sign consists of individual letters, words or symbols
attached to a surface, building, canopy, awning or wall, the
sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which
completely encompasses all such letters, words or symbols and
any accompanying background of a color different than the
color of the wall.
B. Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs. The sign area for a
sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together
the area of all sign faces. When two identical sign faces are placed
back to back, the size of any single face shall not exceed 50 percent
of the total area permitted.
C. Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed
as the mean distance from the base(s) of the sign at finished grade
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:1000
to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the newly established grade after
construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
7-8-7.Permitted Signs Table.
Sign Type
Residential
Districts
Business
Districts*
Industrial
Districts
All Other
Districts
Address sign
Construction sign
Incidental sign
Fuel pump sign
Home occupation Sign
Political sign
Real estate sign
Window sign
Signs Requiring a Permit
Building Signs
Awning sign
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:1001
Sign Type
Residential
Districts
Business
Districts*
Industrial
Districts
All Other
Districts
Fascia sign
Hanging sign
Marquee sign
Projecting sign
Wall sign
Menu Board
Freestanding Signs
Ground sign
Message center
sign
*** ***
Pole sign
** **
Subdivision
identification sign
Miscellaneous Signs
Directory sign
* In the SC district, in addition to the pole sign described in § 7-8-4,
only wall, ground, hanging, fascia, and permanent changeable
letter signs shall be permitted.
** Pole signs are not permitted in the OB, NB, or TNB overlay
districts.
*** Message center signs are not permitted in the - TNB, PRD, PDD or
TND overlay districts or within 500 feet of a residential district.
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:1002
Sign Type
Residential
Districts
Business
Districts*
Industrial
Districts
All Other
Districts
Ground, wall and awning signs only are permitted in the LW-1
District.
7-8-8.Permitted Sign Area.
A. All Signs. The maximum area of all signs, excluding those that are
exempt, shall be related to the height of the building above the
finished grade and the length of the wall of the building facing the
nearest street. The total maximum face area for all signs shall not
exceed X square feet per linear foot of building frontage where X
equals the values in the following table. Lots fronting on two or
more streets are allowed to calculate all street frontages into the
allowable allocation. The allowance included in the prior sentence
shall not be applicable to any Controlled Access Highway as
detailed in § 120-5 of the Code of the Town of Amherst or any other
street where vehicular access is not permitted including, but not
limited to, the New York State Thruway (I-90), the Youngmann
Expressway (I-290) and the Lockport Expressway (I-990).
Sign Area (square feet) per Linear Foot
District
Under 2
Stories 2 Stories
Over 2
Stories
RD, ST, GI 1.00 1.25 1.50
GB, SC 2.00 2.00 2.00
MS, CS 1.50 1.75 2.00
NB, OB 0.75 1.00 1.25
CF 0.50 0.50 0.50
RC [Added
12-16-2019 by
L.L. No. 22-2019]
0.50 0.50 0.50
LW-1 12 sq. ft. maximum (see § 5-8-4C)
B. Pole Signs. The maximum total face area for a pole sign shall be
determined by the street frontage of the lot. Where the lot fronts on
more than one street, the frontage shall be the length of the longest
side. The size of any single face shall not exceed 50 percent of the
total area permitted.
Street Frontage
(feet)
Total Face Area
(square feet)
Under 200 64
200 to 349 96
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:1003
Street Frontage
(feet)
Total Face Area
(square feet)
350 to 499 128
500 to 750 160
Over 750 192
C. A permitted public and civic use located in a residential district
shall be allowed a maximum of 32 square feet of total sign area.
Ground and wall signs shall be permitted and shall not contain a
message center sign. Such signs shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from any lot line.
7-8-9. Signs in Multiple Developments.
A. A Coordinated Sign Plan shall be required for all existing and newly
proposed multiple developments as defined in § 2-4 and in
accordance with § 8-11.
B. All signs in a multiple development shall conform to the approved
Coordinated Sign Plan on file with the Town. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the development to ascertain that the
most updated version is on file for purposes of this Ordinance.
C. Building permits for signs for individual businesses within multiple
developments shall be approved by the Commissioner of Building,
following Coordinated Sign Plan approval.
D. No owner, tenant or other user of a multiple development may
erect, permit to be erected, or use any sign deviating from or not
included within the approved coordinated sign plan.
7-8-10.Temporary Signs.
A. Exterior portable or temporary signs shall be limited to a maximum
sign area of 32 square feet per face and erected, used or
maintained only after obtaining a temporary building permit for a
signs in accordance with § 8-10. A temporary building permit for a
sign shall be issued for the following purposes only:
(1) New business enterprises for a period not exceeding 30 days;
(2) Celebration of the first anniversary date of a new business
enterprise for a period not exceeding 30 days;
(3) Business enterprises which have lost the use of an existing sign
by reason of fire or other catastrophe, for a period not
exceeding 30 days;
(4) To replace a conforming or legally nonconforming sign during
construction activities related to public improvements that has
been removed in order to improve the public right-of-way, the
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:1004
time limitation of which shall be established by the
Commissioner of Building;
(5) Limited activities in connection with the principal use or
activity on the premises, for a period not exceeding seven days;
or
(6) Signs advertising the price of merchandise displayed outdoors,
not exceeding 24 square feet in face area.
(7) Temporary businesses with leases of 92 days or less for a
period not exceeding the length of the lease. [Added
12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
B. No more than two temporary building permits for signs shall be
issued within any calendar year for any business on the premises.
Temporary signs shall not be allowed within multiple developments
as defined in § 2-4, except as provided in 7-8-10A(1), (2), (3) and
(7). [Amended 12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019[
7-8-11. Construction and Maintenance of Signs. Every sign shall at all
times be in a safe and structurally sound condition and maintained by
replacement of defective or worn parts, painting, repainting and
cleaning. The Commissioner of Building shall require compliance with
all standards of this Ordinance. If the sign does not comply with
adequate safety standards, it shall be removed.
A. Abandoned Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, any sign which is located on property which becomes
vacant and unoccupied for a period of three consecutive months or
more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which
no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change of ownership or management of such business
shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant
for a period of six months or more. An abandoned sign is prohibited
and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the
premises at the direction of the Commissioner of Building. Failure
to remove an abandoned sign shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
B. Dangerous or Hazardous Signs.
(1) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person any
sign which is either not structurally sound or creates an
electrical hazard. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired
by the owner or user of the sign or the owner of the premises.
(2) Overhead electrical wires or exposed electrical wires on a sign
or its supporting members are prohibited. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:1005
C. Unlawful Signs. No person shall erect on any premises owned or
controlled by such person or use any sign which does not comply
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Street Improvement Projects. Any sign projecting over a public
right-of-way which was subject to removal or relocation at the
owner's expense, pursuant to a permit or other ordinance of the
town, shall be removed by the owner or altered at the owner's
expense to comply with the regulation of this Ordinance if, as the
result of or after completion of a street improvement project, the
sign does not or would not comply with the provisions of this
Section.
7-8-12. Coordinated Sign Plan.
A. The purpose of a Coordinated Sign Plan is to detail the standards
for uniformity to which the development proposes to conform, and
to state the manner in which the design criteria and standards for
uniform signage are in compliance with these regulations.
B. Signs shall be designed to be integrated with the design and
architectural character of the building and be compatible with the
surroundings in which they are placed.
C. Sign panels and graphics shall relate to, be in proportion to and not
cover architectural features. Raceway cabinets, where used as an
element of building mounted signs, shall match the color at the
location of the building where the sign is located.
D. Signs shall be appropriate to the types of activities they represent.
E. The layout of signs shall be orderly and graphics shall be of simple
shape, such as rectangle, circle or oval and consistent throughout a
multiple development.
F. The number of different fonts shall be kept to a minimum and
should be selected to provide for clarity and artistic integrity. If a
tenant does not have a company logo, the font used shall be
consistent with the font common to the overall development.
G. The number of colors used for signs shall achieve a harmonious
appearance throughout the development and be the minimum
necessary to be consistent with the overall design.
H. The materials used in the composition of the signs should be
compatible with building facades and should contribute to the
legibility of the signs.
I. The illumination of signs shall be appropriate to the character of
the sign, its surroundings and generally consistent throughout the
development. Illumination shall be of constant intensity, duration,
with the light source (excluding neon) shielded and where
applicable directed solely onto the sign(s).
§ 7-8 AMHERST CODE § 7-8
1:1006
§ 7-9. Performance Standards
Any use shall comply with the performance standards set forth below. Any
use already established in such districts shall not be altered, added to
or otherwise modified so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
performance standards set forth below for the district in which such use
is located. The Town may select and arrange for an independent survey by
a person qualified in the particular field to determine whether or not any
structure or use complies with the performance standards and the costs for
the services shall be paid by the owner or user.
J. Groups of related signs shall express uniformity and create a sense
of harmonious appearance.
K. The orientation of signs should be consistent throughout the
development.
L. The number and content of signs shall be no more than is necessary
to provide reasonable identification of the businesses within a
multiple development.
M. The size, location, and type of signs shall be consistent on the
facades of buildings and faces of free standing signs, except for:
(1) Company logos; and
(2) Designated anchors that may have signage that varies from
secondary tenants provided that signage is generally
consistent with the overall architecture and signage of the
development.
7-9-1. Incineration Facilities. All incineration facilities shall be enclosed
within an approved structure and shall be provided with devices for
prevention of emission of smoke, odors, chemical or particulate matters
and shall conform to the regulations of Part III, § 3.1 to and including
§ 3.15 of Bulletin 82, National Board of Fire Underwriters, or any
applicable federal, state or county requirements. No garbage, rubbish,
waste matter or empty containers shall be permitted outside of
buildings.
7-9-2. Dust-Smoke. The emission of smoke, soot, fly ash fumes, dust and
other types of air pollution borne by the wind shall be controlled so that
the rate of emission and quantity deposited shall not be detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, welfare or adversely
affect property values.
7-9-3. Glare and Heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall
be conducted in such a manner so that the glare or heat shall be
completely imperceptible from any point along a lot line.
7-9-4. Fissionable, Radioactive or Electrical Disturbance. No activities
shall be permitted which utilize fissionable or radioactive materials if
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:1007
§ 7-10. Bulk Storage of Combustible or Flammable Liquids
All bulk combustible liquids over 660 gallons in residential districts, and
1,000 gallons in all other districts; or flammable liquids over a temporary
portable tank storage of 660 gallons, shall be stored underground per the
National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet #30. Any above ground tank
installed shall be protected from leaks and or spills by a double wall storage
tank or proper diking, per the national Fire Protection Association Pamphlet
#30. The Commissioner of Building shall have discretionary authority to
approve larger aboveground storage facilities in accordance with National
Fire Protection Association standards. In accordance with the requirements
of § 7-4-3C, all tanks installed above ground shall be completely screened
from any public right-of-way.
their use results at any time in the release or emission of any fissionable
or radioactive material into the atmosphere, the ground or sewerage
systems, and no activities shall be permitted which emit electrical
disturbance affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of
the creator of such disturbance.
7-9-5. Odorous Matter. The emission of odorous matter in such quantities
as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond the lot occupied by
the use shall not be permitted.
7-9-6.Toxic or Noxious Matter. The emission of toxic, noxious or corrosive
fumes or gases which would be injurious to property, vegetation,
animals or human health at or beyond the boundaries of the lot
occupied by the use shall not be permitted.
7-9-7.Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated by said use is not perceptible
without instruments, at any point along any property line of the lot on
which the use is located.
7-9-8. Bird Hazards. In order to reduce bird hazards to air traffic in the
vicinity of the Greater Buffalo Niagara International Airport, all
buildings hereafter constructed in the area of the town east of the
Village of Williamsville and south of Wehrle Drive shall be designed so
as to eliminate water standing on the roofs. No roof shall be colored
black.
§ 7-9 AMHERST CODE § 7-10
1:1008
PART 8.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 8-1. Development Review Bodies
8-1-1.Town Board.
A. Establishment. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals, or the general welfare of the community, the Town Board is
hereby empowered under § 261 of NYS Town Law to regulate and
administer the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Powers and Duties. The Town Board shall be responsible for final
action regarding the following:
(1) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(2) Amendments to the text of this Ordinance;
(3) Amendments to the Audubon Development Plan;
(4) Open development areas in accordance with NYS Town Law
§ 280a(4);
(5) Site plan review in the Bryant Woods development area; and
(6) Relief of any restriction or action from any of the above.
8-1-2. Planning Board.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board is established under the
provisions of § 271 of NYS Town Law.
B. Membership, Appropriations and Terms. The Planning Board
shall consist of seven members and its composition, appropriations,
terms, vacancies, removals, and appointments shall be in
accordance with § 271 of NYS Town Law.
C. Power and Duties. The Planning Board shall have the following
powers and duties.
(1) Review Authority. The Planning Board shall be responsible
for reviewing and making recommendations regarding the
following:
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(b) Amendments to the text of this Ordinance;
(c) Amendments to the Audubon Development Plan;
(d) Applications for review of open development areas;
(e) Site plan review in Bryant Woods development area; and
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:1009
(f) Relief from conditions or restrictions for actions taken
under § 8-1-1B.
(2) Final Authority. The Planning Board shall be responsible for
final action regarding applications for major site plan review
and relief from conditions or restrictions.
(3) General Authority.
(a) The Planning Board may exercise additional powers as
directed by the Town Board and as may be described
elsewhere in this Ordinance and as permitted by NYS
Town Law.
8-1-3. Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
A. Establishment. The ZBA is established under the provisions of
§ 267 of NYS Town Law.
B. Membership, Appointments and Terms.
(1) The ZBA shall consist of five members appointed by the Town
Board. The members of the ZBA as now constituted shall
continue in office until the expiration of their present terms.
Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for a term of
five years each. Vacancies shall be filled as provided for in the
NYS Town Law.
(2) The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the ZBA and shall perform
such duties as required by it. The Town Board may appoint
additional clerks or other employees serving at its pleasure to
assist the ZBA.
C. Meetings.
(1) The ZBA shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business
consistent with statute and this Ordinance.
(2) The Chair of the ZBA, or in the Chair's absence the Acting
Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses in the manner and to the extent permitted by NYS
Town Law and the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(3) The ZBA may seek recommendations from the Planning Board
and other agencies as it deems appropriate.
(4) Hearings shall be public, and decisions shall be voted upon at
public sessions. The ZBA may otherwise hold executive
sessions in accordance with the NYS Open Meeting Law.
D. Minutes. The Town Clerk shall keep minutes of all proceedings
before the ZBA.
§ 8-1 AMHERST CODE § 8-1
1:1010
E. Powers and Duties. The ZBA shall have the following powers and
duties.
(1) Final Authority. The ZBA shall be responsible for final action
regarding the following:
(a) Applications for variances;
(b) Administrative appeals;
(c) Applications for special use permits;
(d) Applications for temporary use permits;
(e) NYS Town Law § 280-a(3) appeal; and
(f) Amendments to restrictions enacted by the ZBA.
(2) General Authority.
(a) The ZBA may exercise additional powers as directed by the
Town Board and as may be described elsewhere in this
Ordinance and as permitted by law.
8-1-4(1). Planning Director. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
A. Designation. The Planning Director shall be responsible for
administering the certain provisions of this Zoning Ordinance as
may be required under § 8-1-4C.
B. Delegation of Authority. The Planning Director may designate
any staff member to represent the Director in any function
assigned by this Ordinance. The Director shall remain responsible
for any final action.
C. Powers and Duties. The Planning Director shall have the
following powers and duties.
(1) Review Authority. The Planning Director shall be responsible
for reviewing the following:
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(b) Amendments to the text of the ordinance;
(c) Amendments to the Audubon Development Plan;
(d) Applications for review of open development areas;
(e) Applications for major site plan review;
(f) Applications for temporary use permits; and
(g) Applications for use variances.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:1011
(2) Final Authority. The Planning Director shall be responsible
for final action regarding the following:
(a) Applications for minor site plan review; and
(b) Coordinated sign plan review.
(3) General Authority.
(a) The Planning Director shall ensure compliance with the
NYS Environmental Quality Review Act (6 NYCRR Part
617) and local law 3-92 Chapter 104, as amended, for all
actions authorized under this Ordinance.
(b) The Planning Director may exercise additional powers as
may be described elsewhere in this Ordinance and as
permitted by NYS Town Law.
(c) The Planning Director shall perform related duties as
directed by the Town Board.
8-1-4(2). Zoning Enforcement Officer. [Added 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
A. Designation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible
for administering the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance as may
be required under § 8-1-4(2)C.
B. Delegation of Authority. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
designate any staff member to represent the Zoning Enforcement
Officer in any function assigned by this Ordinance. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall remain responsible for any final action.
C. Powers and Duties. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have
the following powers and duties.
(1) Review Authority. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be
responsible for reviewing the following:
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(b) Amendments to the text of the ordinance;
(c) Amendments to the Audubon Development Plan;
(d) Applications for review of open development areas (Appeal
under § 280-a(3) of NYS Town Law);
(e) Applications for major and minor site plan review;
(f) Variances;
(g) Applications for administrative appeal;
(h) Applications for special use permits;
§ 8-1 AMHERST CODE § 8-1
1:1012
(i) Applications for temporary use permits;
(j) Coordinated sign plan review;
(k) Restricted Parking Lots under § 7-1-9B(2)(b) of this
ordinance.
(2) Final Authority. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be
responsible for final action regarding the following:
(a) Interpretation of district boundaries;
(b) Written interpretation of this Ordinance;
(c) Determination of similar uses.
(3) General Authority.
(a) The Zoning Enforcement Officer may exercise additional
powers as may be described elsewhere in this Ordinance
and as permitted by NYS Town Law.
(b) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall perform related
duties as directed by the Town Board.
(4) Enforcement.
(a) This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
notify the Commissioner of Building when it has been
determined that a violation of this Ordinance may exist.
(b) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall recommend to the
Commissioner of Building discontinuance of uses of land,
structures or construction of structures or additions,
alterations or other structural changes which are in
violation of this Ordinance or any other law. Nothing in this
Section shall limit or restrict any other procedure provided
for the enforcement of this Ordinance or other applicable
law.
8-1-5. Commissioner of Building. [Added 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
A. Delegation of Authority. The Commissioner of Building may
designate any staff member to represent the Commissioner of
Building in any function assigned by this Ordinance. The
Commissioner of Building shall remain responsible for any final
action.
B. Powers and Duties. The Commissioner of Building shall have the
following powers and duties.
(1) Review Authority. The Commissioner of Building shall be
responsible for reviewing the following:
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:1013
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Map (rezoning);
(b) Amendments to the text of the ordinance;
(c) Amendments to the Audubon Development Plan;
(d) Applications for review of open development areas;
(e) Applications for major and minor site plan;
(f) Applications for Coordinated sign plan.
(2) Final Authority. The Commissioner of Building shall be
responsible for final action regarding the following:
(a) Applications for certificates of occupancy or compliance;
(b) Applications for floodplain development permits;
(c) Applications for building permits.
(3) General Authority.
(a) The Commissioner of Building may exercise additional
powers as may be described elsewhere in this Ordinance
and as permitted by NYS Town Law.
(b) The Commissioner of Building shall perform related duties
as directed by the Town Board.
(4) Enforcement.
(a) This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Commissioner of
Building. Upon notice, the Commissioner of Building may
enter any premises or building at a reasonable time to
determine whether or not same is in violation of this
Ordinance.
(b) The Commissioner of Building shall order discontinuance
of uses of land, structures or construction of structures or
additions, alterations or other structural changes which
are in violation of this Ordinance or any other law. Nothing
in this Section shall limit or restrict any other procedure
provided for the enforcement of this Ordinance or other
applicable law.
8-1-6.Summary of Review Authority. The following table summarizes
review authority under this Ordinance. Public hearing may be required
in accordance with § 8-2-3. [Amended 5-20-2013 by L.L. No.
8-2013; 12-16-2019 by L.L. No. 22-2019]
§ 8-1 AMHERST CODE § 8-1
1:1014
Sec.
Review
Procedure
Commissioner
of
Building
Planning
Director
Zoning
Board of
Appeals
Planning
Board
Town
Board
Zoning
Enforcement
Officer
Approval by Town Board
§ 6-9 Planned
Unit
Development
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
§ 8-3 Amendment,
Zoning Map
(Rezoning)
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
§ 8-5 Amendment,
Text
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
§ 8-15 Audubon
Plan
Amendment
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
Review of
Open
Development
Areas in
accordance
with NYS
Town Law
§ 280a (3)
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
Site Plan
Review in
Bryant
Woods
Review Review Recommend Decision Review
Approval by the Planning Board
§ 8-7 Major Site
Plan Review
Review Review Decision Review
Approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 8-6 Special Use
Permit
Review Decision Review
§ 8-8 Temporary
Use Permit
Review Decision Review
§ 8-13 Variance Decision Review
§ 8-14 Administrative
Appeal
Decision Review
NYS Town
Law
§ 280-a(3)
Appeal
Decision Review
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:1015
§ 8-2. Common Development Review Procedures
Sec.
Review
Procedure
Commissioner
of
Building
Planning
Director
Zoning
Board of
Appeals
Planning
Board
Town
Board
Zoning
Enforcement
Officer
Approval by Planning Director
§ 8-7 Minor Site
Plan Review
Review Decision Review
§ 8-11 Coordinated
Sign Plan
Review
Review Decision Review
Approval by the Commissioner of Building
§ 8-9 Certificate
of
Occupancy
or
Compliance
Decision
§ 7-7 Floodplain
Development
Permit
Decision
§ 8-10 Building
Permits for
Signs
Decision
Approval by Zoning Enforcement Officer
1-11-3 Interpretation
of District
Boundaries
Decision
§ 8-12 Written
Interpretation
Decision
Determination
of Similar
Uses
Decision
8-1-7. Review Authority for Sexually Oriented Businesses. In addition
to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, and in accordance
with § 6-6-4, a certificate of registration is required for the operation of
a sexually oriented business. The application for the certificate of
registration is filed with the Town Clerk and reviewed by the
Commissioner of Building and the Chief of Police. Upon receipt of
determinations of compliance from these officials, the Town Clerk
issues either an approval or denial of the application. [Added 7-7-2008
by L.L. No. 9-2008]
8-2-1. Pre-Application Conference.
§ 8-1 AMHERST CODE § 8-2
1:1016
A. Before submitting an application for development approval, it is
recommended that each petitioner schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Director and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, as applicable, to discuss the procedures, standards and
regulations required for development approval in accordance with
the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
B. A pre-application conference shall be required for the modification
of an existing development without a previously approved site plan.
8-2-2. Application Requirements. The following requirements shall apply
to all applications for development review.
A. Who May Submit Applications.
(1) All applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or Planning Director, as applicable, for their signature
prior to filing with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall
receive payment of the required fees. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
(2) Applications shall only be accepted from persons having the
legal authority to submit such applications. In general,
applications shall be made by the owners or lessees of
property, or persons who have contracted to purchase property
contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary approval
under this Zoning Ordinance.
(3) The Planning Director or Zoning Enforcement Officer, as
applicable, shall require a petitioner to present additional
evidence of authority to submit the application. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
B. Forms. [Amended 1-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(1) All application forms shall be available either from the
Planning or the Building Department, as applicable. The
content of such application forms shall be determined by the
Planning Director or the Commissioner of Building, as
applicable, and may be amended from time to time. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(2) Applications required under this Ordinance shall be submitted
on forms and in such numbers as required by the Town.
C. Fees.
(1) No application shall be accepted by the Town Clerk until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full.
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:1017
(2) Filing fees shall be established from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board to defray the cost of processing the
application.
(3) All required fees shall be made payable to the "Town of
Amherst."
(4) A petitioner who has paid an appropriate fee pursuant to the
submission of an application, but who chooses to withdraw
such application within 24 hours of application shall be entitled
to a full refund upon written request to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Planning Director, as applicable. After
this 24-hour period, the petitioner may petition the Town Board
for a partial refund. The Town Board may request a
recommendation on any request for a refund considered under
this Section. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
D. Acceptance of Applications for Review.
(1) An application and fee will be accepted for review when it
contains all information necessary to determine whether or not
the development as proposed will comply with all of the
requirements of this Ordinance, as determined by the Planning
Director, Commissioner of Building or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer. In addition, an application shall not be considered
complete until a SEQR determination of significance under
Town Code, Chapter 104, Environmental Quality Review, can
be made. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(2) The presumption is that all of the information required in the
Town's application forms is necessary to satisfy the
requirements of this Section. However, it is recognized that
each application is unique, and therefore more or less
information may be required according to the needs of the
particular case. The petitioner may rely on the
recommendations of the Planning Director or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, as applicable, as to whether more or less
information should be submitted with the application.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(3) An application not considered complete within six months after
the initial date of submittal shall be considered null and void,
except where such application is part of an ongoing SEQR
review.
8-2-3. Notice and Public Hearings.
A. Public Notice Requirements.
(1) Published Notice. For the purpose of notifying the public of
all public hearing agenda items which may be considered or
reviewed, notice shall be published at least once in a
§ 8-2 AMHERST CODE § 8-2
1:1018
newspaper having general circulation in the Town for a time
period as required under SEQR.
(2) Published Notice for Rezoning to a PRD District. The
published notice of any public hearing scheduled to consider
the creation of a PRD district shall state that the proposed
development plan, with a list of all property ownerships within
the district (listed by house number, name of owner, street
name and tax number), and a map of the proposed district,
showing proposed use classification areas and property lines of
all parcels of land included in district areas, is available for
public examination in the Office of the Town Clerk, prior to the
public hearing and thereafter until such time as the Town
Board shall act to approve or disapprove the creation of the
district and shall describe any adjustments in any regulations,
standards or criteria of this Ordinance.
B. Courtesy Notices. These notice provisions are not jurisdictional.
Failure to provide any notice or to erect or maintain the sign or
failure of the notice or sign to provide the information called for
shall not affect the validity of any action taken by the ZBA, Planning
Board and Town Board.
(1) Mailed Notice.
(a) At least 10 days prior to the first public hearing, the Town
Clerk shall give written notice by mail of the date, time and
place of the public hearing and the street address or other
identification of the property involved and a brief
description of the action under consideration to each of
the following: [Amended 7-7-2014 by L.L. No. 21-2014]
(i) The owner of the property affected by the proposal, as
shown by the records of the Town Assessor, and the
petitioner for the action being sought, if other than the
owner;
(ii) The owners of property located within 600 feet of the
subject property, as shown by the records of the Town
Assessor;
(iii) Any other person who has filed a written request for
notice of applications for such proposals and paid the
annual fee therefor, as fixed by resolution of the Town
Board from time to time. Eligibility for notice under
this subsection shall expire at the end of each
calendar year; and
(iv) Any and all homeowners' or residents' associations or
organizations registered with the Town Clerk having a
geographical area within which the subject property is
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:1019
situated. Said associations or organizations shall
define the geographical area they represent.
(2) Posted Notice. At least 10 days prior to the first public
hearing, the Town shall cause a two-foot by three-foot sign to
be erected on the affected property, facing the nearest street,
bearing the words "Zoning/Development Application Pending,"
together with a Planning Department telephone number to be
called for additional information. The sign shall remain posted
during the pendency of the application, to the conclusion of the
final public hearing before the ZBA, Planning Board or Town
Board as the case may be, or the earlier termination of the
proposal.
C. Required Hearing. A public hearing shall be required for
development review as shown in the table below.
Applications for Approval ZBA
Planning
Board
Town
Board
Amendment, Map
(Rezoning)
Amendment, Text
Audubon Plan Amendment
Variance
Administrative Appeal
Special Use Permit
Site Plan, Major
Review of Open
Development
Planned Development
District
Temporary Use Permit
§ 8-2 AMHERST CODE § 8-2
1:1020
§ 8-3. Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
Applications for Approval ZBA
Planning
Board
Town
Board
NYS Town Law § 280-a
8-2-4. Any request to modify or remove a condition of approval for a
development application will follow the same review procedures,
including all required public hearing(s), as the original action. [Added
8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
8-3-1. Applicability.
A. The boundaries of the Zoning Map may from time to time be
amended, supplemented, changed, or modified as provided by
§ 264 and § 265 of NYS Town Law.
B. A rezoning may be initiated by the Town Board, the Planning Board,
the Planning Director, the property owner of the property to be
rezoned, or an authorized agent of the owner.
C. A rezoning may also be initiated when the owners of 50 percent or
more of the subject property, excluding public streets, in any
district present a signed petition to the Town Board requesting a
Zoning Map amendment.
8-3-2. Application Requirements and Development Plan for Rezoning.
A. An application for rezoning shall be submitted in accordance with
§ 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
B. All applications shall be complete in accordance with § 8-2-2D
before the Planning Director is required to review the application.
An application shall not be considered complete until a SEQR
determination under Town Code, Chapter 104, Environmental
Quality Review, can be made.
C. In addition to the information required above, the following
information shall be submitted as part of the formal application for
rezoning to the SC district.
(1) A market analysis, including:
(a) Identification of the trade area of the proposed shopping
center;
(b) Trade area population, present and future; and
(c) Net potential customers' buying power for stores in the
proposed shopping center.
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:1021
(2) A financial analysis indicating the ability of the petitioner to
carry out the project.
(3) A traffic study, including an estimate of traffic volumes to be
generated by the development and the assignment of traffic to
proposed entrances and exits.
8-3-3. Action by the Planning Director.
A. Upon receipt of a petition for rezoning, the Town Clerk shall
transmit the application to the Planning Director for distribution to
officials and agencies as deemed appropriate for their review,
report and recommendation. Such officials and agencies shall each,
within 30 days from receiving the petition, furnish the Planning
Director a report pertinent to their respective jurisdictions.
B. The Planning Director shall prepare a report that reviews the
rezoning request in light of any reports, recommendations,
applicable plans and the general requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance. A copy shall be provided to the Planning Board.
8-3-4. Action by the Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing and give notice
in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings. The
Planning Board shall review the petition and evaluate the report
received from the Planning Director.
B. Within 62 days following close of the public hearing, the Planning
Board shall furnish to the town Board and petitioner either its
findings that the proposed rezoning is generally consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the regulations, standards and purpose of
this Ordinance or a finding of any failure of such compliance and a
recommendation that the rezoning be approved, disapproved or
modified. [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
C. The Planning Board may include in a favorable report a
recommendation that the Town Board establish conditions as a part
of any resolution approving the application in order to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and environmental quality of the
community and is generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance.
D. An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefore and,
if appropriate, point out to the petitioner what changes might be
necessary in order to receive a favorable report.
8-3-5. General Review Criteria. In recommending a favorable report, the
Planning Board shall consider and make findings on the following
matters:
A. The proposed zoning and development plan is generally consistent
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance;
§ 8-3 AMHERST CODE § 8-3
1:1022
B. Whether or not there are adequate services and utilities available
or proposed to be made available in the construction of the
development;
C. Compatibility with the present zoning and conforming uses of
nearby property and with the character of the neighborhood; and
D. Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the current
versus the proposed district.
E. Whether the proposed change tends to improve the balance of
uses, or meets a specific demand in the Town.
8-3-6. Action by the Town Board.
A. Following completion of Planning Board review and upon written
request by the petitioner, the Town Board shall schedule a public
hearing and give notice in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and
Public Hearings. A further public notice shall be published and paid
for by the petitioner when a hearing postponement is requested by
the petitioner.
B. If the petitioner does not request a public hearing before the Town
Board as provided for by this Ordinance within six months after the
Planning Board makes its report, the petition shall be deemed
withdrawn.
C. Upon request, the Town Board shall hold the public hearing and
render a decision within 62 days thereafter. The time within which
the Town Board shall render a decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the petitioner and the Town Board.
D. If the Town Board approves the amendment, supplement, change
or modification to district boundaries or classifications, the Zoning
Map shall be amended after publication as required by § 265 of
NYS Town Law.
E. Amending the Zoning Map does not constitute recording of a
subdivision plat nor authorize the issuance of building permits.
Such actions can only be taken after site plan approval in
accordance with § 8-7 or subdivision approval in accordance with
the Town of Amherst Subdivision Regulations.
8-3-7. Notice of Decision. The decision of the Town Board shall be filed in
the Office of the Town Clerk within five business days after the decision
is rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
8-3-8. Resubmittal of Withdrawn or Denied Applications. When a
petition has been filed and processed within 10 days prior to the
scheduled public hearing of the Town Board and is thereafter
withdrawn, or is withdrawn or denied after the hearing, a petition
seeking substantially the same relief shall not be considered or voted on
by the Town Board, except for a vote to table or to receive and file,
§ 8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:1023
§ 8-4. Planned District Rezoning and Planned Unit Development
(PUD) Process Application. [Amended 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013]
within one year from the date of such previous filing, unless the
Planning Board shall first find that there have been substantial changes
which would merit a hearing or rehearing, in which case the Planning
Board shall in its recommendation set forth the grounds for its
determination. This restriction shall not apply where the Town Board
has not finally determined the proceeding within 62 days following the
public hearing.
8-3-9. Review of Zoning Changes. The Town may review property not
developed within three years following a zoning classification change to
determine whether or not the classification remains appropriate.
Following the review, the Town Board may call a public hearing to
consider a further change in classification, as it deems appropriate.
8-4-1. Applicability.
A. This Section shall apply to applications requesting a zoning map
amendment to the PRD, PDD, or TND planned districts and for the
Planned Unit Development Process (PUD), as applicable.
[Amended 9-9-2013 by L.L. No. 17-2013]
B. A conceptual development plan shall be required to petition to
rezone to a planned district or apply for a PUD in an applicable
district. The development plan shall become part of the petition for
rezoning or the application for a PUD and shall be reviewed
concurrently.
C. The conceptual development plan procedure is established to
assure that the proposed petition for rezoning or application for a
PUD is consistent with this Ordinance and generally consistent
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
D. A request for rezoning to a planned district or a PUD application
may be initiated by the Town Board, the property owner of the
property to be rezoned or an authorized agent of the owner.
8-4-2. Application Requirements and Development Plan.
A. An application for planned district rezoning or a PUD application
shall be submitted in accordance with § 8-2-2, Application
Requirements.
B. All applications shall be complete in accordance with § 8-2-2D
before the Planning Director is required to review the application.
An application shall not be considered complete until a SEQR
determination under Town Code, Chapter 104, Environmental
Quality Review, can be made.
§ 8-3 AMHERST CODE § 8-4
1:1024
C. A conceptual development plan shall be included with the
application. The precise contents of the development plan shall be
established by the Planning Director.
8-4-3. Action by the Planning Director.
A. Upon receipt of a petition for planned district rezoning or an
application for a PUD, the Town Clerk shall transmit the application
and the associated conceptual development plan to the Planning
Director for distribution to officials and agencies as deemed
appropriate for their review, report and recommendation. Such
officials and agencies shall each, within 30 days from receiving the
petition, furnish the Planning Director a report pertinent to their
respective jurisdictions.
B. The Planning Director shall prepare a report that reviews the
planned district rezoning request or PUD application and the
associated conceptual development plan in light of any reports,
recommendations, applicable plans and the general requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance. A copy shall be provided to the Planning
Board.
8-4-4. Action by the Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing and give notice
in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings. The
Planning Board shall review the rezoning petition or PUD
application and the associated development plan and evaluate the
report received from the Planning Director.
B. Within 62 days following receipt of the petition by the Planning
Director, the Planning Board shall furnish to the Town Board and
petitioner either its findings that the proposed planned district
rezoning or PUD application is generally consistent with the
policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the regulations, standards
and purpose of this Ordinance or a finding of any failure of such
compliance and a recommendation that the rezoning be approved,
disapproved or modified.
C. The Planning Board may include in a favorable report a
recommendation that the Town Board establish conditions as a part
of any resolution approving the application in order to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and environmental quality of the
community and is generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance.
D. An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefore and,
if appropriate, point out to the petitioner what changes might be
necessary in order to receive a favorable report.
8-4-5. Review Criteria for a Planned District. In recommending a
favorable report to approve a rezoning to a Planned District or a PUD
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:1025
application, the Planning Board shall consider and make findings on the
following matters in addition to those specified in § 8-3-5:
A. The proposed conceptual development plan meets the purpose and
objectives of the PRD, PDD, TND or the district in which the PUD is
located.
B. For a Planned District rezoning, the proposed conceptual
development plan shall meet all the use regulations of Part 6. The
dimensional requirements of the PRD, PDD, or TND districts must
also be met.
C. A PUD development plan must be consistent with all the applicable
use regulations in Part 6 and the purpose statement of the zoning
district in which it is located.
8-4-6. Action by the Town Board.
A. Following completion of Planning Board review and upon written
request by the petitioner, the Town Board shall schedule a public
hearing and give notice in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and
Public Hearings. A further public notice shall be published and paid
for by the petitioner when a hearing postponement is requested by
the petitioner.
B. If the petitioner does not request a public hearing before the Town
Board as provided for by this Ordinance within six months after the
Planning Board makes its report, the petition shall be deemed
withdrawn.
C. Upon request, the Town Board shall hold the public hearing and
render a decision within 62 days thereafter. The time within which
the Town Board shall render a decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the petitioner and the Town Board.
D. If the Town Board approves a planned district rezoning the Zoning
Map shall be amended after publication as required by § 265 of
NYS Town Law.
E. Amending the Zoning Map or approval of a PUD application does
not constitute recording of a subdivision plat nor authorize the
issuance of building permits. Such actions can only be taken after
site plan approval in accordance with § 8-7 or subdivision approval
in accordance with the Town of Amherst Subdivision Regulations.
F. The determination by the Town Board of whether to approve
rezoning to a planned district or a PUD application to adjust any
regulations, standards or criteria of this Ordinance shall be based
on its review of the proposed conceptual development plan, the
report of the Planning Board and the Planning Director and any
matters brought forth at the hearing and approval or rejection of a
development plan where the Town Board has acted on its own
§ 8-4 AMHERST CODE § 8-4
1:1026
initiative. Such approval shall include the making of the findings
specified in § 8-3-5 and § 8-4-5.
G. The Town Board may, in order to protect the public health, safety,
welfare and environmental quality of the community, attach to its
resolution approving an application additional conditions or
requirements consistent with this Ordinance and generally
consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
H. If such additional conditions or requirements are proposed, the
petitioner shall be given notice by the Town Clerk in writing of such
additional conditions or requirements within 15 days of the filing of
the Town Board's decision. The Zoning Map shall not be amended
or the PUD application shall not be deemed approved until the
petitioner has filed with the Town Clerk written consent to the
development plan as modified. If additional conditions or
requirements are imposed by the Town Board, a restriction stating
those requirements or conditions shall be noted on the deed.
Failure of the petitioner to file consent with the Town Clerk within
62 days of the Town Board's action shall constitute a rejection of
the conditions, and the application shall be null and void.
Extensions of this period may be granted by the Town Board.
8-4-7. Notice of Decision. The decision of the Town Board shall be filed in
the Office of the Town Clerk within five business days after the decision
is rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
8-4-8. Subsequent Amendment of Development Plan.
A. Amendments to conditions and restrictions shall be resubmitted
and reviewed for development plan approval as if it were a new
application. Any changes subject to the requirements as defined
above shall be reviewed first by the Planning Board. The Town
Board shall be responsible for final review and action.
B. Amendments to any other conditions and restrictions for the
development plan shall be reviewed and approved in accordance
with § 8-7-3
8-4-9. Resubmittal of Withdrawn or Denied Applications. When a
petition has been filed and processed within 10 days prior to the
scheduled public hearing of the Town Board and is thereafter
withdrawn, or is withdrawn or denied after the hearing, a petition
seeking substantially the same relief shall not be considered or voted on
by the Town Board, except for a vote to table or to receive and file,
within one year from the date of such previous filing, unless the
Planning Board shall first find that there have been substantial changes
which would merit a hearing or rehearing, in which case the Planning
Board shall in its recommendation set forth the grounds for its
determination. This restriction shall not apply where the Town Board
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:1027
§ 8-5. Text Amendment
has not finally determined the proceeding within 62 days following the
public hearing.
8-4-10. Development Plan Phasing. If the development is to be
implemented in phases, each phase shall have adequate provision for
access, parking, open space, recreation areas and stormwater
management and other public improvements to serve the development
in the event that other phases are not constructed. All proposed
phasing of infrastructure and utilities shall be shown in the
development plan. Where the overall development will require more
than 24 months to complete, such development shall be required to be
phased. Each phase shall be provided with temporary or permanent
transitional features, buffers or protective areas in order to prevent
damage to completed phases, to future phases and to adjoining
property.
8-4-11. Action Following Development Plan Approval. No construction
or site improvement work may commence until subdivision approval
has been granted, or site plan approval has been granted and all
applicable permits or approvals are obtained in accordance with § 8-7,
Site Plan Review.
8-5-1. Applicability.
A. The Town Board shall consider amendments to the text of this
Ordinance, as may be desired from time to time.
B. Such amendments shall be made in accordance with the provisions
of this Section.
C. A request to amend the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by
the Town Board, the Planning Board, the ZBA, the Planning
Director, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commissioner of
Building. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-5-2. Action by the Planning Director, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
Commissioner of Building.
A. When a text amendment is initiated as described in § 8-5-1C, the
Planning Director, Zoning Enforcement Officer or the
Commissioner of Building, as applicable, in consultation with the
Town Attorney's Office, shall draft an appropriate amendment and
present that amendment to the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Director, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
Commissioner of Building, as applicable, shall prepare a staff
report that reviews the proposed text amendment request. A copy
shall be provided to the Planning Board.
§ 8-4 AMHERST CODE § 8-5
1:1028
§ 8-6. Special Use Permit
8-5-3. Action by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall schedule a
public hearing and give notice in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and
Public Hearings. The Planning Board shall make a recommendation on
the application to the Town Board. If the Planning Board fails to make a
recommendation within 90 days, the Town Board may process the
request without a recommendation.
8-5-4. Action by the Town Board.
A. Before taking action on a text amendment, the Town Board shall
consider the recommendations of the Planning Board, Planning
Director and the Commissioner of Building, and shall schedule a
public hearing and give notice in accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice
and Public Hearings.
B. Following the public hearing, the Town Board may approve the
amendment, deny the amendment, or send the amendment back to
the Planning Director or Commissioner of Building, as applicable,
for additional consideration.
8-5-5. Review Criteria.
A. In evaluating any proposed amendment of the text of this
Ordinance, the Town Board shall consider the following:
(1) The extent to which the proposed text amendment is consistent
with the remainder of this Ordinance, including, specifically,
any purpose statements;
(2) The extent to which the proposed text amendment represents a
new idea not considered in the existing ordinance, or
represents a revision necessitated by changing circumstances
over time;
(3) Whether or not the proposed text amendment corrects an error
in the ordinance; and
(4) Whether or not the proposed text amendment revises the
ordinance to comply with state or federal statutes or case law.
B. In deciding whether to adopt a proposed amendment to this
Ordinance, the governing principle before the Town Board is
whether the proposed amendment advances the public health,
safety or welfare and is consistent with this Ordinance and
generally consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
8-6-1. Applicability.
A. Special uses within the zoning districts are generally considered to
be uses which are appropriate in a particular zoning district but
because of their potential for incompatibility with adjacent uses
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:1029
require individual review and may require the imposition of
conditions in order to assure the appropriateness of the use in a
particular zoning district.
B. A special use permit shall be required in accordance with the
district use tables in Part 3, Part 4 and Part 5.
C. The ZBA shall hear and decide all applications for special use
permits in accordance with § 274-b of NYS Town Law.
8-6-2. Application Requirements.
A. An application for a special use permit shall be submitted in
accordance with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
B. All applications shall be complete in accordance with § 8-2-2D
before the Zoning Enforcement Officer is required to review the
application. An application shall not be considered complete until a
SEQR determination under Town Code, Chapter 104,
Environmental Quality Review, as amended, can be made.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-6-3. Action by the Planning Director. When applicable, the Planning
Director shall prepare a report that reviews the request for a special
use permit. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-6-4. Action by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall prepare a report that reviews the request for
a special use permit. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-6-5. Action by the ZBA.
A. Within 62 days following receipt of the application, the ZBA shall
schedule a public hearing and give notice in accordance with
§ 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings.
B. After review of the special use permit application and the public
hearing, the ZBA shall make written findings of approval, approval
with modifications or conditions, or denial.
C. After conducting the public hearing, the ZBA shall render a
decision within 62 days thereafter. The time within which the
decision shall be rendered may be extended by mutual consent of
the petitioner and the Board.
D. The ZBA may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove
the application for a special use permit.
E. The ZBA shall have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental
to the proposed special use permit. Upon approval of a special use
permit, any such conditions shall be met in connection with
issuance of permits by applicable agents and officers of the Town.
§ 8-6 AMHERST CODE § 8-6
1:1030
8-6-6. Review Criteria.
A. In rendering a decision, the ZBA shall consider and make findings
that the proposed use:
(1) Will be generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Meets any specific criteria set forth in this Ordinance;
(3) Will be compatible with existing uses adjacent to and near the
property;
(4) Will be in harmony with the general purpose of this Ordinance;
(5) Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property;
(6) Will not create a hazard to health, safety or the general
welfare;
(7) Will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor
be detrimental to the neighborhood residents; and
(8) Will not otherwise be detrimental to the public convenience
and welfare.
B. Commercial recreation activities not conducted within completely
enclosed buildings may be permitted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with this Section. In evaluating the
application for the special permit, In addition to the review criteria
in § 8-6-6A, the ZBA may also consider the proximity of the any
commercial outdoor recreation activities to residential and
nonresidential properties, noise, odors, lighting and hours of
operation. In approving a permit, the ZBA may impose conditions to
eliminate or mitigate off-site impacts of the commercial outdoor
recreation activity.
8-6-7. Conditions on Special Use Permits.
A. The ZBA may impose such conditions upon the premises benefited
by a special use permit as may be necessary to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property in the neighborhood, including
limitations on the time period for which the permit is granted.
B. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution
authorizing the special use permit.
8-6-8. Notice of Decision. The decision of the ZBA shall be filed in the
Office of the Town Clerk within five business days after the decision is
rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
8-6-9. Renewal of Special Use Permits with Specific Time Periods.
Special use permits that have been issued for specific time periods are
subject to review for compliance with all of the conditions imposed at
§ 8-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:1031
§ 8-7. Site Plan Review
the time of approval of the initial permit. Following a public hearing on
the matter, the ZBA may deny a renewal of a special use permit when
any of the following apply:
A. The petitioner has failed to comply with one or more of the
conditions of the prior approval;
B. Substantial new issues regarding the permit conditions during the
operation of the use have arisen;
C. The general requirements of this Zoning Ordinance have not been
met;
D. There are changes in the area or neighborhood which would be
incompatible with the special use.
8-6-10.Period of Validity.
A. A special use permit shall become null and void six months after the
date on which it was issued unless the special use is established
within six months of the date of ZBA approval.
B. A special use permit shall become null and void upon a finding by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer that any of the conditions in the
permit have been violated. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
C. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use or its operation for which it was issued, and such
permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or
effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period
of six consecutive months.
8-7-1. Applicability.
A. In accordance with § 274-a of NYS Town Law no construction or
site improvement work may commence until site plan approval,
where required, has been granted.
B. Site plan review shall not be required for development of two or
fewer single- or two-family lots except in the NCD district.
C. The addition of residential units to a mixed use development shall
be regulated by the provisions for residential units.
8-7-2. Initial Site Plans for New Development. An initial site plan for new
development shall be submitted in accordance with the following table
[Amended 5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010].
§ 8-6 AMHERST CODE § 8-7
1:1032
Type of Development
Major Site
Plan
Minor Site
Plan
RESIDENTIAL
Up to 4 Residential Units
Proposed construction of 3 or 4
residential units (If proposed single
family lots result in the subdivision of a
parcel into 5 or more lots within a 3-year
period, see Town of Amherst Subdivision
Regulations) Site plan review shall not
be required for development of one or
two single-family lots, except in the NCD
district
5 or More Residential Units
Proposed construction of 5 or more
residential units (If 5 or more residential
lots are proposed, see Town of Amherst
Subdivision Regulations)
SEQRA Type 1 Action
Any proposed residential development
classified as a Type 1 action under Town
Code, Chapter 104, Environmental
Quality Review, as amended.
NONRESIDENTIAL
Within 250 Feet of Residential
Proposed nonresidential or mixed-use
development located within 250 feet of
residential use or zoning
Under 4,000 SF
Nonresidential or mixed-use
development of less than 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area and beyond 250
feet from a residential lot boundary
Under 4,000 SF
Nonresidential or mixed-use
development of less than 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area and within 250
feet of a residential lot boundary
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:1033
Type of Development
Major Site
Plan
Minor Site
Plan
Over 4,000 SF
Nonresidential or mixed-use
development of greater than 4,000
square feet of gross floor area of all
buildings
Under 10,000 SF in the -TNB Overlay
District
Nonresidential or mixed-use
development of less than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area in the -TNB
overlay district [Added 5-17-2010 by
L.L. No. 8-2010]
SEQRA Type 1 Action
Any proposed nonresidential or mixed
use development classified as a Type I
action under Town Code, Chapter 104,
Environmental Quality Review, as
amended.
8-7-3. Modification to a Previously Approved Site Plan or Sites
Developed Prior to 1968. [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. Previously approved sites shall be modified in accordance with the
following table. [Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008;
9-21-2009 by L.L. No. 14-2009; 5-17-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010;
9-20-2010 by L.L. No. 15-2010; 2-8-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
Type of Development
Major
Site Plan
Minor
Site Plan
Minor
Adjustment
RESIDENTIAL
Adding 4 or Fewer
Residential Units
Addition of 4 or fewer
residential units not on an
individual lot
Adding 5 or More
Residential Units
Addition of 5 or more
residential units not on an
individual lot
§ 8-7 AMHERST CODE § 8-7
1:1034
Type of Development
Major
Site Plan
Minor
Site Plan
Minor
Adjustment
Multifamily Landscape Plan
Modifications to approved
landscape plan for a multifamily
residential development
Adding Accessory
Structures
Proposed accessory
structures, such as A/C
compressors, generators, tool
or garden sheds, decks and
gazebos
Modifications to Parking
NONRESIDENTIAL
Adding Less Than 750
Square Feet [Added
2-4-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
Proposed addition of less than
750 square feet of gross floor
area
Adding Between 750 and
4,000 Square Feet
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008 and 9-20-2010
by L.L. No. 15-2010]
1. Proposed addition of
between 750 and 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area and
within 250 feet of a residential
lot boundary, as measnured79
from the work limit line as
shown on the site plan. In the
event that no work limit line is
shown, the property boundary
shall be used as the work limit
line.
79.So in original.
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:1035
Type of Development
Major
Site Plan
Minor
Site Plan
Minor
Adjustment
2. Proposed addition of
between 750 and 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area and
greater than 250 feet of a
residential lot boundary, as
measured from the work limit
line.
Adding More Than 4,000
Square Feet
Proposed addition of more
than 4,000 square feet
Adding Less Than 10,000
Square Feet in the -TNB
Overlay District
Proposed addition of 10,000
square feet or less of gross
floor area in the -TNB overlay
district [Added 5-17-2010 by
L.L. No. 8-2010]
Changes to Parking,
Loading or Stacking
[Amended 12-12-2011 by
L.L. No. 29-2011]
Any proposed changes to
parking, loading or stacking
located more than 250 feet
from residential use or district.
Changes to parking, loading or
stacking located within 250
feet of residential use or
district may require a major
site plan at the discretion of
the Planning Director
Adding Accessory
Structures
Accessory structures, such as
generators, RPZ's, tool sheds,
HVAC equipment, hot boxes,
transformers, or compressors
Minor Adjustment
[Amended 2-4-2008 by L.L.
No. 1-2008]
§ 8-7 AMHERST CODE § 8-7
1:1036
Type of Development
Major
Site Plan
Minor
Site Plan
Minor
Adjustment
Proposed modification to an
approved landscape plan to
preserve existing mature trees
and/or vegetation or change
proposed plant species or the
relocation of underground
utilities where such
modifications are determined
by the Planning Director to be
consistent with the intent and
objectives of the original site
plan
Other [Added 9-21-2009 by
L.L. No. 14-2009]
A proposed modification to a
previously approved site plan
where such modification is not
included in any of the other
categories in this section.
B. No site plan review shall be required for improvements on an
existing single- or two-family lot created as part of a site plan,
except in the NCD district.
C. Notwithstanding the requirements in the table in § 8-7-3, a major
site plan may be required if the Planning Director determines that
the proposed modifications are not consistent with the intent and
objectives of the original site plan approval or generally consistent
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
8-7-4. Application Requirements.
A. An application for site plan review shall be submitted in accordance
with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
B. All applications shall be complete in accordance with § 8-2-2D
before the Planning Director is required to review the application.
An application shall not be considered complete until a SEQR
determination under Town Code, Chapter 104, Environmental
Quality Review, as amended, can be made.
C. The site plan shall be prepared by a NYS licensed engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or surveyor, as appropriate.
D. The content of the site plan application shall be approved by the
Planning Director prior to filing.
8-7-5. Minor Site Plan Approval.
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:1037
A. A minor site plan requires only Planning Director approval.
B. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Planning
Director shall, after receiving recommendations from the Town's
review agencies and any appropriate reviewing agencies, approve,
approve with modifications, or deny the site plan. Where a site plan
does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance, the Planning
Director shall refer said site plan to the Planning Board for their
review.
C. The Planning Director may grant minor site plan approval with
conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the
actions necessary to bring the application into complete
compliance with applicable regulations or where additional
conditions have been agreed to by the petitioner. If the proposed
minor site plan is determined to be consistent with all applicable
regulations, the Planning Director shall approve the minor site
plan.
D. The Planning Director shall have sole authority in determining the
compliance of a minor site plan with the provisions of this
Ordinance and generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
E. The date the Planning Director signs the approved minor site plan
shall establish the date of approval for a minor site plan. [Added
8-1-2011 by L.L. No. 19-2011]
8-7-6. Major Site Plan Approval. A major site plan shall require Planning
Board approval.
A. Action by the Planning Director. Within 30 days of receipt of a
complete application, and after receiving recommendations from
the appropriate reviewing agencies, the Planning Director shall
notify the Planning Board in writing of any comments or
recommendations on the action.
B. Action by the Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing within 62
days of receipt of a complete application and give notice in
accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings. Within
62 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board
shall act on it and notify the appropriate agencies, petitioner
and Town Clerk of its action.
(2) The time within which the decision shall be rendered may be
extended by mutual consent of the petitioner and the Board.
(3) In determining its action, the Planning Board may seek advice
from the agencies it deems appropriate.
§ 8-7 AMHERST CODE § 8-7
1:1038
(4) In determining its action, the Planning Board shall also seek
advice and assistance from the Town Attorney with respect to
all covenants, restrictions and easements to be recorded and
covenants for maintenance; the Town Engineer and Highway
Superintendent with respect to improvements plans; the
Commissioner of Building with respect to building plans and
any other persons or committees.
(5) The Planning Board decision date shall establish the date of
approval for a major site plan. [Added 8-1-2011 by L.L. No.
19-2011]
8-7-7. Site Plan Review Criteria. During review of a minor or major site
plan the Planning Director or Planning Board, as applicable, shall
ensure that the site plan is consistent with this Ordinance and generally
consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
8-7-8. Additional Review Criteria for Residential Site Plans. When
reviewing a minor or major residential site plan, the Planning Director
or Planning Board, as applicable, shall consider the following factors in
addition to those described in § 8-7-7:
A. The adequacy of usable space for active and passive recreation
including pedestrian connections;
B. Adequacy of open space lands for public ownership and use offered
for dedication or other disposition to the town or other public
entity; and
C. Adequacy of school sites and facilities.
D. The extension of roadways provided to adjacent property.
8-7-9. Findings for Site Plan Approval. In rendering a final decision, the
Planning Director or Planning Board, as applicable, shall consider and
make findings that:
A. The proposed site plan is consistent with the development plan if
one is required.
B. The proposed site plan is consistent with the purpose and specific
requirements of this Ordinance and generally consistent with the
policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
C. Adequate services and utilities will be available prior to occupancy;
and
D. The site plan is consistent with all other applicable laws.
8-7-10. Approval with Conditions. The Planning Board may grant
approval with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify
the actions necessary to bring the application into complete compliance
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:1039
with applicable regulations and the policies of the Comprehensive Plan
or where additional conditions have been agreed to by the petitioner.
8-7-11. Notice of Decision. In accordance with NYS Town Law § 274(a),
the decision of the Planning Board or Planning Director, as applicable,
shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk consistent with all
applicable state requirements.
8-7-12. Changes in Site Plan.
A. At any time within 30 days following the initial site plan submission
to the Planning Director, the petitioner may submit to the Planning
Director site plan modifications which do not materially affect the
fundamental character of a proposed site plan, and the time
periods stated in this Section shall continue to apply.
B. If, subsequent to the approval of a site plan by the appropriate
authority, the petitioner proposes any modification (other than to
correct minor or technical omissions or inaccuracies) of the site
plan, the procedures set forth in § 8-2-2, Application
Requirements, shall be applicable to such modification, except that
the materials submitted to the Planning Director shall relate only to
such modification.
C. Minor modifications to the site plan may be approved by the
Planning Director. Minor modifications include: [Amended
12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 29-2011]
(1) Error correction that does not alter the site plan.
(2) Modifications that are not in violation of this Ordinance
(3) Changes that do not affect overall site layout or properties
outside of the site.
(4) Changes that are of a lesser intensity than those listed in the
table in § 8-7-3A.
(5) Location of dumpster containers and other refuse containers,
including enclosures.
8-7-13. Subdivision Review. Site plan review under the provisions of this
ordinance may occur simultaneously with subdivision plat review,
where required. A single public hearing for approval of the site plan and
its associated plat shall be permitted, as determined by the Planning
Director.
8-7-14. Development Phasing.
A. If the development is to be implemented in phases, each phase
shall have adequate provision for access, parking, open space,
recreation areas and stormwater management and other public
improvements to serve the development in accordance with the
§ 8-7 AMHERST CODE § 8-7
1:1040
§ 8-8. Temporary Use Permit
applicable criteria in the event that other phases are not
constructed.
B. Each phase shall be provided with temporary or permanent
transitional features, buffers or protective areas in order to prevent
damage to completed phases, to future phases and to adjoining
property.
C. For developments which are developed in phases, construction of
all phases of the development as shown on the approved site plan
for that development shall be commenced within five years from
the date of that site plan approval. If construction of all phases of a
development is not commenced within five years from the date of
site plan approval, the phased development is thereafter required
to obtain site plan approval in accordance with the current
requirements of this Ordinance in effect at the time of the next
phase of development for all undeveloped phases of the original
site plan. Construction of all phases of a development shall be
deemed to have commenced when building permits have been
obtained and construction has started for all buildings shown on
the approved site plan.
8-7-15.Period of Validity. Except for subdivision plans that have been duly
filed in the Office of the County Clerk, if construction of the approved
development has not commenced within two years from the time of site
plan approval, that approval shall be deemed revoked. Extensions not
to exceed two years may be granted by the Planning Board or Planning
Director. Approval of extensions for site plans shall be made by the
applicable approval body for Major or Minor Site Plan or Minor Site
Adjustment. Multiple extensions may be granted. [Amended 2-4-2008
by L.L. No. 1-2008, 4-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010, and 9-20-2010
by L.L. No. 15-2010]
8-8-1. Applicability. The ZBA may authorize a temporary and revocable use
permit for not more than two years for uses or structures that do not
conform with the regulations of this ordinance for the district in which
it is located.
8-8-2. Application Requirements.
A. An application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted in
accordance with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
B. As part of the application, written permission shall be required of
the property owner expressly authorizing the petitioner to submit
an application for a temporary use permit.
8-8-3. Action by the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall issue
a recommendation on the request for a temporary use permit. A copy
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8
1:1041
shall be provided to the ZBA and the petitioner. [Amended 8-20-2012
by L.L. No. 15-2012]
8-8-4. Action by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall prepare a report that reviews the request for
a temporary use permit. A copy shall be provided to the ZBA and the
petitioner. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-8-5. Action by the ZBA.
A. The ZBA shall schedule a public hearing and give notice in
accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings. The ZBA
shall decide upon the temporary use permit by applying the
required findings below.
B. The ZBA may authorize a temporary and revocable use permit for
not more than two years for uses or structures that do not conform
with the regulations of this ordinance for the district in which it is
located.
8-8-6. Required Findings. The ZBA may approve the issuance of a
temporary use permit provided the following findings are made:
A. Such use is of a temporary nature and does not involve the erection
or enlargement of any permanent structure.
B. In case of a renewal of such a permit, that all conditions and
safeguards previously required have been met.
C. The proposed use:
(1) Will be generally consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Meets any specific criteria set forth in this Ordinance;
(3) Will be compatible with existing uses adjacent to and near the
property;
(4) Will be in harmony with the general purpose of this Ordinance;
(5) Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property;
(6) Will not create a hazard to health, safety or the general
welfare;
(7) Will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor
be detrimental to the neighborhood residents; and
(8) Will not otherwise be detrimental to the public convenience
and welfare.
8-8-7. Incidental Development. The ZBA may authorize temporary
structures or uses incidental to development, provided that the nature
and scale of the development is such as to require temporary structures
§ 8-8 AMHERST CODE § 8-8
1:1042
§ 8-9. Certificate of Occupancy or Compliance
or uses. The permit shall be on the condition that such development
proceeds diligently.
8-8-8. Revocation of a Temporary Use Permit. A temporary use permit
shall become null and void upon a finding by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer that any of the conditions on the permit have been violated.
[Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-8-9.Violation. A violation of any condition or time limit established by the
ZBA under this Section shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
8-9-1. Applicability. A certificate of occupancy or compliance shall be
required as a condition precedent to the occupancy and use of a
structure and land as follows.
8-9-2. Occupancy of a Structure Erected or Altered. A certificate of
occupancy or compliance shall be required before occupancy of a new
structure or before occupancy or use of an existing structure which has
been altered, moved, changed in use or increased in off-street parking,
loading or stacking requirements. The certificate shall only be issued
after the erection or alteration of said structure, or a component of the
structure, or after required accessory use and all approved site plan
requirements have been completed and found by inspection to be in
conformity with the provisions of the applicable laws and the approved
site plan.
8-9-3. Change in Use of Conforming Structure or Land. A certificate of
occupancy or compliance shall be required before occupancy or use of a
conforming structure or land where the specific occupancy has been
changed and where, by reason of the provisions of this Ordinance or
other applicable law, increased public or private facilities or
modification of the structure are required. The certificate shall be
issued when found by The Commissioner of Building to be in conformity
with the provisions of all applicable laws.
8-9-4. Change in Use of Nonconforming Building or Land. A certificate
of occupancy or compliance shall be required whenever the specific
occupancy or use of a nonconforming building or land is changed.
8-9-5. Application Requirements.
A. A certificate of occupancy or compliance shall be applied for by the
owner or their agent and shall be issued by the Commissioner of
Building.
B. An application for a certificate of occupancy or compliance shall be
submitted in accordance with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
C. Applications for a certificate of occupancy or compliance shall
contain accurate information furnished by the owner or the owner's
§ 8-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-9
1:1043
§ 8-10. Building Permit For Signs
agent as to size and location of the lot, structures occupying the
lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces, the use of land or
structures and all additional documents as may be required by the
Commissioner of Building.
D. A record of all applications and certificates issued shall be kept in
the Office of the Commissioner of Building and shall be made
available to the public during regular office hours.
8-9-6. Record of Existing Building and Land Use. Upon application by
the owner or agent, the Commissioner of Building shall inspect a
building or tract of land existing on May 23, 2006 and shall issue a
certificate of occupancy or compliance therefore, certifying:
A. The present use of the building or land;
B. If such use conforms to all the provisions of this Ordinance; or
C. If it is a lawfully existing nonconforming use.
8-10-1. Applicability.
A. Certain signs are allowed without a building permit for a sign (as
set forth in § 7-8). Signs requiring permits are allowed in
accordance with the following requirements.
B. Signs not visible from the public right-of-way shall not require a
building permit for a sign; however, electrical or other permits may
be required.
C. A coordinated sign plan may be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit for a sign in accordance with § 8-11, Coordinated
Sign Plan.
8-10-2.Permit Required for Signs. Except as otherwise provided in § 7-8,
no sign may be erected, moved, enlarged, or altered except in
accordance with and pursuant to a building permit for a sign. No
building permit for a sign shall be issued unless the plans and
information submitted demonstrate that the sign will comply with all
applicable requirements of this Ordinance. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-10-3. Application Requirements. An application for a building permit
for a sign shall be submitted in accordance with § 8-2-2, Application
Requirements.
8-10-4. Action by the Commissioner of Building.
A. The Commissioner of Building shall review each application for a
building permit for a sign application for conformity with this
§ 8-9 AMHERST CODE § 8-10
1:1044
§ 8-11. Coordinated Sign Plan Review [Amended 4-8-2014 by L.L.
No. 7-2014]
Ordinance and act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
permit.
B. The Commissioner of Building may grant approval with conditions
only to the extent that such conditions specify actions necessary to
bring the application into complete compliance with this
Ordinance.
C. A sign may also require separate building or electrical permits from
the Town.
8-10-5.Period of Validity. Any permit issued for the erection of a sign shall
become null and void if sign installation is not completed within six
months after the date of approval.
8-10-6. Building Permits For Temporary Signs. Permits for temporary
signs shall be permitted in accordance with § 7-8-10, Temporary Signs.
The approval time period shall be specified on the permit.
8-10-7. Revocation of Maintenance of Signs.
A. If at any time the Commissioner of Building finds that a sign is not
in good repair or does not comply with the building permit for a
sign issued or with the provisions of § 7-8-11, Construction and
Maintenance of Signs the Commissioner of Building shall order the
owner or lessee of the premises upon which it is located, the owner
and the user of the sign and the holder of the building permit for a
sign to repair it or bring it into compliance with the use permit, as
the case may be, or remove the sign at the direction of the
Commissioner of Building.
B. Such order shall be written and served personally or by mail and
directed to the last known address of the owner, lessee, user or
holder. Failure to comply with such an order shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
8-10-8. Illegal Signs. Illegal or noncompliant signs shall be removed at the
direction of the Commissioner of Building.
8-11-1. Applicability. A coordinated sign plan shall be required for all signs
requiring a building permit in a multiple development prior to issuance
of said permit. For multiple developments in the PRD and PDD districts,
the coordinated sign plan is required unless the sign regulations are
superseded by the development agreement.
8-11-2. Application Requirements.
A. An application for a coordinated sign plan shall be submitted in
accordance with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
§ 8-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-11
1:1045
§ 8-12. Written Interpretation
B. All applications shall be complete in accordance with § 8-2-2D
before the Planning Director is required to review the application.
C. The content of the coordinated sign plan application shall be
approved by the Planning Director prior to filing.
8-11-3. Coordinated Sign Plan Review and Approval. A Coordinated
Sign Plan only requires Planning Director approval. At his discretion,
the Planning Director may refer said coordinated sign plan to the
Planning Board for their review and decision.
A. When reviewing a coordinated sign plan, the Planning Director
shall consider the review criteria listed in § 7-8-12.
B. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Planning
Director shall, after receiving recommendations form the Town’s
review agencies along with any appropriate outside agency,
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the coordinated sign
plan.
C. The Planning Director may grant coordinated sign plan approval
with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the
actions necessary to bring the application into complete
compliance with applicable regulations or where additional
conditions have been agreed to by the petitioner. If the proposed
coordinated sign plan is determined to be consistent with all
applicable regulations, the Planning Director shall approve the
coordinated sign plan.
D. The Planning Director shall have sole authority in determining the
compliance of a coordinated sign plan with the provisions of this
Ordinance and its general consistency with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
E. The date the Planning Director signs the approved coordinated sign
plan shall establish the date of approval for a coordinated sign plan.
F. Should questions arise regarding a sign’s conformance with an
approved coordinated sign plan, the Building Department shall
refer said sign to the Planning Director for determination prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
8-12-1. Applicability. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall interpret this
Ordinance. Any interpretation of an order, requirement, decision or
determination in connection with this Ordinance shall be final except as
otherwise provided by law. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-12-2. Application Requirements. A written request for interpretation of
this Ordinance shall be submitted in accordance with § 8-2-2,
Application Requirements.
§ 8-11 AMHERST CODE § 8-12
1:1046
8-12-3. Action by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. [Amended 3-4-2019
by L.L. No. 6-2019]
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall:
(1) Review and evaluate the request as it pertains to the text of
this Ordinance, the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and any
other relevant information;
(2) Consult with other Town of Amherst staff, as necessary; and
(3) Render an opinion.
B. The interpretation shall be provided to the petitioner in writing by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
8-12-4. Determination of Similar Uses.
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may determine that a use not
specifically listed in any of the permitted building and use
classifications in and districts established by this Ordinance is a
similar use to those enumerated in a specific district or districts. In
making a determination that a use is similar, the Commissioner
shall first determine that: [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
(1) The use is not listed in any other classification of permitted
uses;
(2) The use is appropriate and conforms to the basic
characteristics of the classification to which it is to be added;
(3) The use does not create dangers to health and safety and does
not create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor,
glare or other objectionable influences to an extent greater
than that resulting from other uses listed in the classification
to which it is to be added; and
(4) Such a use does not create traffic to a greater extent than the
other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added.
B. Where a use not listed in the use table is found by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer not to be similar to any other use in the table,
the use shall be permitted only following a text amendment of these
zoning regulations in accordance with § 8-5. [Amended 3-4-2019
by L.L. No. 6-2019]
C. When considering appropriate districts for a use not listed in the
Use Table, the district purpose statements in Part 3, Part 4 and Part
5 and the policies of the Comprehensive Plan shall be taken into
consideration.
§ 8-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-12
1:1047
§ 8-13. Variance
8-12-5. Official Record. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain an
official record of the interpretation. [Amended 12-16-2019 by L.L.
No. 22-2019]
8-13-1. Applicability. The ZBA, on appeal from the decision or
determination of any administrative official charged with enforcement
of this Ordinance, shall have the power to grant use and area variances,
subject to the standards and procedures in § 267-b of the NYS Town
Law.
8-13-2. Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall be
submitted in accordance with § 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
8-13-3. Notice and Public Hearings. Once the application has been
determined complete by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a public
hearing shall be scheduled and notice shall be given in accordance with
§ 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
8-13-4. Burden of Proof. The petitioner seeking the variance shall have the
burden of presenting sufficient evidence to allow the ZBA to reach a
conclusion as set forth below as well as the burden of persuasion on
those items.
8-13-5. Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
A. After review of the variance application and the public hearing, the
ZBA shall, in accordance with NYS Town Law § 267, make written
findings of approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or
denial.
B. The ZBA shall decide upon the variance within 62 days after
receiving a complete application. The time within which the ZBA
may render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the
petitioner and the ZBA.
C. In granting a variance, the ZBA may vary or modify the provisions
of this Ordinance or such regulations so that the spirit of the law
shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. Toward this end, the ZBA may prescribe such conditions or
restrictions as it may deem necessary. Such conditions or
restrictions shall be incorporated in the building permit and a
violation of such permit shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
8-13-6. Notice of Decision. The decision of the ZBA shall be filed in the
Office of the Town Clerk within five business days after the decision is
rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
8-13-7.Period of Validity. Variances are valid for a period of two years
from the date of approval. If the variance is not exercised within this
§ 8-12 AMHERST CODE § 8-13
1:1048
§ 8-14. Administrative Appeal
time period, the variance shall expire. Notice of expiration shall be
conveyed to the petitioner as part of the notification of approval.
8-14-1. Applicability. The ZBA shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error or misinterpretation in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Planning Director in regard to the enforcement
of the provisions of this Ordinance or other regulations adopted
pursuant to Article 16 of NYS Town Law. Rehearings shall be held only
in accordance with § 267 of NYS Town Law. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
8-14-2. Application Requirements. An application for an appeal shall be
submitted in accordance with 8-2-2, Application Requirements.
8-14-3. Deadline for Submission. An application for an appeal shall be
taken within 60 days after the filing of any order, requirement, decision,
interpretation, or determination by the administrative official
authorized to do so under the provisions of this Ordinance. Such
application shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
8-14-4. Record of Administrative Decision. Upon receipt of a complete
application from the Commissioner of Building, the Town Clerk shall
forthwith transmit to the ZBA all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed was taken from.
8-14-5. Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
A. Once the application has been determined complete, a public
hearing shall be scheduled and public notice shall be given in
accordance with § 8-2-3, Notice and Public Hearings.
B. The ZBA shall decide upon the appeal within 62 days after the
closing of the public hearing. The time within which the ZBA may
render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the
petitioner and the Board.
C. The ZBA may reverse, modify or affirm, in whole or in part, any
such appealed order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made in strictly applying
and interpreting the provisions of this Ordinance and for such
purposes shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken.
D. Appeals for interpretation shall be decided by the concurring vote
of a majority of the members of the ZBA in compliance with § 267-a
of NYS Town Law.
§ 8-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-14
1:1049
§ 8-15. New Community District (NCD)
8-14-6. Notice of Decision. The decision the ZBA shall be filed in the Office
of the Town Clerk within five business days after the decision is
rendered, and a copy mailed to the petitioner.
8-14-7. Effect of Appeal.
A. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative official from whom the
appeal is taken determines a stay in proceedings would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall
only be stayed by the issuance of a restraining order, which may be
granted by the ZBA or by the court of record on the application.
B. An appeal does not stop action lawfully approved (including
construction activities authorized by a building permit), only
actions presumed in violation of this Ordinance are stayed.
8-15-1. Application and Procedures.
A. General. Proceedings to create a NCD may be initiated by the
Town Board with the approval of the principal owner or owners of
the proposed new community site or by application of the principal
owner or owners of the proposed community site. In the event that
the new community site includes any lands which are not owned or
controlled by a petitioner, said petitioner may request or the Town
Board may require that such lands be included in the NCD by
action of the Town Board taken on its own initiative simultaneously
with the rezoning of the lands owned or controlled by said
petitioner. In the case of proceedings begun by the Town Board on
its own initiative regarding lands referred to in the preceding
sentence and/or lands owned or controlled by said principal owner
or owners, the public review procedure for the creation of a NCD
shall be as the Town Board may require in accordance with
applicable law. Accordingly, except as specified in subsection
8-15-2 of this Section, the provisions of subsection 8-15-2 of this
Section are applicable only to proceedings initiated upon
application of the principal owner or owners of the proposed new
community site. As used in this Section, the "owner" shall be
deemed to include a contract vendee or holder of an option to
purchase or a person who or which has accepted any other form of
firm commitment of lands to be developed for new community uses
pursuant to a development plan as defined in subsection 8-15-1B of
this Section.
B. Application for Development Plan Approval.
(1) Concept Plan. In order to allow the Town Board and the
petitioner to reach an understanding on basic design
requirements prior to investment in detailed planning and
§ 8-14 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1050
design, the petitioner shall submit a concept plan to the
Director of Planning showing the proposed location and
components of the new community development and shall
consult with the Planning Director and Planning Board
concerning the procedure and criteria for approval. The
purpose of the informal submission contemplated in this
subsection is informational, and no formal Planning Board or
Town Board action is required concerning such concept plan.
(2) Development Plan. Formal application for a NCD shall be
initiated by filing with the Town Clerk 10 copies of a
development plan at an appropriate scale, not to the precision
of a finished engineering drawing. It may consist of material
prepared for other purposes, portions of which satisfy the
formal requirements of development plans as set forth in this
Section. Overlays, maps and drawings included in the
submission shall be at a scale of not less than one inch to 500
feet unless otherwise specified in this subsection. The plan
shall contain the following information:
(a) The proposed new community name, date, North point and
scale of the plan and a clear identification of the submittal
as a development plan;
(b) The name and address of the owner or owners of the land
to be included within the NCD, the name and address of
the developer(s) if other than the owner(s) and a
description of the manner in which lands not owned,
controlled or accepted by the principal owner, but
intended for development under the development plan, are
to be acquired, controlled or otherwise accepted for
inclusion in such development;
(c) An area map upon which shall be indicated the proposed
NCD boundaries and major existing property ownerships
and major easements within the district boundaries and at
least 1,000 feet around the perimeter of the district. All
property owned by the petitioner in the area shown on the
map shall be identified and the amount of acreage
indicated;
(d) Aerial photographs showing the site and at least 1,000 feet
around the perimeter at a scale of at least 200 feet to one
inch, flown within three years of filing of the development
plan and indicating any significant use changes occurring
since the flight. Two such aerial photographs shall be
submitted;
(e) Topographic map at a scale of at least 200 feet to one inch
showing five-foot contour levels and key-spot elevations
for all land in the proposed new community site, indicating
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1051
areas currently subject to flooding at one-hundred-year
frequency, all major drainage ditches and all existing
floodways in the town storm drainage system. Closer
contours shall be provided if requested by the Town
Engineer;
(f) A description of existing surface and subsurface soils and
soil conditions and an overlay map and evaluation of the
soils for the proposed use;
(g) An overlay or map and description of the existing
woodland, grassland, wetland, marshland and unique
natural areas and description and evaluation of their
quality;
(h) A written plan or written program indicating provisions for
management and protection of soil, water, woodland,
wetland, marshland, grassland and wildlife resources;
(i) The proposed approximate location of the various uses and
their estimated areas;
(j) The general location, right-of-way width and approximate
grade of all existing and proposed major highways,
arterials and all major existing public and private rights-ofway
and easements;
(k) Approximate magnitude and general composition of the
residential development in terms of the total number of
dwelling units, with an analysis of such total number
indicating the proposed range of housing costs and a
numerical breakdown by dwelling unit type (for example,
single-family, two-family, townhouse, patio house, garden
apartments or student or elderly housing) and number of
units, if any, proposed for real estate tax abatement. The
petitioner shall also furnish a calculation of the residential
density in dwelling units per gross acre. Such calculation
shall conform to the requirements of 5-2-6A;
(l) The approximate location, dimensions and proposed
general uses of the major open space system, including
private, common and public land;
(m) The overall proposed major storm drainage system,
including the direction of flow and location of major
existing and proposed storm sewers and drainageways,
description of stormwater storage and movement features
and treatment of floodways and drainageways, if existent;
(n) Major existing and proposed linkages to the community at
large with respect to pedestrian and vehicle
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1052
transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater
drainage, open space and recreation;
(o) The proposed sanitary sewage disposal system serving the
new community, including its projected load and the effect
it will have on the existing and proposed town disposal
system;
(p) Estimated future population of school-age children by age
level, with anticipated breakdown between private and
public school pupils and the method by which such lands
are proposed to be made available to such school districts;
and
(q) General description of the proposed provision of other
community facilities, such as fire protection services and
cultural facilities, if any, and indication of how these needs
are proposed to be accommodated.
(3) Documentation. The following documentation shall
accompany the development plan:
(a) Evidence of how the petitioner's particular mix of land
uses meets existing or future community demands and
needs and objectives of the Town Master Plan;
(b) General statement as to how common open space is to be
owned and maintained and how it will meet the applicable
criteria set forth in this Section;
(c) The expected completion date of the new community
development;
(d) If the development is to be phased, a general statement of
how the phasing is expected to proceed with regard to
time and sequential factors. This may include a schedule of
construction commencement and completion dates of
major improvements. Whether or not the development is
to be phased, the development plan shall show the
intended total project. If phasing is proposed, the plan
shall show how the phasing criteria set forth in this
Section will be met; and
(e) Evidence to demonstrate the petitioner's competence to
undertake the organizational and financial aspects of the
project.
8-15-2. Planning Board Review.
A. Upon receipt of a petitioner's development plan of a new
community development, the Director of Planning shall transmit a
copy of the plan and accompanying documentation to the Town
Engineer, Highway Superintendent, the school districts and such
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1053
other agencies as the Director may deem appropriate for their
review, report and recommendation. Such officials and agencies
shall each, within 30 days from receiving the development plan and
documentation, furnish to the Planning Board a report pertinent to
their respective jurisdictions and concerns.
B. The Planning Board shall review the petitioner's development plan
and related documents and evaluate the reports enumerated
above. Within 60 days following the petitioner's submission of the
development plan and data to the Planning Board, the Planning
Board shall furnish to the Town Board and petitioner either its
finding that the development plan complies with the regulations,
standards and criteria prescribed by this Section or a finding of any
failure of such compliance and a recommendation that the
development plan be approved, disapproved or modified.
C. If in any such evaluation the Planning Board finds that any
submission requirements, regulations, standards or criteria
prescribed by this Section are inapplicable because of unusual
conditions of the new community development or the nature and
quality of the proposed design, it may recommend to the Town
Board that an adjustment in such regulations, standards or criteria
be made for the development or a proposed site in the
development.
(1) A favorable report shall include a recommendation to the Town
Board that a public hearing be held for the purpose of
considering the creation of a NCD. It shall be based on the
following findings which shall be included as part of the report:
(a) The proposed development plan meets the purpose of a
NCD as expressed in 5-2-1;
(b) The proposed development plan meets all the
requirements of §§ 5-2-3 and 5-2-4 through 5-2-5B;
(c) The proposed development plan is conceptually sound in
that it meets present and future community needs;
(d) There are adequate services and utilities available or
proposed to be made available in the construction of the
development; and
(e) The proposed development plan is consistent with the
Town Master Plan.
(2) An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefore
and, if appropriate, point out to the petitioner what changes
might be necessary in order to receive a favorable report. The
petitioner may, within 10 days after receiving an unfavorable
report, file an application for a NCD with the Town Clerk. The
Town Board then shall hold a public hearing for a NCD and
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1054
shall render a decision within 60 days after filing of such
application.
8-15-3.Town Board Action. Either upon receipt of a favorable report from
the Planning Board as described in subsection 8-15-2 or at any time
following the submission of a proposed development plan (making the
applicable requirements of § 5-2-2) by the Director of Planning in the
case of proceeding on the Town Board's initiative, the Town Board shall
schedule a public hearing and give notice in accordance with § 8-2-3,
Notice and Public Hearings for the purpose of considering the creation
of a NCD in accordance with the procedures established under the NYS
Town Law or other applicable law. In the case of proceedings initiated
by a petitioner under subsection 8-15-1, the Town Board shall hold a
public hearing for a NCD and render a decision within 60 days of the
receipt of the favorable report from the Planning Board. The published
notice of any public hearing scheduled to consider the creation of a
NCD under this Section shall state that the proposed development plan,
with a list of all property ownerships within the district (listed by house
number, name of owner, street name and tax number), and a map of the
proposed district, showing the proposed use classification areas and
property line of all parcels of land included in district areas, are
available for public examination in the office of the Town Clerk, prior to
the hearing and thereafter until such time as the Town Board shall act
to approve or disapprove the creation of the district.
8-15-4. Zoning for District. The determination by the Town Board of
whether to create a NCD shall be based on its review and approval of a
development plan. Where the Town Board has acted on its own
initiative, such approval shall include the making of the findings
specified in paragraph 8-15-2C(1) of this Section. Upon the creation of a
NCD in such a manner, the Zoning Map shall be notated. The Town
Board may, in order to protect the public health, safety, welfare and
environmental quality of the community, attach to its zoning resolution
additional conditions or requirements consistent with the purposes and
requirements of this Section for the petitioner to meet. If such
additional conditions or requirements are proposed, the petitioner shall
be given notice in writing of such additional conditions or requirements
at least 15 days prior to the creation of the NCD. Such rezoning shall
apply to all lands within the boundaries of the NCD, provided that in
order to protect the interests of owners of lands in said district which
have not been purchased for or otherwise firmly committed to the new
community development contemplated by the development plan, the
substantive zoning requirements and the zoning procedures which
were applicable to any such nonacquired or noncommitted lands prior
to such rezoning shall be deemed incorporated in this Section so as to
remain applicable to said lands until such acquisition shall occur or
until such firm commitment shall be accepted, at which time such prior
requirements and procedures shall cease to be applicable and the new
community requirements and procedures of this Section shall become
applicable. In considering any petition for rezoning of any such lands
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1055
submitted prior to such acquisition or firm commitment, the Planning
Board and Town Board shall include in their evaluation the
compatibility of the petitioner's proposed use with the use of such lands
contemplated by the development plan approved by the Town Board.
8-15-5. Site Plan Approval.
A. Application for Site Plan Approval. After the Town Board
creates a NCD and approves a development plan on its own
initiative or on application, a site plan application or applications
covering all or portions of the district intended for new community
development under the development plan shall be submitted to the
Town Board and Planning Board. The petitioner shall be the entity
which was the principal owner of the new community site, as
contemplated in subsection 8-15-1 above at the time of such Town
Board approval of the development plan, or the designee of such
entity. All of the lands covered by such site plan application shall be
owned, controlled or otherwise accepted by such principal owner
or its designee. The area covered by said application is referred to
as the "proposed site." The application shall be accompanied by the
information required on the development plan, including the
necessary modifications or changes previously required, and by the
following more detailed information in 10 copies prepared by
licensed or accredited engineer, surveyor, architect or landscape
architect, as appropriate.
(1) Site Plan. The following new information shall be included on
an accurate site plan at a scale of at least one inch equals 100
feet:
(a) Title of drawing and name of development, if any, covered
by the site plan, including the name of the petitioner and
person who prepared the drawing, North point, scale and
date.
(b) Location of survey datum and name of surveyor.
(c) Boundaries of the proposed site and its acreage.
(d) The lines of existing and proposed vehicular, bicycle and
pedestrian circulation systems within, connecting to and
immediately adjoining the proposed site.
(e) All street names, including stub streets. No street name
change shall be made following site plan approval unless
approved by the Planning Board.
(f) Preliminary layout of proposed property and lot lines,
including property which is to be offered for dedication or
other disposition for public ownership and use with the
purpose indicated, and property that is proposed to be
reserved by deed covenant for common use.
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1056
(g) Location, proposed use, type, floor area and height of all
buildings, location of all parking and service areas with
access drives thereto; location, uses and proposed
improvements of all open reservations.
(h) Topography at one-foot contour levels.
(i) Existing wet and dry watercourses and direction of flow.
(j) Location of all existing and proposed site improvements,
including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences;
description of method of water supply and sewage disposal
and capacity and location of such facilities; location and
proposed development of buffer areas; general location,
material and approximate size of all architectural
monuments and permanent signs; size and general design
of street lighting fixtures.
(k) Provision for all stormwater management, including
retention areas, open stormwater facilities and
underground tiled drainage as well as drainage channels
both proposed and to remain, including data or gradients
of the new system relative to existing facilities. This shall
include all ditches, ponds and like facilities, including the
acre-feet and/or cubic-foot-per-second capacity of such
facilities where applicable. Such facilities shall provide, by
the combination of storage and/or improved stream flow,
completely for the stormwater on the proposed site plan
area and shall provide the land or other facilities
necessary to permit water movement from adjacent
properties. To meet this requirement, such facilities may
be augmented by appropriate facilities located outside the
site plan area which are committed to be in service upon
the completion of the development described by the site
plan.
(l) An overlay showing soil types and their stratification and
areas, if any, with moderate to high susceptibility to
ponding and moderate to high susceptibility to erosion.
For areas with potential erosion problems, the overlay
shall also include an outline and description of existing
vegetation and the program to be undertaken to correct
potential erosion problems. In addition another overlay of
the proposed improvement shall be provided and shall
describe the following:
(i) Location and type of floodproofing measures where
they are needed, e.g., backyard drainage, fill locations
and elevations. Indication of floodproofing measures
for buildings planned for flood hazard areas.
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1057
(ii) Existing inventory and plans to preserve topsoil, deal
with seasonal high groundwater table problems,
stabilize cut and fill banks and provide for open space
and the preservation of valuable natural vegetation,
woodland, grassland, wetland, marshland, unique
natural areas and wildlife resources.
(m) Preliminary construction plans and specifications for all
public improvements, including construction detail sheets
which shall show the following information:
(i) Preliminary profiles showing existing and proposed
elevations along the center lines of all streets. Where
a proposed street or streets, the elevation along the
center line of the existing street or streets, within 100
feet of the intersection, shall be shown. All elevations
shall be referenced to establish United States
government or approved local bench marks where
they exist, within one-half mile of the boundary of the
site plan area.
(ii) Preliminary plans and profiles showing the locations
and a typical cross section of street pavements,
including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, manholes and
catch basins; the locations of street trees, street
lighting standards and street signs; the locations, size
and invert elevations of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, stormwater drains and fire hydrants;
and the location and size of all underground utilities
or structures.
(n) A landscape plan indicating wooded areas and other
natural features to be created and/or preserved and trees
in public street rights-of-way. There shall be information
provided for the Planning Board to determine whether the
standards outlined in 5-2-7 are met.
(o) An updated development schedule covering the site plan
area. The schedule shall include the improvement of open
space, the construction of buildings and structures in the
open space and the construction of other improvements in
the site plan area and the proposed coordination of such
activities.
(2) Schematic layout of the street lighting system
(3) A description of the proposed types of covenants running with
the land and of deed restrictions, of covenants, restrictions or
easements proposed to be recorded and of covenants proposed
for maintenance.
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1058
(4) An estimate of the number of bedrooms to be contained in the
various types of residential units.
(5) If the petitioner is a developer designated by the owner, a
statement of the developer's experience and financial capacity
to carry out the site plan development.
B. Factors for Consideration. The Planning Board's review of a site
plan shall be directed to the following considerations:
(1) Extent to which the site plan embodies the goals and objectives
of this Section and the development plan previously approved
by the Town Board.
(2) Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths,
channelization structures and traffic controls.
(3) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic, access,
walkway structures, control of intersection with vehicular
traffic and pedestrian convenience.
(4) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading.
(5) Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting,
signs and monuments.
(6) Relation of the various uses to one another and their scale.
(7) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or deterring buffer or
weather buffer between adjacent uses and adjoining lands.
(8) The adequacy of usable open space for active and passive
recreation.
(9) The preservation of outstanding and/or unique natural features
and the preservation and/or creation of natural woodlands,
grasslands and marshland.
(10) Adequacy of facilities for sanitary waste disposal and
stormwater storage and disposal, including drainage canals,
ponds and water storage in relation to location in the
watershed.
(11) Adequacy of open space lands for public ownership and use
offered for dedication or other disposition to the town or other
public entity.
(12) Adequacy of structures, roadways, utilities and landscaping in
areas with moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, ponding
and/or erosion.
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1059
(13) Protection of adjacent properties against noise, glare,
unsightliness or other objectionable features.
(14) Capacity of proposed public facilities and services to serve
projected needs of the new community.
(15) Adequacy of existing public facilities and services to serve
projected needs of the new community.
(16) Adequacy of school sites and facilities to serve the new
community.
C. Action on Site Plan Application.Within 62 days following close
of its public hearing on a site plan, the Planning Board shall act on
it and deliver to the Town Board and the petitioner a report of its
action. In determining its action, the Planning Board may seek
advice and assistance as needed from the Town Attorney with
respect to all types of covenants, restrictions and easements to be
recorded and covenants for maintenance and from the Town
Engineer, Highway Superintendent and any other persons or
agencies. If, in its review of the site plan, the Planning Board finds
that any regulations, standards or criteria prescribed by this
Section are inapplicable because of unusual or unforeseen
conditions affecting the proposed site plan development or because
of the nature of quality of the proposed design, it may recommend
to the Town Board that an adjustment be made in such regulations,
standards or criteria consistent with the purposes of this Section as
applied to the proposed site plan development. The Town Board
also may allow such adjustments upon its own initiative. The
Planning Board's report shall include a written statement stating
whether or not the site plan is approved, accompanied by a copy of
the appropriate minutes of the Planning Board, including exhibits
and submissions made a part of the record, and by a separate
detailed statement of the basis for any Planning Board
determination of noncompliance with any substantive criterion,
standard or regulation of this Section. A copy of such report shall
be delivered to the petitioner promptly following such approval or
disapproval of the site plan. Within 30 days of the receipt of a
favorable report of the Planning Board or within 30 days following
the delivery to the Town Clerk of a petitioner's request for Town
Board review by an unfavorable report by the Planning Board or
review by the Town Board if the Planning Board has not acted
during the 60-day period specified above for such Planning Board
action, the Town Board shall act to approve or disapprove the site
plan. In any event, if the Town Board does not approve or
disapprove the site plan within 90 days following the initial
submission of the site plan to the Planning Board and the Town
Board under subsection A, the petitioner may notify the Town
Board by delivery to the Town Clerk of written notice of its intent to
proceed with construction as if the site plan has been approved. If
the Town Board does not approve or disapprove the site plan within
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1060
10 days following the delivery of such notice to the Town Clerk, the
site plan shall be deemed to have been approved by the Town Board
for all purposes under this Section. [Amended 2-8-2016 by L.L.
No. 2-2016]
D. Town Board Procedures. In taking any actions or conducting any
proceedings relating to the responsibilities of the Town Board
under subsection C above, the Town Board shall act as the local
public body responsible for administering the substantive criteria,
standards and regulations of this Section. The Town Board shall
keep accurate minutes of all such actions or proceedings and shall
furnish to the petitioner for site plan approval, within 10 days
following any such action or proceeding, a complete copy of the
minutes, including exhibits and submissions made a part of the
record, describing the action or proceeding. The official record of
such actions or proceedings shall include any materials or
documents submitted by the petitioner to the Town Board and/or
Planning Board in connection with the application for site plan
approval. If the Town Board determines that a site plan does not
comply with any substantive criterion, standard or regulations of
this Section, then the record of such determination, to be delivered
to the petitioner as aforesaid, shall include a separate statement
setting forth in detail the exact nature of such noncompliance and
all factors included in the basis for the Town Board's determination.
After the submission of a site plan to the Town Board and Planning
Board, as provided in subsection A(1), and so long as any Planning
Board or Town Board procedures contemplated by this subsection
A(1) shall be in progress, the petitioner shall be afforded a
reasonable opportunity, on one or more occasions as circumstances
require, to appear before the Town Board and/or the Planning
Board on reasonable notice to present its position concerning
compliance of the proposed site plan with the substantive criteria,
standards and regulations of this Section.
8-15-6. Conformity to Development Plan. It is expected that the site plan
will be in substantial conformance with the goals and objectives of the
development plan approved by the Town Board. However, if in the
preparation of the site plan it becomes apparent that certain elements
of the development plan, as it was approved by the Town Board, were
infeasible and in need of significant modification, or have become so
since such approval, the petitioner may incorporate the necessary
development plan modifications in the site plan. The Planning Board
shall then determine whether the site plan embodying such
modifications is in keeping with the purpose of this Section. The
Planning Board shall; as part of its report referred to in subsection
8-15-5C above, notify the Town Board and the petitioner of its
recommendations in such regard, stating all of the factors involved and
its reasons for recommending approval or disapproval of any such
modifications. Within 30 days of such notification, or within 30 days
following the delivery to the Town Clerk of a petitioner's request for
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1061
review as described in subsection 8-15-5C, the Town Board shall act
to approve or disapprove a site plan incorporating modifications of the
development plan. The provisions of the preceding subsection 8-15-5D
shall be applicable to Town Board action or proceedings under this
subsection.
8-15-7. Changes in Site Plan.
A. If, subsequent to the approval of a site plan, the petitioner proposes
any modification other than a minor modification or to correct
minor or technical omissions or inaccuracies of said site plan, the
procedures set forth in subsection 8-15-5A shall be applicable to
such modification, except that the materials submitted shall relate
only to the modification.
B. At any time within 75 days following the initial site plan submission
to the Town Board and Planning Board, the petitioner may submit
to the Planning Board and Town Board site plan modifications
which do not materially affect the fundamental character of a
proposed site plan development, and the time periods stated in this
Section shall continue to apply with respect to the overall site plan
submission notwithstanding said modifications. The 90-day period
for Town Board action shall be extended by an additional 10 days
for each such modification submitted after the expiration of said
75-day period.
8-15-8. Commencement of Construction.
A. Upon the approval of a site plan by the Town Board, or upon the
expiration of the 10-day period relating to inaction by the Town
Board, the petitioner or its designee may commence site
improvement work for all aspects of the development covered by
such site plan.
B. The following actions shall not require additional development
review:
(1) The commencement or continuation of such site improvement
work;
(2) The use or occupancy of any improvements constructed in
accordance with such site plan and accompanying materials;
(3) The connection or tie-in of such improvements to public or
private improvements;
(4) The dedication or other disposition of such improvements or
lands included in the site plan for public use;
(5) The construction of any public improvements;
(6) The filing of a subdivision plat with the Town and County
Clerks; or
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1062
(7) The issuance of any public improvement approvals or building
construction code approvals.
8-15-9. Planning Board Action on Site Plans. Except for lands located
within Bryant Woods and the provisions of subsection 8-15-6 requiring
Town Board approval or disapproval of modifications to the
development plan proposed as a part of a site plan, anything contained
in these regulations for the NCD to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Planning Board shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to review and
approve or disapprove, modify, change, condition or restrict any site
plan and, to that end, will have and exercise all authority otherwise
granted to and perform all duties imposed upon the Town Board in
connection therewith.
8-15-10. Development Phasing. If the petitioner wishes to phase the
development, the petitioner may submit only those phases the
petitioner wishes to develop for site plan approval in accordance with
the phasing plan. Where the overall development of an entire new
community site will require more than 24 months to complete, such
development shall be required to be phased. If the development is to be
implemented in phases, each phase shown on a site shall have adequate
provision for access, parking, open space, recreation areas and
stormwater management and other public improvements in accordance
with the applicable site plan approval criteria set forth in this Section.
Each phase shall contain facilities to appropriately serve the functions
described in the preceding sentence in the event that other phases of
the new community are not constructed. Each phase shall be provided
with temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers or
protective areas as will prevent damage or detriment to completed
phases, to future phases, to adjoining properties not in the new
community site or to adjoining properties in the new community site but
not to be developed in accordance with the development plan.
8-15-11. Other Applicable Regulations.
A. Regulations After Initial Construction and Occupancy. For the
purposes of regulating the development and use of property after
completion of initial construction and occupancy, any proposed
changes shall be in the form of a request for a special permit
requiring Town Board approval. It shall be noted, however, that
properties lying in NCDs are unique and shall be so considered by
the Planning Board and Town Board when evaluating these
requests, and maintenance of the intent and function of the new
community and its relationship with the entire town shall be of
primary importance.
B. Subdivision Review. Site plan review and approval under the
provisions of this Section shall suffice for all Town Board and other
town review of Subdivision Regulations and shall suffice to satisfy
all preconditions of filing a subdivision plat in the form referred to
in subsection (1) below, subject to the following conditions:
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-15
1:1063
(1) The petitioner shall plat the entire new community
development as a subdivision; however, new communities
being developed in stages may be platted and filed in the same
stages. Information on the final plat shall be provided in
accordance with established informational requirements
applied generally in the town.
(2) The petitioner shall prepare sets of subdivision plats suitable
for filing with the offices of the Town and County Clerks, and
the appropriate town officials shall provide such endorsements
thereon or other evidences of such approval as may be
necessary to effect such filing.
8-15-12. Installation of Improvements. No building permits shall be
issued for construction within a NCD until public street drainage and all
utility improvements are installed or a performance bond is posted in
accordance with established town procedures or a firm commitment to
provide such improvements is certified to the town by any public
agency willing to undertake such commitment.
8-15-13. Other Ordinance Provisions. Except for site plan minor
modification and those other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
specifically incorporated in this Section with the express purpose of
giving them binding effect, no other procedural or substantive
provisions of any other Section of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to
development in a NCD; nor shall any provision of any other town
ordinance or other local law, rule or regulation which is inconsistent
with or more stringent than any provisions or substantive requirements
of this section be applicable to any aspect of development in a NCD to
which such inconsistency or more stringent requirement applies.
8-15-14.Town Board Approval of Development Plan Amendment. A
development plan, after its approval by the Town Board upon
application or on the Town Board's own initiative, may be amended
(other than as provided in subsection 8-15-6 above) upon the request of
the entity which was the principal owner, as defined in 8-15-1 above, of
the new community site at the time of Town Board approval of said
development plan or upon the request of a designee of said owner
designated in writing by said owner for such purpose. Such request
shall be filed with the Town Clerk, accompanied by such supporting
material as may be reasonably necessary to enable the Planning Board
or Town Board to review such request on the basis of the applicable
criteria of this Section. The Town Board shall act to approve or
disapprove such request within 45 days after such filing with the Town
Clerk. A public hearing shall not be required in connection with any
such amendment unless the amendment contemplates a change in the
provisions of this Section or in the boundaries of a NCD or a change in a
use classification of the development plan. In a case where such a
hearing is required, such a hearing shall be held within 45 days
following such filing, and the Town Board shall approve or disapprove
the requested amendment within 20 days following the hearing. If a
§ 8-15 AMHERST CODE § 8-15
1:1064
§ 8-16. Enforcement
proposed boundary change will result in the inclusion of additional
lands in the NCD, the minimum area requirements of § 5-2-3 shall
not be applicable to such change. All Planning Board and Town Board
determinations pursuant to this subsection shall be communicated to
said principal owner or its designee, in writing, with a detailed
statement of the basis therefor. At any time before the Town Board
has approved a development plan pursuant to subsection 8-15-4 hereof,
said principal owner may amend its application for such approval so
as to include additional land owned or controlled by him and adjacent
to the land owned by him at the time of submission of the original
application; and prior to such approval, the Town Board may similarly
amend a development plan proposed by the Town Board on its own
initiative, in order to reflect the inclusion of such additional land owned
or controlled by the entity which was the principal owner, as aforesaid,
at the time of the original development plan proposal by the Town
Board. Land so added shall be within the originally proposed NCD
boundaries.
8-16-1.Penalties For Violation. Any person who violates any provision of
this Ordinance or any regulation adopted hereunder is guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 6 months, or both; for conviction of a second
offense both of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6 months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
8-16-2. Administrative Procedures For Enforcement.
A. General Provisions. This ordinance shall be administered by the
Building and Planning Departments, the Town Clerk and such other
agencies as the Town Board shall direct and shall be enforced by
the Commissioner of Building. Those departments and agencies
shall be provided with the assistance of such persons as the Town
Board may direct.
B. Construction and Use. Building permits authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction which is in compliance with this
Ordinance and other applicable laws. Use, arrangement or
construction not in compliance with this Ordinance or other
applicable laws shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
C. Records and Reports. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
keep, or cause to be kept, a record indexed in regard to any
decision or determination reached by the Zoning Enforcement
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-16
1:1065
Officer in connection with the interpretation or enforcement of this
Ordinance. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ 8-16 AMHERST CODE § 8-16
1:1066
PART 9.
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 9-1. Purpose
Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may
be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and characteristics of
use that were lawful before this Ordinance or amendments thereto were
passed, but that would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under terms
of this Ordinance or future amendments. Regulations for the continuance,
maintenance, repair, restoring, moving and discontinuance of such
nonconforming lots, structures, land and uses are established for the
following purposes:
§ 9-2. Nonconforming Uses
Except as authorized below, no nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged
or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or an amendment of this
Ordinance; nor shall any existing conforming structure devoted to a use
not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located or a
nonconforming structure itself or its use, if nonconforming, be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed or moved, except in changing the use
of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located or to
make the structure conforming.
A. To permit these nonconformities to continue, but to minimize any
adverse effect on the adjoining properties and development;
B. To regulate their maintenance and repair;
C. To restrict their rebuilding if substantially destroyed;
D. To require their permanent discontinuance if not operated for certain
periods of time; and
E. To require conformity if they are discontinued, to bring about eventual
conformity in accordance with the objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan and Zoning Ordinance of the Town.
9-2-1. Restoration of a Damaged Use.
A. If a nonconforming use is destroyed or damaged by fire, other
casualty, act of God or by the public enemy to the extent of less than
75 percent of its assessed value immediately prior to the
occurrence, it may thereafter be reconstructed or repaired and
occupied. In all other cases, the nonconforming use shall be
terminated and any nonconforming structure shall be demolished.
B. Application for a building permit to repair, replace or reconstruct a
partially destroyed or damaged use or structure as authorized in
this Section shall be made within six months of the occurrence, and
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:1067
§ 9-3. Nonconforming Structures
Except as authorized below, no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed or moved, except as provided in this
Section.
the repair, replacement or reconstruction shall be completed within
six months following the issuance of the permit or the
nonconforming status of the use or structure shall be terminated,
and any nonconforming structure then remaining shall be
demolished.
9-2-2. Superseding a Nonconforming Use by a Permitted Use. Any
structure, land or structure and land in combination in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter
conform to the use regulations of the district.
9-2-3. Moving a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use shall not be
moved for any reason other than to conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
9-2-4. Discontinue or Abandoning a Nonconforming Use.
A. A nonconforming use discontinued or abandoned for 12
consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period
shall not thereafter be used or occupied except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Discontinuance of the active and continuous operation of a
nonconforming use, or a part or portion thereof, for a period of 12
consecutive months or 18 months during any three-year period, as
the case may be, is hereby construed and considered to be an
abandonment of such nonconforming use, regardless of any
reservation of an intent not to abandon same or of an intent to
resume active operations. If actual abandonment in fact is
evidenced by the removal of buildings, structures, machinery,
equipment and other evidence of such nonconforming use of the
land and premises, the abandonment shall be construed and
considered to be completed within a period of less than 12
consecutive months and all rights to reestablish or continue such
nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate.
9-3-1. Restoration of a Damaged Structure.
A. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by fire, other
casualty, act of God or by the public enemy to the extent of less than
75 percent of its value immediately prior to the occurrence, it may
thereafter be reconstructed or repaired and occupied. In all other
cases, the nonconforming structure shall be terminated and any
nonconforming structure shall be demolished.
§ 9-2 AMHERST CODE § 9-3
1:1068
§ 9-4. Nonconforming Sites
B. Application for a building permit to repair, replace or reconstruct a
partially destroyed or damaged use or structure as authorized in
this Section shall be made within six months of the occurrence, and
the repair, replacement or reconstruction shall be completed within
six months following the issuance of the permit or the
nonconforming status of the use or structure shall be terminated,
and any nonconforming structure then remaining shall be
demolished.
9-3-2. Enlargement of Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming
structures may be enlarged or extended, provided that the enlargement
does not increase the degree of the existing nonconformity, and the
enlargement or extension does not create a new nonconformity.
9-3-3. Moving a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure
shall not be moved for any reason other than to conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
9-3-4. Repair and Maintenance.
A. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a nonconforming use or occupancy, ordinary repair
work may be done or repairs or replacements of non-bearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be made, provided that the cubic
content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be
increased.
B. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to
lack of repairs or maintenance and is declared by any duly
authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical
condition, it may be strengthened or restored to a safe condition
upon order of an official charged with protecting the public safety.
9-4-1. Nonconforming Parking, Loading and Stacking Facilities.
A. A structure, use or occupancy existing lawfully at the time this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto becomes effective, but which
does not conform with the off-street parking, loading and stacking
regulations, may be occupied or continued without such parking
and/or loading spaces being provided.
B. Any such spaces that may be provided thereafter shall comply with
the regulations of this Ordinance.
C. If an existing structure, use or occupancy is altered so that there is
an increase of the number of dwelling units, seating capacity or
floor area, or if the use or occupancy is changed to one requiring
more off-street facilities, then off-street parking, stacking and
loading spaces shall be provided at least equal to the number
§ 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:1069
§ 9-5. Nonconforming Lots of Record
§ 9-6. Nonconforming Signs
No sign permitted pursuant to a building permit for a sign or any sign
erected and existing prior to May 23, 2006 shall be altered, rebuilt or
modified unless it conforms to the requirements hereof and a new building
permit for a sign is issued.
required for the increased area for the structure or use in
accordance with all provisions of this Ordinance.
9-5-1. General Provisions.
A. In any S-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 district in which single-family detached
dwellings are permitted, a single-family detached dwelling and
customary accessory structures may be erected on any single
nonconforming lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed
by other provisions of this Ordinance. Such lot shall be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the
same ownership.
B. This provision shall apply even though the nonconforming lot of
record fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both,
that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or
width, or both, of the nonconforming lot of record shall conform to
the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance
of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
ZBA.
C. If two or more lots or combinations of lots or portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the requirements established for width and area,
the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this Ordinance. The provisions of this Section shall not
apply if any portion of said parcel shall, after the adoption of this
Ordinance or amendment, be used or divided in a manner which
prevents or diminishes compliance with the requirements
established by this Ordinance or amendment thereto.
9-6-1. Signs Eligible for Characterization as Nonconforming. Any sign
that does not comply with this Ordinance is eligible for characterization
as a nonconforming sign if:
A. The sign was erected pursuant to a permit and complied with all
requirements then in effect; and
B. It complies with the provisions of § 7-8.
§ 9-4 AMHERST CODE § 9-6
1:1070
9-6-2. Loss of Nonconforming Status. A nonconforming status for the
sign shall terminate, if:
A. The sign is altered in any way in structure or size (except for
normal maintenance);
B. The sign is relocated;
C. The sign is replaced; or
D. There is any change in the tenancy, use or occupancy of the
premises served by the sign.
9-6-3. Nonconforming Sign Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this
Section shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming sign or
owner of the property on which the nonconforming sign is located from
complying with the provisions of this Ordinance regarding safety,
maintenance and repair of signs, provided that any repainting, cleaning
and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure
shall not modify the sign structure or copy in any way not permitted
under § 9-6-2. Where signs individually or collectively in a multiple
development, as defined in § 2-4, are nonconforming, one or more new
wall, hanging, fascia or panel on a multi-tenant free-standing sign for an
individual tenant space complying with the provisions of § 7-8 may be
erected whenever the tenancy, use or occupancy of an individual
establishment or enterprise changes.
§ 9-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:1071
Chapter 204
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 83.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 85.
Conservation easements — See Ch. 92.
Curb cuts — See Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 104.
Excavations — See Ch. 106.
Reimbursement of expert fees — See Ch. 108.
Geodetic control point network — See Ch.
119.
Recreation and open space — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 172.
Trees — See Ch. 179.
Zoning — See Ch. 203.
§ 9-6 AMHERST CODE § 9-6
1:1072
PART 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Title
The official name of this Local Law and this document shall be "Town
of Amherst Subdivision Regulations" hereinafter referred to as the
"Subdivision Regulations" or "these Regulations."
§ 1-2. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of these Subdivision Regulations and the intent of the use of
legislative authority is to provide for the future growth and development
of the town and the affording of adequate facilities for the housing,
transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and
welfare of its population by regulating the development of residential
subdivision pursuant to the authority set forth in Town Law § 271 and
§ 276. The Town Board finds and determines that these subdivision
regulations are necessary to protect and safeguard the Town of Amherst
and its residents with respect to subdivision developments in the town
which, once accepted, become a permanent unit in the basic physical
structure of the community which the future community will of necessity
be forced to adhere. It is the purpose of this law that all subdivision and
platting of land shall be designed to achieve, among others, the following
objectives:
1-2-1. To ensure orderly development and redevelopment of land to obtain
harmonious and stable residential and nonresidential areas.
1-2-2. To ensure the design and installation of high-quality improvements
and infrastructure in compliance with the specifications and standards
established by the Town of Amherst, and the correct and complete
recording of improvements.
1-2-3. To minimize ongoing costs of operating and replacing the Town's
infrastructure.
1-2-4. To provide coordination of land development activities in accordance
with the objectives of the Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive
Plan.
1-2-5. To coordinate local subdivision actions with the requirements of
county, state and federal statutes.
1-2-6. To provide safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
1-2-7. To require reservation of space for school, recreation, and other
public use.
1-2-8. To ensure accurate preparation and recording of plats.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:1073
§ 1-3. Authority, Local Supercission
This Local Law is enacted under the authority of subparagraphs (a)(12) and
(d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(iii) and Municipal Home
Rule Law § 22. It is the intent of this legislation to supercede the provisions
of New York State Town Law dealing with subdivisions and the Highway
Law in the following circumstances:
§ 1-4. Interpretation
§ 1-5. Delegation of Authority
By the authority of Article 16, § 276 of the Town Law of the State of New
York and resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Amherst, Erie County,
New York, dated [insert effective date],80 the Planning Board of the Town of
Amherst is authorized and empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks
or sites, with or without streets or highways, and to approve preliminary
plats, within that part of the Town of Amherst outside the limits of the
Village of Williamsville.
1-2-9. To ensure subdivision design mindful of avoiding, minimizing, or
mitigating natural hazards and protecting natural resources.
(a) Highway Law § 171(c) — Minimum right-of-way width of three rods.
(b) Town Law § 276(11) — Filing of final plat; expiration of approval.
(c) Town Law § 277(9)(a) — Furnishing performance bond.
(d) Town Law § 277(9)(b) — Security where plat is approved in sections.
1-4-1. The provisions of these Regulations shall be construed to be the
minimum requirements necessary for the preservation of public health,
safety, and welfare within the Town.
1-4-2. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or supersede
any existing regulation of the Town, nor to conflict with any statutes,
laws, or regulations of the State of New York, or Erie County, except
that these Regulations shall prevail in cases where they impose a lawful
restriction or requirement more severe than existing statutes, laws, or
regulations. The Town shall not enforce private deed or plat
restrictions.
1-4-3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the
interpretation of this Local Law. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No.
7-2019]
80.So in original.
§ 1-2 AMHERST CODE § 1-6
1:1074
§ 1-6. Jurisdiction
These Regulations shall govern all subdivision and resubdivision of land
lying within the Town limits of the Town of Amherst outside the limits of the
Village of Williamsville.
§ 1-7. Application
§ 1-8. Validity
Should any section or provision of these Subdivision Regulations be
declared invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of these
Regulations as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the section or
provision so declared to be invalid, nor shall the decision affect its
application to different facts or circumstances.
§ 1-9. Duration of Planning Board Approval
1-7-1. In accordance with Article 16, § 278 of the Town Law of the State of
New York, no plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the Erie
County Clerk's Office or have any validity until it shall have been
approved in the manner prescribed in these Regulations and is in full
compliance with them.
1-7-2. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plot of land which was created by subdivision after the
effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these
subdivision regulations and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced
except in conformity with these Regulations.
1-9-1. Approval of the following procedures shall expire in accordance with
the following table.
Application Duration of Approval
Sketch Plan 2 years
Preliminary Plat 6 months
Final Plat 1 year
1-9-2. In the event that approval is revoked, the petitioner may resubmit a
new plat subject to any new zoning or subdivision regulations.
1-9-3. Extension of the duration of approval may be granted by the Planning
Board after determining that the plat remains in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations.
1-9-4. The subdivision regulations in effect at the time of preliminary plat
approval shall be applied to all subsequent approvals required by these
regulations in accordance with Part 4.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:1075

PART 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 2-1. Definition of Terms
§ 2-2. Abbreviations
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency — United States
Department of Homeland Security
PE — Professional Engineer
ROW — Right of Way
SEQR — State Environmental Quality Review Act
§ 2-3. General Terms
BUILDING DEPARTMENT — The Building Department of the Town of
Amherst, New York.
COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING — Commissioner of Building of the Town
of Amherst, New York.
COUNTY — Erie County, New York.
HIGHWAY SUPERINTENDENT — Highway Superintendent of the Town
of Amherst, New York.
LAW — Law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the federal, state, county or
town governments, as appropriate.
PERSON — Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
company or corporation as well as an individual.
PETITIONER — Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly
or indirectly, sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease or develop,
or advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest, lot, parcel site,
unit or plot in a subdivision, or who (3) constructs or contracts to construct
improvements on subdivided land or who (4) is directly or indirectly
controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with any of the
foregoing.
PLANNING BOARD — Planning Board of the Town of Amherst, New York.
2-1-1.Words in this Local Law are normally used in their ordinary English
usage. Certain terms shall have the meanings that follow, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
2-1-2. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; "should"
is to be interpreted as expressing that which is desired and not
specifically required.
2-1-3. All words used in the singular include the plural, and all words used in
the present tense include the future tense.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:1077
PLANNING DIRECTOR — Planning Director of the Town of Amherst, New
York.
TOWN — Town of Amherst, Erie County, New York, outside the Village of
Williamsville, New York.
TOWN BOARD — Elected legislative body, Town of Amherst, New York.
TOWN ENGINEER — Town Engineer of the Town of Amherst, New York.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Zoning Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Amherst, New York.[Added 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance and
Zoning Map of the Town of Amherst, together with any and all amendments
and conditions adopted by the Town Board thereto.
§ 2-4. Specific Terms
ACCESS MANAGEMENT — The process of locating and designing
vehicular access connections to preserve the flow of traffic in terms of
safety, capacity and speed.
ARCHITECT — A New York State licensed professional authorized to
practice architecture as defined by New York State laws.
BUILDING LINE (OR FRONT SETBACK) — A line parallel to the street
right-of-way line, or edge of pavement for a private road, between which
line and the street right-of-way no structure may be built.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Materials, written and graphic, including
maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and other descriptive material
that identify the goals, objectives, principles, guidelines, policies,
standards, devices and instruments for the immediate and long-range
protection, enhancement, growth and development which have been
adopted and may be amended by the Amherst Town Board in accordance
with NYS Town Law § 272-a.
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS PLAN — See Public and Private Improvement
Permit.
CURB CUT — A curb break, or a place or way provided for the purpose of
gaining vehicular access between a street and abutting property.
DEVELOPMENT — The act of building structures or installing site
improvements.
EASEMENT — An authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the property.
ENGINEER — A New York State licensed professional engineer (P.E.)
authorized to practice engineering as defined by New York State laws.
EXCEPTION — See Reserve.
§ 2-3 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:1078
GRADES —
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION — An incorporated non-profit
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which
each lot owner of a developed area is a member and each lot is subject
to charges for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's
activities such as maintaining common property.
IMPROVEMENTS (PRIVATE) — Any facility or service together with
its associated site necessary to provide street pavements, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street
trees, utilities, and other appropriate items provided in the development
installed privately, and to be owned, maintained or operated by a private
entity, such as an individual, corporation or homeowners association.
IMPROVEMENTS (PUBLIC) — Any public facility or service together
with its associated public site or right-of-way necessary to provide street
pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary
and storm sewers, street trees, utilities, and other appropriate items as
installed or provided in the development and to be owned, maintained, and
operated by the municipality or special district.
LAND SURVEYOR — A New York State licensed professional authorized to
practice land surveying as defined by New York State Laws.
LOT — A parcel of land for a structure, use and the accessory structures
or uses customarily incident to it, including such yards as are required
by ordinance and such yards as are arranged and designed to be used in
connection with such structure.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT MEASUREMENTS —
STREET GRADE. 1) The elevation of the street as measured at its
crown; or 2) the slope of the street as measured between two points.
1.
NATURAL GRADE. The elevation above North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, of the surface of the ground prior to any development. Within
special flood hazard areas, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929 shall also be used.
2.
FINISHED GRADE. The elevation of the finished surface of the ground
adjoining the building after final grading and normal settlement.
3.
DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
1.
WIDTH. The horizontal distance of a lot measured along the building
line at right angles to the mean lot depth line.
2.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:1079
LOT TYPES —
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate parcel on a plat map
or deed filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of Erie County, New York.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street or alley that provides
access to abutting properties parallel and adjacent to an arterial street.
OPEN SPACE — An area unobstructed by buildings from the ground
upward, except for walks, paths, landscaping or other site features in
public, common or other private ownership. Yards of individual lots
occupied by dwellings shall not constitute open space.
OPEN SPACE-COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within the site, privately owned
and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the site or in specified portions thereof, or other
users if permitted by the owners of the common open space. Common open
space may contain such structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons served by such
common open space.
OWNER — Shall include, in addition to its usual meaning, tenant, lessee,
occupant, or other user.
CORNER LOT. A parcel of land having lot lines at the junction of two or
more streets or having lot lines on the same street forming an interior
angle of intersection not more than 135 degrees.
1.
FLAG LOT. A lot so shaped that the main building site area is set back
from the street on which it fronts and includes only a long narrow
access strip connecting the main building site with the frontage street.
2.
3. INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.
THROUGH LOT. An interior lot which has frontage on more than one
street.
4.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which the frontage is at right
angles or approximately right angles to the general pattern in the area.
A reverse frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot or a
through lot.
5.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:1080
PEDESTRIAN WALK — A public or private right-of-way intended solely for
pedestrian circulation which may be located within a street right-of-way.
PERFORMANCE BOND — An agreement by and between a petitioner and
a bonding company or personal fidelity or property bond in favor of the
Town for the amount of the estimated construction cost, and guaranteeing
the completion of physical improvements according to approved plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the petitioner's agreement.
PLAT — A drawing showing the proposed plan of the subdivision and
supplementary information which is submitted for approval to the Planning
Board.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A map and related material submitted to the
Planning Board in order to obtain approval for a proposed subdivision of
land. If approved by the Planning Board, it provides the basis for proceeding
with the preparation of the final plat of a subdivision.
PLAT, FINAL — A survey record of the subdivision, or part thereof, showing
location of lots, street right-of-way, easements, and other pertinent data as
required in these Regulations.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT — Permit to build a
public or private improvement approved by the Town Board and issued by
the Town Engineer.
PRIVATE UTILITY — A utility whose ownership is not fixed in a public body
as electrical, gas and phone lines and supporting apparatus, structures or
markers.
RESERVE — A parcel of land within a subdivision that is intended for future
use, or interim continued existing use.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land not dedicated to public use located
between a private parcel and a public right-of-way that prevents access to
the public right-of-way.
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout shown on such
map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivision. This process is also referred to as replatting.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The width, between property lines, of a street, alley, or
easement (measured at right angles to the center line of a street).
RURAL SUBDIVISION — Residential subdivisions in the AG, Agricultural,
or R-R, Rural Residential Districts, or on land which is outside the utility
service area for wastewater services and for which the provision of these
services will be accommodated through the use of individual, privately
owned systems.
SALE OR LEASE — Any immediate or future transfer of ownership,
including contract of sale or transfer, or an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:1081
SKETCH PLAN — A simple sketch of the proposed layout of streets,
lots, and other features of a proposed subdivision in relation to existing
conditions, including topography, prepared by the petitioner and submitted
to the Planning Board for the purpose of obtaining the advice and assistance
of the Planning Department Staff and approval of the Planning Board before
preparation of the preliminary plat.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — As defined by § 7-7-4 of the Zoning
Code of the Town of Amherst.
STREET — A public or private way which permits conducting of vehicular
travel and/or affords a primary means of access by vehicles and pedestrians
to abutting properties including the entire area within the right-of-way. The
term includes those ways as shown on plats filed in the Office of the Erie
County Clerk, whether improved or not.
EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic to which
access from the abutting properties is prohibited and all street
crossings are made by grade-separated intersections.
1.
MAJOR ARTERIAL. A high volume roadway that carries the major
portion of daily trips to centers of activity in the metropolitan area.
Major arterials (also called principal arterials) place a greater emphasis
on mobility rather than access to land and include fully and partially
controlled access facilities in three categories: Interstates,
Expressways, and Streets. A major arterial serves major through
movements between important centers of activities in a metropolitan
area, and a substantial portion of trips entering and leaving the area. It
also connects freeways with major traffic generators.
2.
MINOR ARTERIAL. A street that connects and augments the major
arterial system. Although its main function is still traffic mobility, a
minor arterial performs this function at a somewhat lower level and
places more emphasis on land access than does a major arterial. A
system of minor arterials serves trips of moderate length and
distributes travel to geographical areas smaller than those served by a
major arterial.
3.
COLLECTOR. Street that distributes trips from and channels trips to
arterials. Additionally, these roadways provide access and circulation
within residential neighborhoods. Collector streets provide for both
access and circulation within residential, commercial, and industrial
areas. Their access function is more important than that of arterials,
and unlike arterials, their operation is not always dominated by traffic
signals.
4.
LOCAL COLLECTOR. A street that distributes lower volumes of traffic
from predominantly residential developments to collector streets and
arterials. Local collectors carry through traffic, but at lower volumes
than collectors.
5.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:1082
STREET GRADE — The slope of the street as measured between two
adjacent points located on the street centerline.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line associated with: 1) a public street;
or 2) edge of pavement abutting a private street.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic excluding gutters, shoulders, and curbing.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into five or more lots,
blocks or sites in any three year period, with or without streets or highways,
for sale or for rent for residential lots or residential building plots. Such
division shall include resubdivision of parcels of land for which an approved
plat has already been filed in the office of the County Clerk and which is
entirely or partially undeveloped.
SUBDIVISION, RURAL CLUSTER — A residential development in
accordance with § 278 of NYS Town Law in the R-R District that helps
retain viable agriculture and open space; minimizes land use conflicts;
provides for recreational and habitat corridors through linked open space
networks; achieves flexibility, efficiency and cost reduction in the provision
of services and infrastructure; and does not rely on central sewer facilities.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — See § 4-3-2.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — See § 4-3-1.
SUBMISSION DATE — Date upon which the sketch plan, preliminary plat,
or final subdivision plat, complete and accompanied by a fee, if required,
and all supporting data required, has been received by the Planning
Department.
SUPERELEVATION — The banking of a roadway along a horizontal curve
so that motorists can safely and comfortably maneuver the curve at
reasonable speeds.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The plan and recommendations adopted by
the Planning Board or Town Board indicating existing and proposed
freeways and streets.
TRAFFIC CALMING — The combination of mainly physical measures that
reduce the negative effects of motor vehicle use, alter driver behavior,
and improve conditions for non-motorized street users. Examples of traffic
calming devices include speed tables, diverters, neck-downs, chicanes,
bump-outs, and roundabouts.
UTILITIES — All lines and facilities related to the provision, distribution,
collection, transmission or disposal of water, sanitary and storm sewage, oil,
gas, power, information, telecommunication and telephone cable.
LOCAL STREETS. A street that provides for local traffic and the lowest
level of mobility. Through traffic movement is discouraged on local
streets.
6.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:1083
WETLAND — Areas regulated by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or applicable Federal agencies as Fresh Water
Wetlands as prescribed by law.
§ 2-4 AMHERST CODE § 2-4
1:1084
PART 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 3-1. General
§ 3-2. Streets
3-1-1. Intent. These design standards are intended as a guide to sound land
planning and are for typical development conditions. Should there be
unusual topographic or physical development conditions, these
standards may waived in accordance with § 4-7.
3-1-2. Conformity to Comprehensive Plan. Subdivisions shall be
designed to be in agreement with objectives of the Comprehensive Plan
and in general compliance with the plan for the area.
3-1-3. Conformity with Thoroughfare and Utilities Specifications. The
arrangement, character, extent, size, grade and location of all streets
and public utilities shall be consistent with the Thoroughfare and Public
Utilities Plans and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets and utilities. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed in
such a way as to avoid casting an undue burden on the street system,
drainage system, or other public facilities planned for the area.
Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the Town of
Amherst Standard Details and Specifications and are available at the
Town of Amherst Engineering Department.
3-1-4. Conformity to the Zoning Ordinance. Subdivisions shall conform
to the Zoning Ordinance regulations and Zoning Map for the area
involved.
3-1-5. Suitability of Land and Relation to Natural Features. Land
deemed by the Planning Board to be unsuitable for human habitation
because of health, safety, public welfare, or sanitary problems shall not
be platted for residential use, nor for such other uses as may involve
danger to health, life, or property. Such land within a plat shall be set
aside for uses appropriate to existing conditions. In subdividing any
land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree
growth, water courses, historic locations, or similar conditions.
3-2-1. Hierarchy.
A. A street is a public way for purposes of vehicular travel and
includes the entire area within the right-of-way. The street also
serves pedestrian traffic and often accommodates public utility
facilities within the right-of-way or on easements adjacent thereto.
The improvement or development of streets is based on a
functional street classification system which is part of the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. A typical hierarchy of streets is shown below.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1085
3-2-2. General Design Guidelines. The following are general design
guidelines for all public streets.
A. Street and pedestrian circulation patterns shall be compatible with
objectives established by the Future Thoroughfare System in the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Planned layouts shall minimize overall length of local streets.
C. Driveway entrances shall be prohibited on arterial streets and shall
be avoided wherever possible on collector streets.
D. Streets shall provide safe and convenient access to housing.
E. All dwellings shall be accessible by emergency and service
vehicles.
F. Roadway networks shall improve efficiency and connectivity while
preserving neighborhood character.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1086
G. Traffic calming and access management measures shall be used in
conjunction with a connected roadway network where needed.
H. Provide for looping of utilities, where appropriate and desirable.
I. Necessary lighting along streets and walkways shall be provided.
J. Use of signs shall be minimized and signposts shall be unobtrusive.
K. Informational signs shall not compete with traffic control signs for
driver attention.
L. Use of break-away street furniture shall be considered wherever
possible and shall be grouped for aesthetic as well as safety values.
M. Sight distances shall be consistent with probable traffic speed,
terrain, alignments, and climatic extremes.
N. Pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic shall be separated to the
extent feasible.
O. Parks, play areas, and interior block open spaces, shall be visible
from the street.
P. Horizontal and vertical street alignments shall relate to the natural
contours of the site insofar as is practical and shall be consistent
with other design objectives.
Q. Horizontal and vertical alignment of streets shall be selected to
minimize grading quantities.
R. Wherever possible, street layouts shall be planned to avoid
excessive runoff concentration.
S. Streets crossing drainageways inevitably will function as dams, and
shall be designed to minimize adverse backwater effects, scour, and
erosion.
3-2-3. General Construction Principles.
A. Pavement designs should be appropriate for the specific traffic
load, subgrade soil, surface drainage, ground water, and climatic
conditions existing at the pavement's location.
B. The thickness of a pavement should be a function of both the
assured load supporting value of the earth subgrade beneath the
pavement and the wheel load distribution characteristics of the
pavement materials.
C. Pavement edge treatments other than curb and gutter may be used
where conditions permit adequate drainage and the roadway base
will not be adversely affected, subject to approval by the Highway
Superintendent.
3-2-4. Specific Design Standards.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1087
A. Geometric and Pavement Standards.
(1) Local Streets.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all local streets.
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
115'
Maximum grade 8%
Minimum curve radius 72'
Design speed 20 — 30 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 28'
Minimum right-of-way
width
52'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
Two lanes 14' wide
Median width None required; additional
width required for
development requesting
medians.
Parking lane width Two lanes, 7' wide
Sidewalk width 4'
Bike lane width None required; share street
Planting strip/snow storage
area
11'; additional width
optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1088
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1089
(2) Local Collectors.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all local collectors.
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
235'
Maximum grade 7%
Minimum curve radius 200'
Design Speed 20 — 30 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 28'
Minimum right-of-way
width
60'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
Two lanes 14' wide
Median width None required; except
where necessary to control
access and/or to provide
pedestrian refuge.
Additional roadway and
ROW width will be
required.
Parking lane width 7 — 8' if required
Sidewalk width 4'
Bike lane width None required; share street
Planting strip/snow storage
area
15'; additional width
optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1090
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1091
(3) Collectors.
(a) The following standards shall apply to collectors.
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
275'
Maximum grade 7%
Minimum curve radius 285'
Design Speed 30 — 60 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 32'
Minimum right-of-way
width
70'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
Two 12' wide lanes
Median width None required, except
where necessary to control
access and/or to provide
pedestrian refuge.
Additional roadway and
ROW width will be
required.
Parking lane width Min. one 8' wide parking
lane required.
Sidewalk width 5'
Bike lane width Optional; where provided,
two one-way 5' wide lanes
located on the outside of
the travel lanes.
Planting strip/snow storage
area
19'; additional width
optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1092
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1093
(4) Minor Arterials.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all minor arterials.
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
275'
Maximum grade 7%
Minimum curve radius 443'
Design Speed 40 — 60 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 24'
Minimum right-of-way
width
90'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
Two 12' wide lanes
Median/center turn lane
width
13' where required
Parking lane width 8' where required
Sidewalk width 5'
Bike lane width Optional; where provided,
two one-way 5' wide lanes
located on the outside of
the travel lanes.
Planting strip/snow storage
area
Distance from centerline to
curb or outside of plowed
area in feet x 0.6; additional
width optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1094
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1095
(5) Narrow Residential Streets.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all narrow
residential streets. Narrow residential streets shall be
used in conjunction with a private alley.
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
115'
Maximum grade 8%
Minimum curve radius 72'
Design Speed 20 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 24'
Minimum right-of-way
width
45'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
One 17' lane
Median width None required
Parking lane width One 7' lane
Sidewalk width 4'
Bike lane width None required
Planting strip/snow storage
area
10.5'; additional width
optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1096
(6) Alleys.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all alleys.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1097
Overall Design Parameters
Minimum stopping sight
distance
50'
Maximum grade 8%
Minimum curve radius 72'
Design Speed 20 mph
Roadway Requirements
Minimum pavement width 12' — 20'
Minimum right-of-way
width
12' — 20'
Geometric Parameters
Travel lane width and
number
One 12-20' lane
Median width None required
Parking lane width None required
Sidewalk width None required
Bike lane width None required
Planting strip/snow storage
area
Distance from centerline to
curb or outside of plowed
area in feet x 0.6; additional
width optional.
(b) The following figure illustrates the location and
relationships between the parameters and requirements
listed in the table.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1098
(7) Standards Applying to all Streets.
(a) In order to provide for proper drainage, the minimum
grade shall be 0.4 percent for streets with outer curbs. A
grade of 0.35 percent may be used where there is a high
type pavement, accurately crowned and supported on firm
subgrade.
(b) An easement, when required, shall be a minimum of 15
feet for local streets and local collectors.
(c) Private streets shall be designed in accordance with the
applicable standards in the tables above.
B. Layout. The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of
all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience
and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets. Where such streets are not
shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted
by the Planning Board.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1099
C. Alignment.
(1) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no streets shall intersect any other street at
less than 80 degrees.
(2) The edge of pavement at street intersections shall be rounded
with a radius of 20 feet, or of a greater radius where the
Planning Board, Highway Superintendent, or Traffic and
Safety Board deem it necessary.
(3) In the case of dead-end streets, where needed, the Board may
require the reservation of a 50-foot wide easement or
dedication, to provide for continuation of pedestrian traffic and
utilities to the next street.
(4) Local streets shall connect with surrounding streets where
necessary to permit the convenient movement of traffic, or to
facilitate access to neighborhoods by emergency service
vehicles, or for other sufficient reasons, but connections shall
be designed to avoid the use of such streets by substantial
through traffic.
(5) Whenever connections to anticipated or proposed surrounding
streets are required, the right-of-way shall be extended and the
street developed to the property line of the subdivided
property (or to the edge of the remaining undeveloped portion
of a single tract) at the point where the connection to the
anticipated or proposed street is expected. No lot shall take
access from the terminal end of such streets. The Planning
Board may also require temporary turn-arounds to be
constructed at the end of such streets pending their extension
when such turn-arounds appear necessary to facilitate the flow
of traffic or accommodate emergency or service vehicles.
(6) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall
not be permitted.
(7) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on major arterial and collector streets.
(8) An intersection of more than two streets shall be avoided
unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise.
(9) In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each
other at any one point by more than 10 degrees, shall be
connected with a curve, the radius of which for the centerline
of street shall not be less than 400 feet on major streets and
collector streets and 200 feet on local streets.
(10) Minor or secondary street openings into collector or major
arterial roads shall, in general, be at least 500 feet apart.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1100
(11) Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than
the minimum size required in the zoning district in which a
subdivision is located, the Board may require that streets and
lots be laid out so as to permit future re-subdivision in
accordance with the requirements contained in these
Regulations.
(12) Alignment in residential areas shall fit closely the existing
topography so as to minimize the need for cuts or fills. There is
advantage in residential areas in purposely making the
alignment of such nature as to discourage high speed through
traffic. Caution shall be taken in the design of the alignment
that the safety of the facility is not reduced.
(13) Where curves are superelevated lower values apply, but the
radius shall never be less than 115 feet for local streets and
275 feet for collector streets.
D. Intersections.
(1) Design Principles.
(a) Paved areas within intersections shall be minimized.
(b) Oblique intersections and large corner radii shall be
avoided.
(c) Wherever possible, intersections on curves should be
avoided.
(2) Intersection Design.
(a) Intersections, including median openings, shall be
designed with adequate corner sight distance and the area
kept free of obstacles.
(i) The corner sight distance for collector streets shall be
a minimum of 300 feet.
(ii) For local streets the corner sight distance shall be a
minimum of 200 feet.
(b) Intersecting streets shall meet at approximately a 90
degree angle.
(c) The minimum off-set for "T" intersections shall be 125 feet
centerline to centerline.
(d) Intersections and stacking areas shall be designed with a
flat grade; the maximum grade on the approach leg shall
be less than five percent.
(e) At street intersections in residential areas and elsewhere
where there are heavy pedestrian movements, the
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1101
minimum radius of curb return where curbs are used or
the outside edge of pavement where curbs are not used,
shall be a minimum radius of 30 feet.
E. Street Connectivity Requirements. An interconnected street
system is necessary in order to promote orderly and safe
development by ensuring that streets function in an interdependent
manner, provide adequate access for emergency and service
vehicles, enhance access by ensuring connected transportation
routes, and provide continuous and comprehensible traffic routes.
(1) Connectivity Defined.
(a) Connectivity is defined by the ratio of links to nodes in any
subdivision.
(b) Connectivity ratio is the number of street links divided by
the number of nodes or end links, including cul-de-sac
heads.
(c) A link is any portion of a public or private street meeting
Town specifications and is legally accessible defined by a
node at each end or at one end. Stubs to adjacent property
shall be considered links. Alleys shall not be considered
links.
(d) A node is the terminus of a street or the intersection of two
or more streets.
(e) Any location where a street name changes shall be
considered a node.
(f) Any curve or bend of a street that exceeds 75 degrees shall
receive credit as a node. Any curve or bend of a street that
does not exceed 75 degrees shall not be considered a
node.
(2) Required Ratio.
(a) The street network for a subdivision of 30 or more lots
with internal roads or access to any public road shall
achieve a connectivity ratio of not less than 1.40,
measured within the subdivision.
(b) Street links and nodes along a local collector, collector or
arterial street providing access to a proposed subdivision
shall not be considered in computing the connectivity
ratio.
(c) A higher connectivity ratio in a surrounding area shall not
provide justification to reduce the required connectivity of
a proposed subdivision.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1102
(d) The Planning Board may permit a lower connectivity ratio
based upon site constraints.
(3) Sample Calculation. The following sample calculation and
figures show how the street connectivity ratio for a subdivision
shall be calculated.
EXAMPLE 1: Does not meet
ratio
EXAMPLE 2: Modified to
meet ratio
Number =
Link
? = Node
(4) External Access Required.
(a) All subdivisions shall provide the appropriate number of
fire apparatus access roads, as described in § 7-6-7(c) of
the Zoning Ordinance, Fire Apparatus Access Road
Requirements.
F. Cul-de-sac Streets.
(1) A curbed permanent turnaround shall be provided at the end of
any permanent dead-end street. This turnaround may be T- or
circular-shaped. The commonly used circular form shall have
the following dimensions.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1103
Standard
Without
Island With Island
Minimum Cul-de-Sac Radii
(including R-O-W)
62 ft 66 ft
Minimum Cul-de-Sac Radii
(to inside of curb)
52 ft 56 ft
Minimum pavement width 28 ft 36 ft
Right-of-way width, minimum 50 ft 50 ft
Utility Easement Width 15 ft 15 ft*
Maximum island radii — 20 ft
* May be modified by the Planning Board or Director.
(2) An unpaved island may be provided at the center of the
turnaround in accordance with the standards in the table
above and provided that:
(a) The island shall be surrounded by an island curb;
(b) The surface of the island shall be landscaped;
(c) Landscaping or other elements located in the island shall
not interfere with the sight distance standards in
§ 3-2-4D(2).
(d) The island shall have a minimum diameter of 20 feet
measured to the back of the curb.
(e) The petitioner shall provide for perpetual maintenance of
the unpaved island through a homeowners association or
other acceptable organization.
(3) The T-shaped turnaround shall have the dimensions required in
the figures below.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1104
(4) No lot shall take access to a temporary or permanent
turnaround unless permission is granted at the discretion of
the Highway Superintendent.
(5) All turnarounds shall contain adequate space for snow storage
and for the maneuvering of emergency vehicles.
G. Curbs. Minimum curb specifications and the measurement at
pavement width are shown in the figure below. There are three
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1105
types of curbing which shall be permitted. However, it is the policy
of the Town of Amherst that "A" Type curbing shall be used
wherever possible. The final selection of curbing shall be
dependent on the site conditions, design character of the proposed
subdivision and the anticipated traffic.
Type "A" Curbing
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1106
Type "B" Curbing
Poured in Place
Type "C" Curbing
Poured in Place
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1107
H. Sidewalks and Pedestrian Circulation. A plan for safe and
convenient pedestrian circulation within the subdivision and
between the subdivision and surrounding areas shall be provided.
Such plan may provide for walks along the streets, along rear
property lines or in some other location acceptable to the Planning
Board. The pedestrian circulation plan as approved by the Planning
Board shall be based on expected use and function consistent with
the following standards. A list of roads and their functional
classifications is available from the Town of Amherst Planning
Department.
(1) Pedestrians shall have convenient access to schools, shopping,
and existing or possible public transportation load points.
(2) Pedestrian and bicycle-way alignments shall have a reasonable
relationship to foreseeable movement, parking, and
community facilities, and shall be safe, secure, and attractive.
(3) Potential pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular conflicts shall be
minimized.
(4) Pedestrian and bicycle travel routes shall be selected to have
minimum practical change in grade (elevation) throughout
their lengths.
(5) Sidewalks shall be installed on existing and proposed streets
unless waived by the Planning Board as a part of an approved
site plan or by the Town Board in which event they shall be
constructed in accordance with Chapter 83, Building
Construction Administration, of the Town Code and located in
accordance with § 3-2-4A.
(6) Sidewalks shall be installed on all collector streets and
arterials on all road frontages, as applicable, and shall be
located in accordance with § 3-2-4A.
(7) Sidewalks shall be of a width as required in the specifications
for sidewalk construction available from the Town of Amherst
Engineering Department, Town of Amherst Standard Details
and Specifications and Chapter 83, Building Construction
Administration, of the Town Code.
(8) All required ramps and curb cuts shall be constructed to be in
compliance with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act and be included and constructed with the P.I.P.
for the roadway.
(9) The Planning Board may require that sidewalks on existing or
proposed streets be included and constructed with the P.I.P. for
the roadway.
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1108
I. Roadway Width for Bridges. The minimum clear width for all
new bridges on streets with curbed approaches shall be the same
as the curb-to-curb width of the approaches. For streets with
shoulders and no curbs, the bridge width shall be the same as the
approach roadway including shoulders. Sidewalks on the
approaches shall be carried across all new structures and shall be
considered an additional width to the bridge. There shall be at least
one sidewalk on all sidewalk bridges.
J. Pavement.
(1) The design of the pavement and subbase shall be consistent
with the specifications in the Town of Amherst Standard
Details and Specifications, available at the Town of Amherst
Engineering Department.
(2) Due to the variables inherent in any design there can be no
minimal standard. Each design shall be reviewed on its own
merits.
(3) Pavement cross slope shall be adequate to provide proper
drainage. The recommended standard is 0.020 feet per foot.
K. Superelevation.
(1) Superelevation is advantageous for street traffic operation, but
in built up areas the combination of wide pavement areas,
proximity of adjacent development, control of cross slope and
profile for drainage, the frequency of cross streets and other
urban features combine to make its use impractical or
undesirable. Usually superelevation is not provided on local
streets in residential and commercial areas; it should be
considered on those in industrial areas. Superelevation shall
be provided on collector streets wherever operating speeds
will not be low.
(2) Where superelevation is used, street curves shall be designed
for a maximum superelevation rate of 0.04 to 0.06 feet per foot.
L. Paved Shoulders. Paved shoulders are permitted on arterial or
collector roads. Such shoulders shall be a minimum of six feet in
width and shall be designed as an integral part of the road, and
shall be constructed according to the Town's minimum
specifications as detailed in the Town of Amherst Standard Details
and Specifications, available at the Town of Amherst Engineering
Department.
M. Railroad-Street Grade Crossings.
(1) Appropriate grade crossing protection devices shall be
installed at all railroad-street grade crossings.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1109
(2) The minimum stopping sight distance for any street that
intersects a railroad track shall be 200 feet.
N. Clearance to Above-Grade Obstructions. A minimum clearance
of two feet shall be provided between the face of curb or edge of
shoulder and above-grade obstructions, such as utility poles,
lighting poles, and fire hydrants. On all streets these obstructions
shall be located at or near the right-of-way line and outside of
sidewalks.
O. Street Lighting.
(1) Street lighting should be considered at all intersections and
continuous lighting should be considered in heavily built up
areas, particularly on collector streets. Determinations on
lighting should be coordinated with crime protection and other
community needs.
(2) Factors that should be taken into consideration in determining
whether or not lighting should be provided are the ratio of
night to day accidents, pedestrian and vehicular volumes, type
of marginal development and previous experience at other
locations having similar geometric design.
P. Traffic Control Devices.
(1) It is important that there be consistent and uniform application
of traffic control devices. Details of the standard devices and
warrants for many conditions are found in the "Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" prepared by the Federal
Highway Administration and supplemented by the New York
State D.O.T.
(2) Geometric design of streets should include full consideration of
the types of traffic control to be used, especially at
intersections where multiphase or actuated traffic signals are
likely to be needed.
Q. Landscaping, Erosion Control, and Street Trees.
(1) Landscaping and Erosion Control.
(a) The Planning Board shall carefully consider all
landscaping elements within the right-of-way especially in
culs-de-sac, islands, and other areas where public
ownership and maintenance will be required. A detailed
planting and landscaping plan shall be submitted for all
such areas and approved by the Planning Board, after
receiving a recommendation from the Town's Planning
Director, as a part of the preliminary platting process.
(b) A Landscape Plan for the area within ten feet form the
edge of pavement along private streets shall be submitted
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1110
with the preliminary plat. The owner shall be responsible
for all planting, maintenance, and necessary replacement.
(2) Street Trees.
(a) Tree Removal Permit. No trees shall be removed from an
area in anticipation of development unless a Tree Removal
Permit has been obtained under the Tree Local Law, Town
Code Chapter 179.
(b) Trees Required.
(i) The issuance of each building permit for buildings
adjacent to a public street shall be subject to planting
one tree per forty feet of street frontage.
(ii) At the time of filing the building permit, the Town
Clerk shall collect the cost of planting the required
trees which cost shall be determined by the Town
Board from time to time.
(c) Specifications for Planting.
(i) All trees shall be guaranteed for one year from the
date of planting and shall be handled and transported
in a manner conducive to good nursery practices at all
times. All trees shall be pruned and planted and
refilled with soil acceptable to the Highway
Superintendent in a tree pit two times the ball
diameter and one and one-half times the ball depth, or
twelve inches greater than the spread of the bare root
stock and six inches greater in depth. Each planting
shall be well watered at the time of planting. Stakes
shall be hard wood, eight-foot minimum height, and
will be placed at time of planting outside the tree
placement cavity with a minimum of two stakes per
tree.
(ii) The top four inches to six inches of each stake shall be
painted a color as specified by the Superintendent of
Highways. In addition, all trees will be wrapped with
tree wrap-up to the first branch. Fertilizer should be
one-half pound per inch of caliper, worked into the
trees' pit soil.
(iii) All trees shall be local or northern grown and will be
subject to inspection at time of planting. All trees shall
be supplied with well developed root systems. All trees
are to have straight trunks with well developed heads.
The caliper of trees shall be measured at a point six
inches above ground level with a minimum caliper of
one and three-quarters inches.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:1111
(iv) All trees shall be planted in accordance with § 179 of
the Local Tree Law, Planting distance requirements.
R. Yard Drainage — General.
(1) Yards and areas shall be properly drained and connected to a
storm sewer or other approved outfall.
(2) See the Town of Amherst Standard Details and Specifications,
available at the Town of Amherst Chapter 83, Building
Construction Administration, of the Town Code for details,
including rear yard drainage and Sump Pump and Downspout
Pipe Discharge.
S. Rural Residential Subdivision Streets. Each lot in a rural
residential subdivision shall be provided with access to a durable
and maintainable public or private street with adequate capacity,
while retaining rural aesthetics and cost effectiveness, and without
compromise to the Thoroughfare Plan.
(1) Exceptions to Street Standards for Rural Residential
Subdivisions. The subdivision may contain roadside ditches in
lieu of curb and gutter.
3-2-5. Grading and Topography. The street plan of a proposed subdivision
shall bear a logical relationship to the topography of the property, and
all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as
possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography and shall be in
accordance with the Town Specifications for Public Improvements.
3-2-6. Marginal Access Streets.
A. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street as specified in the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning
Board may require the following:
(1) Marginal access streets, and controlled access points;
(2) Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line;
(3) Deep lots with rear service access; or
(4) Such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
B. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access thoroughfare right-of-way, the Planning Board
may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
the right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land as for the following purposes:
§ 3-2 AMHERST CODE § 3-2
1:1112
§ 3-3. Utilities
(1) Parks;
(2) Deep residential lots backing to railroad or arterial street with
planting screen in a no-access area at rear property lines of
lots; or
(3) Motor vehicle parking, business or industry in appropriate
districts.
C. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
3-2-7. Other Street Improvements. Design standards for other required
improvements such as fire hydrants, water main, and the location of
sanitary and storm sewers are also available within the Town of
Amherst Standard Details and Specifications on file at the Town's
Engineering Department. Street lighting, traffic control signs, and
street signs are found within Town Specifications for Public
Improvements. Public and Private Improvement Permits are issued on
the basis of compliance with these specifications.
3-2-8. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed with the Town
under conditions approved by the Planning Board, Town Engineer, and
Town Attorney.
3-2-9. Street Designation. Street names for a proposed subdivision shall
be proposed by the owner which shall not duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets in Erie County irrespective of modifying
terms such as street, avenue, boulevard, etc. Streets that are or will
eventually be continuations of existing or platted streets shall be of the
same name. Street names shall be subject to the policies established by
the Town Board and the approval of the Planning Director.
3-3-1. Underground Utilities. Utilities, to the extent practicable, are to be
placed underground throughout a subdivision area and in conformance
with Town Specifications for Public and Private Improvements.
3-3-2. Utility Easements. Suitable easements shall be provided for any
utility service, including storm water drainage, as determined by the
Town Engineer. They shall be established at sanitary sewers and
applicable lot lines so as to provide continuity of alignment from block
to block.
3-3-3. Storm Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by an
existing or proposed watercourse, storm sewer, drainage way, channel
or stream, there shall be provided a permanent public or private
drainage easement conforming substantially with the limits of such
watercourse, which may include additional area adjoining such
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:1113
§ 3-4. Blocks
watercourse as determined by the Town Engineer and/or Highway
Superintendent.
3-3-4. Pipes for Ditches. Street side ditch piping for stormwater along an
existing street shall be the responsibility of the lot owner (or petitioner)
and construction, removal, or replacement shall be in accordance with
Town Specifications. Maintenance of a public facility shall be the
responsibility of the Town.
3-3-5. Sewers.
A. Any building that has sanitary facilities, or is used by human
occupants for living or sleeping, must be connected to a sanitary
sewer system approved by the Erie County Health Department, if
such sewer is available.
B. All sanitary sewers and laterals must be installed before a street is
improved and construction shall be in accordance with Town
Specifications for Public Improvements.
C. The Town reserves the rights to require the installation of
improvements necessary for non-rural subdivisions when the site is
within a sewer district but public wastewater utility services are
not currently available.
3-3-6.Water Distribution and Fire Hydrants.
A. Waterline types and installation shall be in accordance with Town
of Amherst Engineering Department specifications.
B. Waterline size shall be a minimum of eight inches and on a grid
system or interconnected wherever possible, based on generally
accepted engineering practices for required fire flow.
C. Fire hydrant type and installation shall be in accordance with Town
of Amherst Engineering Department specifications.
D. Fire hydrants shall be located a maximum of 500 feet apart.
3-4-1. Shape. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but
blocks shall fit readily into the overall plan of the subdivision, and their
design shall evidence consideration of topographical conditions, lot
planning, traffic flow and public open space areas.
3-4-2. Block Dimensions.
A. The maximum lengths of blocks containing a majority of lots
seventy-five feet and over in width shall be 1,800 feet, and the
maximum length of blocks containing a majority of lots less than
seventy-five feet in width shall be 1,200 feet.
§ 3-3 AMHERST CODE § 3-4
1:1114
§ 3-5. Lots
B. Blocks over 900 feet long may, at the discretion of the Planning
Board, require pedestrian ways at their approximate centers. The
provision of additional access ways to schools, parks or other
destinations may be required by the Planning Board.
C. Blocks shall have sufficient width to accommodate two tiers of lots
including any additional allowance for natural features in between
such as an existing watercourse. This standard shall not apply
where single tier lots are required to separate residential
development from arterial traffic, to separate lots from an
incompatible use, to accommodate a requirement for single loaded
streets, to allow for unusual topographical conditions or when
adjacent to the outer perimeter of the subdivision.
3-5-1. Buildable. All lots shall meet the minimum area and lot dimensions
required by the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the
lot is located.
3-5-2. Shape.
A. Generally, side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines.
B. The average depth of a lot shall not generally exceed three and onehalf
times its average width.
C. Flag lots shall be discouraged in non-rural subdivisions, except
where environmental, design or other constraints render
subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
3-5-3. Access.
A. All lots shall have adequate access to the public thoroughfare
system, and lots shall abut a public dedicated street or private
drive or have access to such street or drive via a public alley. See
NYS Town Law § 280-a(4) for streets not having frontage on a
public street.
B. No lot shall take access from the turnaround areas described in
§ 3-2-4F.
C. In an effort to minimize the number of curb cuts and maximize
green space, the Planning Board may require the sharing of curb
cuts by adjacent lots.
3-5-4. Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be increased in width over the width of
typical interior lots, in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.
3-5-5. Through Lots. Through lots shall not be permitted except under the
following circumstances:
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:1115
§ 3-6. Monuments and Lot Corner Markers
A. Where lots back upon an arterial, local collector or collector street.
In such instances, vehicular access between the lots and the
arterial or collector street is prohibited.
B. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing
otherwise unreasonable. Such through lots shall have an additional
depth, as determined by the Planning Board, in order to allow for a
protective screen planting on one frontage.
3-5-6. Lots Abutting a Watercourse.
A. Riparian Buffer.
(1) Lots abutting upon or extending into a watercourse, drainage
way, channel or stream shall be required to provide additional
depth in the form of a riparian buffer to assure an acceptable
building site.
(2) Riparian buffers shall be clearly indicated on all sketch plans,
preliminary plats and final plats. Where maps show a
difference in stream type for a particular reach of stream, the
map that shows the greater level of stream protection shall
apply.
B. Buffer Width. Riparian buffers shall apply on each side of the
watercourse and shall begin at the most landward limit of the top of
the bank perpendicular to the direction of stream flow. Riparian
buffers shall be a minimum of 50 feet in total width.
C. Buffer Limitations.
(1) Buildings and other features that require grading and
construction shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
edge of the buffer.
(2) Crossings by streets, driveways, bridges, utilities, culverts,
recreational features or other facilities shall be allowed
provided that they are designed to minimize intrusion into the
riparian buffer. Such facilities may run generally within and
parallel to the buffer only where no other access to the
property is practical and when their design minimizes
intrusion into the buffer.
(3) Riparian buffers may be used for passive recreational
activities, provided that service facilities for such activities,
including but not limited to parking, picnicking and sanitary
facilities, shall be located outside of the stream buffer.
3-5-7. Lots in a Floodway or Flood Plain District. All structures and uses
in the Special Flood Hazard Areas are subject to the Flood Damage
Prevention provisions of § 7-7 of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 3-5 AMHERST CODE § 3-6
1:1116
§ 3-7. Commercial and Industrial Areas
§ 3-8. Open Space Dedication
3-6-1. Permanent concrete monuments shall be made of concrete four
inches by six inches by 24 inches, or six-inch diameter by 24 inches, or
an approved equal, with 1/2-inch or larger iron pipe or iron rod cast in
the center.
3-6-2. At least one permanent concrete monument shall be in each
subdivision in accordance with Local Law No. 6, Chapter 119 and the
Rules and Regulations 119-5.A, Town of Amherst Geodetic Survey
Maintenance Network. The monument's location shall be approved by
the Town Engineer.
3-6-3. Pipe monuments 3/4-inch in diameter, or steel rods 1/2-inch in
diameter by 18 inches in length, shall be placed at the corners of each
lot, block, at each intersection, of street center lines at angle points and
at the ends and at suitable intervals along curbs. A suitable nail may be
used should any of these locations fall within the street pavement.
3-6-4. All U.S., State, County, Town or other official benchmarks, monuments
or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position and identified on the final plat.
3-7-1.Vehicular Movement. The location for vehicular movements
between commercial and industrial areas and adjacent streets shall be
indicated, and restrictions shall be recorded upon the plat which shall
restrict such vehicular movements to the location shown on the plat.
3-7-2. Easements. Easements may be required providing for vehicular
movements through parking areas and to and from service areas, as
well as easements which can be improved as buffer areas wherever the
area adjoins property zoned for residential use. The installation of
planting, walls, fences or other improvements that assure a satisfactory
buffer or protective screen within said easement may be required by
the Planning Board.
A. General. Dedication of open space shall be in accordance with Chapter
155, Recreation and Open Space, of the Town Code.
B. Cluster Subdivision.
(1) Ownership of open space created as part of a cluster subdivision
shall be retained by or transferred to any of the following thirdparty
organizations, including any combination of such
organizations:
(a) The owner of the property to be developed;
(b) A homeowners association;
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8
1:1117
§ 3-9. Acceptance of Dedications
(c) An established land trust, created as a not-for-profit agency in
accordance with § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(d) A non-profit conservation organization created in accordance
with § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(e) The Town of Amherst; or
(f) Another public agency responsible for natural resource
preservation.
(2) A conservation easement limiting the use of the open space in
perpetuity shall be required. The easement shall provide for third
party enforcement of the limits placed on the open space area.
A. Streets. Streets shall be dedicated according to all applicable State
and local laws.
B. Parkland Sites.
(1) Acceptance of dedications for parkland shall be by resolution of the
Amherst Town Board.
§ 3-8 AMHERST CODE § 3-9
1:1118
PART 4
REVIEW PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 4-1. Applicability
Whenever any subdivision of land of five or more lots is proposed and before
any permit for the erection of a structure or facilities in or for such proposed
subdivision shall be granted, the petitioner or authorized agent shall apply
for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this Part.
§ 4-2. Pre-Application Conference
The petitioner for subdivision approval shall schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Director or his or her designee to discuss
the requirements for the following, but not limited to: the general layout
of streets and lots, the reservation of land, street improvements, drainage,
soil conditions, special flood hazard areas, wetlands, sewerage, water, fire
protection, other community services and facilities, and the availability of
existing services.
§ 4-3. Subdivision Classification
The Planning Director shall classify the subdivision as requiring a major
or minor-subdivision on the basis of the pre-application conference and in
accordance with the criteria in this Section.
4-3-1. Minor Subdivision.
A. The Planning Director shall only classify a subdivision as a minor
subdivision where the proposal meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The subdivision contains a minimum of five lots, but not more
than nine lots fronting on an existing street;
(2) The subdivision does not require the construction of new
streets or roads, the extension of municipal facilities or the
dedication of land;
(3) The subdivision does not adversely affect the development of
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property;
(4) The subdivision is not in conflict with any provision or portion
of the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Ordinance; and
(5) The subdivision does not require a waiver from these
Regulations.
4-3-2. Major Subdivision. Any subdivision that contains more than nine
lots shall be considered a major subdivision.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:1119
§ 4-4. Application Requirements
The following requirements shall apply to all applications for development
review.
4-4-1. Who May Submit Applications.
A. All applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Director for his
or her signature prior to filing with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk
shall receive payment of the required fees.
B. Applications shall only be accepted from persons having the legal
authority to submit such applications. In general, applications shall
be made by the owners or lessees of property, or persons who have
contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to
acquire the necessary approval under these Regulations.
C. The Planning Director may require a petitioner to present
additional evidence of authority to submit the application.
4-4-2. Forms.
A. Applications required under these Regulations shall be submitted
on forms and in such numbers as required by the Town.
B. All application forms are available from the Planning Department.
The content of such application forms shall be determined by the
Planning Director and may be amended from time to time.
4-4-3. Fees.
A. No application shall be accepted by the Town Clerk until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full.
B. Filing fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board to defray the actual cost of processing the
application.
C. All required fees shall be made payable to "The Town of Amherst."
D. A petitioner who has paid an appropriate fee pursuant to the
submission of an application, but who chooses to withdraw such
application within 24 hours of application shall be entitled to a full
refund upon written request to the Town. After this 24-hour period,
the petitioner may petition the Town Board for a partial refund. The
Town Board may request a recommendation on any request for a
refund considered under this Section.
4-4-4. Applications to be Complete.
A. An application and fee will be accepted for review when it contains
all information necessary to initiate review as determined by the
Planning Director or his or her designee. In addition, an application
shall not be considered complete until a SEQR determination of
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-4
1:1120
significance under Town Code, Chapter 104, Environmental Quality
Review, can be made.
B. The presumption is that all of the information required in the
Town's application forms is necessary to satisfy the requirements of
this Section. However, it is recognized that each application is
unique, and therefore more or less information may be required
according to the needs of the particular case. The petitioner may
rely on the recommendations of the Planning Director as to
whether more or less information should be submitted with the
application.
C. An application not considered complete within six months after the
initial date of submittal shall be considered null and void, except
where such application is part of an ongoing SEQR review.
4-4-5. Staff Consultation After Application Submitted.
A. Upon determination of a complete application, the Planning
Director shall review the application and confer with the petitioner
to ensure that the petitioner understands the requirements of these
Regulations; has submitted all of the information that the petitioner
is required to submit; and that the application represents precisely
and completely what the petitioner proposes to do.
B. Once the petitioner indicates that the application is as complete as
the petitioner intends to make it, the application shall be
distributed to the appropriate departments, officials and boards.
However, if the Planning Director finds that the application remains
incomplete, a recommendation to deny the application on that basis
shall be provided to the Planning Board.
4-4-6. Notice and Public Hearings.
A. Required Hearing.
(1) Preliminary Plat. Within 62 days after the receipt of a
preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be advertised at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at
least five days before such hearing.
(2) Final Plat.
(a) No public hearing shall be required for review of a minor
subdivision, or review of a final plat of a major subdivision
provided that such plat is in substantial agreement with
the approved preliminary plat.
(b) In the event that the Planning Director determines that the
final plat of a major subdivision is not in substantial
agreement with the approved preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 62 days
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:1121
§ 4-5. Minor Subdivision Submission Requirements
A minor plat shall be submitted and reviewed consistent with the
requirements for a preliminary plat.
from the time of submission of the subdivision for final plat
approval. The hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town at least five days before
such hearing.
4-4-7.Summary of Review and Approval Authority. The following table
summarizes review and approval authority under these Regulations.
Review Procedure Planning Director Planning Board
Minor Subdivision
Sketch Plan Not Required Not Required
Preliminary Recommendation Decision*
Final Recommendation Decision
Major Subdivision
Sketch Plan† Recommendation Decision*
Preliminary Recommendation Decision*
Final Recommendation Decision
* = Public hearing required
† = The Planning Director may waive the requirement for a sketch
plan for a major subdivision of five to nine lots.
§ 4-4 AMHERST CODE § 4-5
1:1122
§ 4-6. Major Subdivision Submission Requirements
4-6-1. Sketch Plan Review.
A. Intent. The sketch plan is not intended to be recorded. Its purpose
is to show graphically all facts needed to enable the Planning Board
and other Town departments to determine whether the proposed
layout of land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of
public interest.
B. Staff Review.
(1) Copies of the sketch plan shall be referred to the Building,
Highway and Engineering Departments, the Traffic and Safety
Committee, the Assessor, the Recreation Commission, and any
other agencies the Planning Director deems appropriate.
(2) Within 30 days of determination of completeness, each agency
shall review the application and notify the Planning Board in
writing of its comments or recommendations.
C. Planning Board Final Action.
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:1123
(1) Within 62 days from the date that the sketch plan is deemed
complete, or such extension as mutually agreed upon, the
Planning Board shall meet and approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove the sketch plan taking into account
the criteria in § 4-6-1D.
(2) If the Planning Board disapproves, it shall advise the petitioner
in writing of the reasons for disapproval and the specific
changes, if any, it shall require in the layout, and the character
and extent of required improvements and land reservations as
a prerequisite to the approval of the sketch plan.
(3) In approving the subdivision sketch plan, the Planning Board
may impose such conditions as it deems necessary and
consistent with the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan,
and other laws.
D. Sketch Plan Review Criteria.
(1) The Planning Board shall review the sketch, considering the
requirements of these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance,
Comprehensive Plan, comments of the reviewing agencies and
the best design use of the land being subdivided.
(2) In evaluating any sketch plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the following:
(a) The arrangement, location and width of streets and their
relation to the topography of the land;
(b) Vegetation, wetlands, special flood hazard area/base flood
elevation;
(c) Sewage disposal, drainage requirements, water needs;
(d) Lot sizes and arrangement;
(e) Soil conditions;
(f) Recreation facilities and open spaces;
(g) Such other concerns as may be appropriate including new
streets or street extensions; and
(h) Policies and recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
4-6-2. Preliminary Plat Review.
A. Submittal of Preliminary Plat and Improvement Plans.
Following approval of the sketch plan, the petitioner shall prepare
a preliminary plat of a subdivision, together with improvement
plans and other supplementary material as specified in these
Regulations. This plat shall cover the entire tract of land
§ 4-6 AMHERST CODE § 4-6
1:1124
concerned, or portion thereof, unless the Planning Board has
authorized a lesser area.
B. Staff Review of Preliminary Plat.
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application in accordance with
§ 4-4-4, copies of the preliminary plat and other
supplementary material shall be referred to the Building,
Highway and Engineering Departments, the Traffic and Safety
Committee, and any other agencies the Planning Director
deems appropriate.
(2) Within 30 days of determination of completeness, each agency
shall review the application and notify the Planning Board in
writing of its comments or recommendations.
C. Planning Board Final Action. Within 62 days or two consecutive
Planning Board meetings after determination of completeness, the
Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the preliminary plat, taking into account the criteria in
§ 4-6-2D.
D. Preliminary Plat Review Criteria. In reviewing the preliminary
plat, the Planning Board may impose conditions consistent with the
intent and purpose of these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance,
Comprehensive Plan, sketch plan and other applicable laws. If the
Planning Board recommends disapproval, it shall state its reasons
in writing.
E. Limits of Approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute final approval of the plat, but rather shall be deemed the
approval of the design submitted on the preliminary plat as a basis
to the preparation of the final plat, which shall be submitted for
approval by the Planning Board and for recording in the Erie
County Clerk's office upon fulfillment of the requirements of these
Regulations and the conditions of the approval, if any.
F. Failure to Take Action. Unless an extension is mutually agreed
upon, in the event the Planning Board fails to take action on a
preliminary plat within the time prescribed herein, such plat shall
be deemed granted preliminary approval. A certificate of the Town
Clerk as to the date of submission and the failure to take action
within such prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall be
sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence of
approval required in these Regulations.
G. Zoning Ordinance. All town regulations, including the Town
Code, in effect at the time of preliminary plat approval shall apply
to the preparation and approval of the final plat.
H. Public Improvement Plans. Engineering drawings or plans for all
proposed improvements, including but not necessarily limited to
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:1125
streets, pedestrian pathways, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm
drainage sewers and systems, water system, etc., shall be
furnished to the Planning Board along with the preliminary plat.
I. Phasing Plan. If phasing of the subdivision is anticipated, a
conceptual phasing plan shall be submitted for review with the
preliminary plat application and used as a guide for submittal of the
final plat.
4-6-3. Final Plat Review.
A. Submittal of Final Plat. Within six months after approval by the
Planning Board of a preliminary plat, the petitioner shall submit the
final plat. The plat shall conform to the layout shown on the
preliminary plat and shall contain any conditions imposed by the
Planning Board during preliminary plat review.
B. Staff Review and Final Action.
(1) The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the final plat taking into account the criteria in
§ 4-6-3C.
(2) If the Planning Board disapproves the final plat, it shall state in
writing the reasons for disapproval.
(3) The petitioner shall have 180 days to satisfy the requirements
upon which the approval has been conditioned and obtain the
certification from the Planning Board. This period may be
extended by the Planning Board, if in its opinion the
circumstances warrant such extension.
(4) If the petitioner does not meet the conditions of approval
within 180 days or within the extension period provided by the
Planning Director, then the application shall be deemed
disapproved.
C. Final Plat Review Criteria. In evaluating any final plat, the
Planning Board shall consider the following:
(1) The application is complete and the information contained
within the application is correct and sufficient enough to allow
adequate review and final action.
(2) The final plat is determined to be consistent with an approved
preliminary plat. The petitioner must certify in writing that the
final plat is consistent with the preliminary plat. Any changes
to the final plat that are not consistent with the preliminary
plat must be identified in writing upon submittal of the final
plat application. Failure to disclose changes pursuant to this
section may result in the Planning Board declaring the final
plat null and void after giving the petitioner notice and an
opportunity to be heard on the matter.
§ 4-6 AMHERST CODE § 4-6
1:1126
(3) The final plat is consistent with any Town-approved
construction plans for any required or agreed improvements.
D. Failure to Take Action. In the event the Planning Board fails to
take action on a complete final subdivision plat application within
the time prescribed in New York State Town Law, such plat shall be
deemed approved, unless an extension has been mutually agreed
upon. A certificate of the Town Clerk as to the date of submission
and the failure to take action within such prescribed time shall be
issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of written
endorsement or other evidence of approval required in these
Regulations.
E. Phasing. Prior to granting approval of a final plat, the Planning
Board may permit the plat to be phased into two or more sections.
The Planning Board may stipulate such requirements as it deems
necessary to insure the orderly development of the plat be
completed. Conditional or final approval of the phases of a final plat
shall be granted concurrently with conditional or final approval of
the plat. Each phase shall comply with all applicable provisions of
§ 3-2, Streets.
F. Filing of Plat.
(1) The issuance of the following shall constitute final approval of
a final plat:
(a) The signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board on
the final plat; or
(b) The certificate of the Amherst Town Clerk as to the date of
the submission of the final plat and the failure of the
Planning Board to take action thereon within the time
prescribed.
(2) The plat shall expire 62 days from the date of the Chair's
signature constituting such approval of the final plat, or from
the date such certificate is issued, unless within such 62-day
period such plat or a section thereof shall have been duly filed
or recorded by the owner in the office of the County Clerk.
(3) The filing of a final plat shall be consistent with the phasing
plan approved in conjunction with the final plat.
G. Period of Exemption for Subdivision Plats. If a final plat or the
first phase thereof has been duly filed in the office of the County
Clerk, provisions of a change or amendment to the Town of
Amherst Zoning Ordinance which establish or increase side, rear or
front yard or setback requirements in excess of those applicable to
building plots under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in
effect at the time of the filing of the said subdivision plat or first
section thereof, shall not, for a period of three years after the filing
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:1127
of the subdivision plat or first section thereof, be applicable to or
in any way affect any of the lots shown and delineated on such
subdivision plat.
H. Modifications to Plat.
(1) No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be
made in any final plat after approval has been given by the
Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the
plat is resubmitted to the Planning Director and the Director
deems such modifications to be minor in accordance with (2)
below.
(2) Provided the number of lots remains the same, the moving of
lot lines and the rearrangement of easements shall be
considered a minor modification, subject to the approval of the
Planning Director, provided that the resulting lots meet the
minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and all other
applicable regulations for the subject parcel. All other
modifications shall be deemed major modifications and shall
require resubmission of a preliminary plat.
(3) In the event that any such plat is recorded without complying
with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and
void, and the Director shall institute proceedings to have the
plat stricken from the records of the County Clerk.
I. Approval Not Acceptance.
(1) If any plat contains public streets, thoroughfares or easements
which are to be dedicated as such, the approval of the plat
shall not constitute an acceptance by the Town of Amherst of
the improvements constructed or installed in the subdivision,
irrespective of any acts by an officer, agent or employee of the
Town with respect to such improvements.
(2) The acceptance of such improvements shall be made only by
the adoption of a resolution by the Town Board after there has
been filed with the Town Clerk a certificate by the Town
Engineer certifying that all improvements required to be
constructed or installed in or upon such street, thoroughfares
and easements in connection with the approval of the plat or
subdivision by the Planning Board have been fully completed
and the construction or installation thereof has been approved
by the Town Engineer. All accepted easements shall be filed
with the plat and copies sent to the Planning, Engineering, and
Highway Departments.
J. Status of Streets on a Subdivision Plat. Every street shown on a
plat filed or recorded in the office of the County Clerk shall be
deemed to be a private street until such time as it has been formally
offered to the Town and formally dedicated as a public street, or
§ 4-6 AMHERST CODE § 4-6
1:1128
§ 4-7. Waivers
§ 4-8. Text Amendments
This Local Law may, from time to time, be revised, modified, or amended.
§ 4-9. Appeal
§ 4-10. Enforcement
alternatively until it has been accepted by the Town for use as a
public street.
K. Protective Covenants. All protective covenants and deed
restrictions required by the Planning Board as a condition of
approval in form for recording shall be approved, by the Town
Attorney prior to filing of the final plat with the County Clerk.
A. Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with these Regulations, it may waive these
Regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that any such adjustment shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations.
B. In granting any adjustment, the Planning Board shall attach such
conditions as are, in its judgment, necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so adjusted.
C. Applications for waivers shall be made upon the filing of the preliminary
plat.
D. Any waivers, if known, should be included during sketch plan review.
4-9-1. Appeal of decisions made under these Subdivision Regulations by the
Town Board, Planning Board, Planning Director, Commission of
Building or Town Engineer shall be heard in accordance with Article 78
of the New York Civil Practice and Law Rules.
4-10-1.Penalties for Violation. Any person who violates any provision of
this Local Law or any regulation adopted hereunder is guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
4-10-2. Administrative Procedures for Enforcement. [Amended
3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
A. General Provisions. This local law shall be interpreted by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer with the assistance of the Town
Engineer, Commissioner of Building, Planning Director, the Town
Clerk and other agencies as the Town Board shall direct and shall
be enforced by the Town Engineer and Commissioner of Building.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:1129
Those departments and agencies shall be provided with the
assistance of such persons as the Town Board may direct.
B. Records and Reports. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
keep, or cause to be kept, a record in his or her Department
suitably indexed in regard to any decision or determination
reached by him or her in connection with the interpretation or
enforcement of these Regulations.
§ 4-10 AMHERST CODE § 4-10
1:1130
PART 5
PROVISION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 5-1. Installation of Improvements
The petitioner, at his or her own expense, shall provide (design, construct,
install) the improvements required by these Regulations. All improvements
shall meet Town standards and specifications as found in the Town
Specifications for Public and Private Improvements.
§ 5-2. Performance Bond
§ 5-3. Approval of Plans
5-2-1. There may be cases when, due to weather conditions or other factors
beyond the control of the petitioner (exclusive of financial hardship) it
would be unreasonable to require the petitioner to comply with all of
the requirements of these Regulations prior to commencing the
intended use of the property or occupying any buildings. In these cases,
the Commissioner of Building may authorize commencement of the
intended use or occupancy of buildings if the permit recipient provides
a performance bond or other security of up to 125 percent of the cost of
the remaining improvement to ensure that all subdivision regulations
will be fulfilled within not more than three years.
5-2-2. In the event that any required improvements have not been installed
in accordance with these Regulations within the term of the
performance bond, the Town Board may declare the bond to be in
default and collect the sum remaining payable. Upon the receipt of the
proceeds of the bond, the Town shall install such improvements as are
covered by the bond and as commensurate with the extent of building
development that has taken place in the subdivision but not exceeding
in cost the amount of such proceeds.
5-3-1. Public and Private Improvement Permit. No improvement shall be
constructed or installed without the prior approval of plans by the Town
Board and the Town Engineer, who shall issue Public and Private
Improvement Permits, as appropriate, following approval of the final
plat or posting of a performance bond in accordance with § 5-2.
5-3-2. Construction Contracts. Prior to the start of construction of any
required improvements, the petitioner shall furnish to the Town
Engineer a copy of the specifications included in any contract entered
into by the petitioner for such construction.
5-3-3. Modification of Design of Improvements. If at any time before or
during the construction of the required public improvements it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer that unforeseen
conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or
design of such required improvements, the Town Engineer, in
consultation with the Highway Superintendent, may authorize such
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:1131
§ 5-4. Inspection of Improvements
§ 5-5. Maintenance Bond
The required improvements shall not be considered to be completed until
the installation of the improvements has been approved and certified by
the Town Engineer and a final as-built map has been submitted indicating
the location of monuments marking all underground utilities as actually
modifications upon written request of the petitioner, provided such
modifications are within the spirit and intent of the approved final plat
approval and do not amount to the waiver or substantial alteration
of the function of any improvement required by the Town. The Town
Engineer shall issue any authorization under this Section in writing and
shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the Planning Director.
5-4-1. Supervision of Construction. The construction of all required
improvements shall be supervised by a registered professional engineer
employed by the Town of Amherst at the expense of the petitioner. After
completion of construction, the supervising engineer shall certify to the
Town Engineer that all required improvements have been constructed
as required and approved by the Board or as such requirements have
been modified by the Town Engineer. In addition, after completion of
construction, the supervising engineer shall submit a certified plan
showing all improvements as constructed, in the same detail as
required for the Public and Private Improvement Permit drawings.
5-4-2. Inspection by the Town. The Town Engineer or designee shall
inspect required improvements during construction to assure their
satisfactory completion.
5-4-3. Notification. The petitioner shall notify the Town at least five days
prior to the start of construction or installation of any improvement and
at least 24 hours prior to the completion of such improvements.
5-4-4. Fees. All costs of inspection shall be charged to the petitioner at the
issuance of a Public and Private Improvement Permit.
5-4-5.Petitioner Responsible.
A. If the Town Engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications filed by the petitioner,
he or she shall so report to the Town Board, Commissioner of
Building, Zoning Enforcement Officer and Planning Board. The
Town Board shall then notify the petitioner and instruct the
petitioner to correct any discrepancies. [Amended 3-4-2019 by
L.L. No. 7-2019]
B. Failure to reject improvements shall not, in any way, prevent later
rejection when such defects are discovered, or obligate the
governing body to final acceptance.
§ 5-3 AMHERST CODE § 5-5
1:1132
installed. In addition, a two-year maintenance bond for all required
improvements shall be submitted prior to acceptance of all the
improvements by the Town Engineer and issuance of a Public and Private
Improvement Permit. A maintenance bond shall be in the amount of 25
percent of the construction cost for each utility.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:1133
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2004 3-22-2004 Administration of
government amendment
(repealing Finance
Department)
Ch. 4
2-2004 4-12-2004 Tax exemption for
persons over 65
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
3-2004 3-15-2004 Compensation of elected
officials
Ch. 10, Art. I
4-2004 12-23-2004 Moratorium on land use
approvals for proposed
Gramercy Park Estates
subdivision
NCM
1-2005 Moratorium on issuance
of land use permits with
regard to commercial
development
NCM
2-2005 5-4-2005 Reimbursement of expert
expenses
Ch. 108
3-2005 5-16-2005 Building construction
administration
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
4-2005 6-28-2005 Extension of temporary
stay on land use
approvals
NCM
5-2005 7-18-2005 Minority- and womenowned
business
utilization commitment
Ch. 32
6-2005 8-15-2005 Construction of public
improvements
amendment
Ch. 125
7-2005 9-19-2005 Rodent control Ch. 169, Art. II
8-2005 10-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 186
§ 5-5 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1134
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2005 10-24-2005 Registration of sex
offenders
Ch. 163
10-2005 11-21-2005 Building construction
administration
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
11-2005 12-5-2005 Blasting and explosives
amendment
Ch. 78
12-2005 12-5-2005 Curb cut procedures and
standards
Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2006
13-2005 12-19-2005 Extension of temporary
stay on land use
approvals for proposed
Gramercy Park Estates
subdivision
NCM
14-2005 12-19-2005 Building construction
administration
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
1-2006 2-6-2006 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 6-2006
2-2006 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 6-2006
3-2006 3-20-2006 Curb cuts Ch. 95
4-2006 4-24-2006 Waste management
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
5-2006 4-24-2006 Veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
6-2006 5-1-2006 Administration of
government amendment;
game rooms amendment;
building construction
administration
amendment; excavations
amendment;
reimbursement of expert
fees amendment; house
trailers amendment;
property maintenance
amendment; trees
amendment; zoning
Chs. 4; 68, Art. II;
83 (repealed by
L.L. No. 1-2009);
106; 108; 122;
151; 179; 203
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1135
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2006 6-19-2006 Extension of temporary
stay on land use
approvals for proposed
Gramercy Park Estates
subdivision
NCM
8-2006 6-19-2006 Residency requirements Ch. 45
9-2006 8-7-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
10-2006 8-21-2006 Term limits Ch. 55
11-2006 9-6-2006 Building construction
administration
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
12-2006 11-20-2006 Wild waterfowl Ch. 199
13-2006 12-18-2006 Extension of temporary
stay on land use
approvals for proposed
Gramercy Park Estates
subdivision
NCM
1-2007 1-16-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2-2007 1-16-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
3-2007 3-19-2007 Tax bill enclosures Ch. 56
4-2007 4-2-2007 Building construction
administration
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
5-2007 4-16-2007 Administration of
government amendment;
waste management
amendment
Chs. 4; 169, Art. I
6-2007 5-7-2007 Assessment of converted
condominium units
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. VII
7-2007 7-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
8-2007 8-6-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2007 8-6-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2007 8-20-2007 Moratorium on public
improvement permits and
building permits in
certain subdivisions
NCM
11-2007 9-17-2007 Stormwater and erosion
control; illicit discharges;
watercourses repealer
Chs. 172; 194
(reference only)
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1136
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2007 10-1-2007 Assessment exemption for
certain residential
property rehabilitation
Ch. 175, Art. IX
13-2007 10-1-2007 Committee on Disabilities Ch. 14A
14-2007 10-1-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
17-2007 12-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 186
1-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
2-2008 Controlled access
highways
Ch. 120
3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
4-2008 4-28-2008 Veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
5-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2008 6-2-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2008 7-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
10-2008 7-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
11-2008 7-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2008 7-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2008 9-15-2008 Stormwater and erosion
control; illicit discharges
amendment
Ch. 172
14-2008 11-3-2008 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 14
15-2008 11-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-2008 12-1-2008 Alarms amendment Ch. 65
1-2009 1-20-2009 Building construction
administration
Ch. 83
2-2009 2-2-2009 Subdivision of land Ch. 204
3-2009 2-2-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-2009 3-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2009 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1137
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2009 6-1-2009 Registration of sex
offenders amendment
Ch. 163
7-2009 7-6-2009 Trespassing repealer Ch. 181 (reference
only)
8-2009 6-15-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2009 5-18-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2009 6-15-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-2009 8-3-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2009 8-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
13-2009 8-17-2009 Use of wireless handsets
to compose, read or send
text messages while
operating motor vehicles
Preempted by
state law
14-2009 9-21-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
15-2009 9-21-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-2009 10-19-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
17-2009 11-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
18-2009 11-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-2009 12-7-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
20-2009 12-7-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2009 12-7-2009 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
22-2009 4-6-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2010 1-19-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2010 4-12-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
3-2010 4-26-2010 Veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
4-2010 4-26-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2010 4-12-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2010 5-17-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2010 5-17-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2010 5-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
9-2010 7-6-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
10-2010 5-17-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-2010 6-7-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2010 5-3-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1138
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2010 8-2-2010 Retirement Incentive
Program
NCM
14-2010 9-7-2010 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
15-2010 4-12-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
16-2010 11-11-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 99
17-2010 Town Board Ch. 56A
18-2010 11-1-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-2010 (State
L.L. No.
26-2012)
12-20-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
20-2010 (State
L.L. No.
27-2012)
12-20-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2010 (State
L.L. No.
28-2012)
Zoning Map amendment NCM
22-2010 (State
L.L. No.
29-2012)
Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2011 3-21-2011 Dogs amendment Ch. 99
2-2011 3-21-2011 Landscapers amendment Ch. 130
3-2011 3-21-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 151
4-2011 3-21-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2011 3-21-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2011 4-11-2011 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
7-2011 4-11-2011 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
8-2011 4-11-2011 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
9-2011 4-11-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2011 (State
L.L. No.
1-2012)
4-11-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1139
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-2011 (State
L.L. No.
2-2012)
5-2-2011 Noise amendment Ch. 138
12-2011 (State
L.L. No.
3-2012)
5-2-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2011 (State
L.L. No.
4-2012)
5-16-2011 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
14-2011 (State
L.L. No.
5-2012)
8-16-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2011 (State
L.L. No.
6-2012)
6-6-2011 Dogs amendment Ch. 99
16-2011 (State
L.L. No.
7-2012)
6-6-2011 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
17-2011 (State
L.L. No.
8-2012)
8-1-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
18-2011 (State
L.L. No.
9-2012)
6-20-2011 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 121
19-2011 (State
L.L. No.
10-2012)
8-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
20-2011 (State
L.L. No.
11-2012)
8-1-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2011 (State
L.L. No.
12-2012)
9-26-2011 Open burning Ch. 36
22-2011 (State
L.L. No.
13-2012)
9-26-2011 Snowplowing amendment Ch. 166
23-2011 (State
L.L. No.
14-2012)
10-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
24-2011 (State
L.L. No.
15-2012)
10-17-2011 Dogs amendment Ch. 99
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1140
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
25-2011 (State
L.L. No.
16-2012)
10-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
26-2011 (State
L.L. No.
17-2012)
10-17-2011 Industrial and commercial
tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. V
27-2011 (State
L.L. No.
18-2012)
10-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
28-2011 (State
L.L. No.
19-2012)
12-12-2011 Arts and Culture in Public
Places Board amendment
Ch. 6
29-2011 (State
L.L. No.
20-2012)
12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
30-2011 (State
L.L. No.
21-2012)
12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
31-2011 (State
L.L. No.
22-2012)
12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
32-2011 (State
L.L. No.
23-2012)
12-19-2011 Snowplowing amendment Ch. 166
33-2011 (State
L.L. No.
24-2012)
12-12-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
34-2011 (State
L.L. No.
25-2012)
12-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
1-2012 (State
L.L. No.
30-2012)
2-6-2012 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
2-2012 (State
L.L. No.
31-2012)
2-27-2012 Waste management
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
3-2012 (State
L.L. No.
32-2012)
2-27-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-2012 (State
L.L. No.
33-2012)
2-27-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1141
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2012 (State
L.L. No.
34-2012)
3-19-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2012 (State
L.L. No.
35-2012)
4-23-2012 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 151
7-2012 (State
L.L. No.
36-2012)
5-7-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2012 (State
L.L. No.
37-2012)
5-7-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2012 (State
L.L. No.
38-2012)
5-7-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2012 (State
L.L. No.
39-2012)
5-21-2012 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
11-2012 (State
L.L. No.
40-2012)
5-21-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2012 (State
L.L. No.
41-2012)
6-4-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2012 (State
L.L. No.
42-2012)
6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
14-2012 (State
L.L. No.
43-2012)
6-18-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2012 (State
L.L. No.
44-2012)
8-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
16-2012 (State
L.L. No.
45-2012)
10-15-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
17-2012 (State
L.L. No.
46-2012)
11-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
18-2012 (State
L.L. No.
47-2012)
11-5-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1142
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2012 (State
L.L. No.
48-2012)
11-5-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
20-2012 (State
L.L. No.
49-2012)
11-19-2012 Relief of condition of
rezoning
NCM
21-2012 (State
L.L. No.
50-2012)
11-19-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
22-2012 (State
L.L. No.
51-2012)
12-17-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
23-2012 (State
L.L. No.
52-2012)
12-17-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2013 1-7-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2013 1-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
3-2013 2-4-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-2013 2-25-2013 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
5-2013 3-11-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2013 4-8-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2013 4-8-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2013 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
9-2013 5-20-2013 Peddling, soliciting,
transient businesses and
mobile food vending
amendment
Ch. 148
10-2013 6-3-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-2013 6-3-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2013 7-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2013 7-22-2013 Grant of relief of rezoning
condition
NCM
14-2013 7-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2013 7-22-2013 Grant of relief of rezoning
condition
NCM
16-2013 7-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
17-2013 9-9-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1143
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2013 9-9-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-2013 9-23-2013 Trees amendment Ch. 179
20-2013 11-4-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2013 11-4-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
22-2013 12-16-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
23-2013 12-16-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2014 1-21-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2014 2-3-2014 Purchasing Ch. 40
3-2014 2-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
4-2014 2-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
5-2014 2-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
6-2014 2-24-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2014 4-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
8-2014 4-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
9-2014 8-1-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2014 4-28-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-2014 5-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
12-2014 5-12-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2014 5-12-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
14-2014 5-12-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2014 6-2-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-2014 6-2-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
17-2014 6-2-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
18-2014 6-16-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-2014 6-16-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
20-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
22-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
23-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
24-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
25-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
26-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
27-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
28-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
29-2014 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1144
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-2014 7-21-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 138
31-2014 7-21-2014 Minority- and womenowned
business
utilization commitment
amendment
Ch. 32
32-2014 9-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
33-2014 9-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
34-2014 9-8-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
35-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
36-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
37-2014 10-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
38-2014 11-3-2014 Secondhand dealers Ch. 157
39-2014 11-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
40-2014 11-17-2014 Sewers: wastewater
collection and treatment
amendment
Ch. 160, Part 1
41-2014 11-17-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2015 2-9-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2015 2-9-2015 Grant of relief of
condition of development
plan amendment
NCM
3-2015 2-9-2015 Grant of relief of rezoning
condition
NCM
4-2015 2-23-2015 Solid waste: composting Ch. 169, Art. III
5-2015 2-23-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2015 3-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2015 3-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2015 5-4-2015 Alarms amendment Ch. 65
9-2015 5-4-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2015 5-4-2015 Grant of relief of rezoning
conditions
NCM
11-2015 5-18-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2015 5-18-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-2015 5-18-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
14-2015 6-1-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2015 6-1-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-2015 6-1-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1145
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2015 6-1-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
18-2015 6-15-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-2015 7-20-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
20-2015 7-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
21-2015 9-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
22-2015 10-19-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
23-2015 11-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
24-2015 11-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
25-2015 12-7-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
26-2015 12-7-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
27-2015 12-7-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
28-2015 12-28-2015 Relieving conditions of
1964 rezoning of 1891,
1893 Niagara Falls
Boulevard
NCM
29-2015 12-28-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2016 1-4-2016 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
2-2016 2-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
3-2016 2-8-2016 Waste management
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
4-2016 2-8-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2016 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
6-2016 3-7-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2016 5-2-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2016 6-6-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2016 6-20-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2016 9-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
11-2016 9-6-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-2016 10-10-2016 Citizens' advisory
committees amendment
Ch. 8
13-2016 10-10-2016 Trees amendment Ch. 179
14-2016 11-1-2016 Committee on Disabilities
amendment
Ch. 14A
15-2016 12-5-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1146
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2017 1-3-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2-2017 1-17-2017 Emergency responder
radio coverage
Ch. 103
3-2017 1-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-2017 1-17-2017
(readopted
11-20-2017)
Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2017 3-6-2017 Amusements:
entertainments, shows
and amusements
amendment; game rooms
amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I; Ch.
68, Art. II
6-2017 3-6-2017 Building construction
administration
amendment
Ch. 83
7-2017 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
8-2017 3-6-2017 Grant of relief of rezoning
condition
NCM
9-2017 3-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
10-2017 3-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-2017 4-3-2017 Taxation: real property
exemption for persons
over sixty-five amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
12-2017 4-3-2017 Solid waste: waste
management amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
13-2017 6-5-2017 Social host liability Ch. 167
14-2017 6-5-2017 Moratorium on wireless
telecommunications
towers, facilities and
antennae in public rightof-
way
NCM
15-2017 6-19-2017 Sewers: wastewater
collection and treatment
amendment
Ch. 160, Part 1
16-2017 6-19-2017 Solid waste: waste
management amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
Res. No.
2017-762
6-19-2017 Sewers: wastewater
collection and treatment
amendment
Ch. 160, Part 1
17-2017 7-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1147
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2017 7-17-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
19-2017 9-18-2017 Reimbursement of expert
fees amendment
Ch. 108
20-2017 10-9-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
21-2017 10-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
22-2017 10-30-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
23-2017 11-20-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
24-2017 12-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 203
25-2017 12-11-2017 Administration of
government amendment;
compensation: elected
officials amendment;
employee suggestion
program amendment;
employee position
vacancy control plan
amendment
Ch. 4; Ch. 10, Art.
I; Ch. 12; Ch. 15
26-2017 12-11-2017 Alarms amendment Ch. 65
27-2017 12-11-2017 Extension of moratorium
on wireless
telecommunications
towers, facilities and
antennae in public rightof-
way
NCM
28-2017 12-11-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
29-2017 12-11-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
30-2017 12-11-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
31-2017 10-30-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2018 1-2-2018 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 19
2-2018 1-2-2018 Employee suggestion
program amendment
Ch. 12
3-2018 2-5-2018 Notification of defects
amendment
Ch. 139
4-2018 2-5-2018 Taxation: veterans
exemption amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
5-2018 3-5-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2018 3-19-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2018 3-19-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1148
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2018 4-16-2018 Alarms amendment Ch. 65
9-2018 4-16-2018 Adjudicatory proceedings Ch. 58
10-2018 5-16-2018 Historic Preservation
Amendment
Ch. 121
11-2018 5-16-2018 Municipal Opioid Cost
Recovery and Public
Nuisance
Ch. 153
12-2018 5-16-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
13-2018 5-16-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
14-2018 6-4-2018 Freedom of Information
Amendment
Ch. 22
15-2018 6-4-2018 Citizens' Advisory
Committees Amendment
Ch. 8
16-2018 6-4-2018 Public Nuisance
Abatement
Ch. 152
17-2018 6-4-2018 Mailbox Setback Ch. 140
18-2018 9-4-2018 Amusements:
Entertainments, Shows
and Amusements
Amendment; Game
Rooms Amendment
Ch. 68, Art. I; Ch.
68, Art. II
19-2018 10-1-2018 Taxation: Real Property
Exemption for Persons
Over Sixty-Five
Amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
20-2018 10-1-2018 Grant of Relief of
Rezoning Condition
NCM
21-2018 10-1-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
22-2018 10-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
23-2018 10-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
24-2018 10-29-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
25-2018 11-19-2018 Sewers: Wastewater
Collection and Treatment
Amendment
Ch. 160, Part 1
26-2018 12-10-2018 Zoning Map Amendment;
Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
NCM
27-2018 12-10-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
1-2019 2-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1149
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2019 2-4-2019 Licensing of Property
Managers
Ch. 43
3-2019 2-4-2019 Building Construction
Administration
Amendment
Ch. 83
4-2019 2-4-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
5-2019 2-8-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
6-2019 3-4-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
7-2019 3-4-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 204
8-2019 4-1-2019 Rental Unit Registration Ch. 44
9-2019 4-1-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 186
10-2019 5-20-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
11-2019 5-20-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
12-2019 5-20-2019 Notification of Defects
Amendment
Ch. 139
13-2019 6-3-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
14-2019 7-1-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203
15-2019 7-22-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
16-2019
8-19-2019 Animals: Dogs and
Harboring of
Animals
Amendment
Ch. 99, Art I 29
L.L. No.
17-2019
8-19-2019 Building
Construction
Administration
Amendment
Ch. 83 29
L.L. No.
18-2019
9-3-2019 Design Advisory
Board
Ch. 5 29
L.L. No.
19-2019
10-21-2019 Clerk Amendment Ch. 9 29
L.L. No.
20-2019
10-28-2019 Alarms Amendment Ch. 65 29
L.L. No.
21-2019
12-2-2019 Animals: Cats Ch. 99, Art.
II
29
§ DL-1 AMHERST CODE § DL-1
1:1150
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
22-2019
12-16-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 203 29
L.L. No.
23-2019
12-16-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 29
L.L. No.
1-2020
2-24-2020 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 4 29
L.L. No.
2-2020
2-24-2020 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 29
L.L. No.
3-2020
3-9-2020 Trees Amendment Ch. 179 29
L.L. No.
4-2020
3-9-2020 Freedom of
Information
Amendment
Ch. 22 29
L.L. No.
5-2020
3-9-2020 Grant of Relief of
Rezoning Condition
NCM 29
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1151