Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Bronxville, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 310, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the Village of Bronxville," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Bronxville" to any other
local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference
shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article
number or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Bronxville in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Bronxville prior to the effective
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Bronxville or any penalty, punishment pr forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of
Bronxville.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of
Bronxville.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Bronxville providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Bronxville or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Bronxville appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Bronxville or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the village.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 2-14-2000.
§ 1-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 1-5
1:4
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Bronxville and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Bronxville by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Village of Bronxville, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of said Village , Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Bronxville" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Bronxville required to be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Bronxville or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Bronxville to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Bronxville, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B, C, D and E
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. All specific fee amounts have been removed from the text of the
chapters and replaced by the phrase "as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees." A Fees Schedule has been included
in Chapter A321 of the Code.
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Deputy Treasurer" is hereby amended to read to "Treasurer."
(2) "Dog Control Officer" is hereby amended to read "Animal Control
Officer."
D. Statutory references. Statutory references throughout the Code are
hereby updated accordingly.
E. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
§ 1-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Bronxville, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article 1, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11E, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article 1. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
village offices.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Terminology
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 1, §§ 1.2 and 1.3, of the 1981 Code]
§ 1-14. Definitions.
A. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR or VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village
Administrator of the village established pursuant to Chapter 61 of this
Code.
ASSESSOR or VILLAGE ASSESSOR — The chief assessing official of the
village appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board.
BOARD OF APPEALS or ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of
Appeals of the village established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
310 of this Code and § 7-712 of the Village Law.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD or BOARD — The Board of
Trustees of the village.
BUDGET OFFICER — The Village Administrator who shall perform the
duties established in Article 5 of the Village Law.
CLERK or VILLAGE CLERK — The chief clerical official of the village
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board.
CODE — Unless otherwise specifically qualified, means the Village of
Bronxville Code of 2000, as it may be amended from time to time.
COUNSEL or VILLAGE COUNSEL — The chief legal advisor of the
village appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board.
COUNTY — The County of Westchester in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Westchester in
the State of New York.
DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE — The Committee established pursuant
to Chapter 310 of this Code.
DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU — The official
appointed by the Village Justice to be in charge of the Village of
Bronxville Traffic Violations Bureau.
DIRECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES or SEALER OF WEIGHTS
AND MEASURES — The Director of Weights and Measures of the
County of Westchester in the State of New York.
ENGINEER or VILLAGE ENGINEER — The Superintendent of Public
Works, unless some other person shall have been appointed to such a
position by the village.[Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
FIRE CHIEF or CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Chief
of the Eastchester Fire Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The official who serves as the Health Officer of
the village.
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Library Board of Trustees of
the village appointed pursuant to § 255 of the Education Law.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the village.
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with another, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the village established
pursuant to Chapter 310 of this Code and § 7-718 of the Village Law.
POLICE CHIEF or CHIEF OF POLICE — The Police Chief of the village
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board.
RECREATION COUNCIL — The Bronxville Recreation Council of the
village.
REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS — The Registrar of Vital Statistics
of the village appointed pursuant to § 4121, Subdivision 3, of the Public
Health Law.
SPECIAL POLICE COUNSEL — The attorney retained by the village to
prosecute violations in the Village Court.
STATE — The State of New York.
SUPERINTENDENT OF BUILDINGS — The enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to § 112-5 of this Code to administer and enforce all
laws, rules and regulations pertaining to construction, use and location
of buildings within the village.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The official appointed by
the Mayor and approved by the Board who is in charge of the
Department of Public Works in the village.[Amended 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 2-2000]
TENANT — A person occupying real property under an oral or written
lease or who is in possession of real property under the actual or tacit
consent of the owner. Whenever a person, not the owner, occupies real
property, it shall be presumed that he or she occupies the same as a
tenant.
TREASURER or VILLAGE TREASURER — The chief fiscal officer of the
village appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board.
TRUSTEE — A member of the Board of Trustees of the village.
§ 1-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 1-14
1:10
§ 1-15. Rules of construction.
VILLAGE, THIS VILLAGE or VILLAGE OF BRONXVILLE — The
Incorporated Village of Bronxville in the State of New York.
VILLAGE LAW — The Village Law of the State of New York.
B. Other words. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise
specifically defined shall be construed as prescribed in the General
Construction Law or, if not defined therein, in the manner they are
normally used unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise;
but words that have acquired a technical meaning in law and are so
used shall be construed and understood in accordance with such
meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11
Chapter 7
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 92.
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Multiple dwelling maintenance — See Ch.
192.
Oil burning equipment — See Ch. 200.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Plumbers and electricians — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Trees, shrubs and plants — See Ch. 282.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 7-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Appearance Tickets
Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 7-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize certain public servants of the
Village of Bronxville to issue appearance tickets pursuant to Section 150.20
of the Criminal Procedure Law and Paragraph (a) of Subdivision 4 of Section
10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law in order to more effectively administer
and enforce certain provisions of the Village of Bronxville Code and state
statutes.
§ 7-3. Authority to issue.
The following public servants are hereby authorized and empowered to
issue and serve appearance tickets, provided that the issuance thereof is
made pursuant to any state statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation
relating to parking, licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention
and safety, health and sanitation and building, zoning and planning:
A. Superintendent of Buildings.
B. Superintendent of Public Works.
C. Dog Control Officer.
D. Fire Chief.
E. Parking Enforcement Officers.
§ 1-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 7-4
7:12
§ 7-4. Issuance of appearance tickets.
Any of the above public servants in the performance of their duties may
issue and serve an appearance ticket pursuant to Subdivision 3 of Section
150.20 of Criminal Procedure Law when he or she has reasonable cause
to believe that a person has committed a crime or has committed a petty
offense, as defined in the Criminal Procedure Law, in his or her presence
relating to any of the following subjects:
§ 7-5. Form of appearance ticket.
Every appearance ticket that is issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall include the following:
A. Superintendent of Buildings.
(1) Chapter 112, entitled "Building Construction."
(2) Chapter 192, entitled "Multiple Dwelling Maintenance."
(3) Chapter 222, entitled "Plumbers and Electricians."
(4) Chapter 200, entitled "Oil Burning Equipment."
(5) Chapter 310, entitled "Zoning."
(6) Chapter 210, entitled "Peace and Good Order." [Added 5-13-1996
by L.L. No. 3-1996]
B. Superintendent of Public Works.
(1) Chapter 260, entitled "Streets and Sidewalks."
(2) Chapter 282, entitled "Trees, Shrubs and Plants."
(3) Chapter 252, entitled "Solid Waste."
(4) Chapter 210, entitled "Peace and Good Order." [Added 5-13-1996
by L.L. No. 3-1996]
C. Dog Control Officer.
(1) Chapter 92, entitled "Animals."
D. Fire Chief.
(1) Chapter 150, entitled "Fire Prevention."
E. Parking Enforcement Officers.
(1) Chapter 290, entitled "Vehicles and Traffic," and nonmoving
violations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
F. Any other state statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation the
public servant is required or authorized to enforce.
§ 7-4 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 7-5
7:13
Chapter 15
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics, Code of — See Ch. 21.
§ 15-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Bronxville from claims which may be
made against them in their individual capacities for actions taken while in
the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting this
chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New York has enacted
similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its employees and
further finds that such security is also required for local employees. By
enactment of this chapter, the Board of Trustees does not intend to abrogate
or otherwise limit any existing right or responsibility of the Village or its
employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense. It is solely the
intent of this chapter to provide similar coverage for local employees as is
presently provided for state employees, so as to continue to attract qualified
individuals to local government service.
§ 15-2. Application of Public Officers Law.
The full benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New York
are hereby conferred upon all of the employees of the Village of Bronxville,
and the Village of Bronxville shall be liable for all of the costs incurred
under that section, as well as the costs incurred under § 15-4 hereof. All
such benefits shall supplement, and be available in addition to, defense or
indemnification protection conferred by any other enactment.
A. Name and address of party to whom the appearance ticket is issued,
when known.
B. Citation of law and appropriate section or sections allegedly violated.
C. Place and date of alleged violation.
D. Place, date and time and name of court that the party is to appear in
court.
E. Date of issuance of appearance ticket.
F. Title and signature of issuing officer.
§ 7-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 15-3
15:14
§ 15-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Village of Bronxville, whether or not
compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee or his/her estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
VILLAGE — The Village of Bronxville, its departments and agencies.
§ 15-4. Obligation of Village to provide for defense.
Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 15-8, the Village
shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or
proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or
omission which occurred, or allegedly occurred, while the employee was
acting within the scope of his/her public employment or duties or which is
brought to enforce a provision of § 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United
States Code, as the same may, from time to time, be amended. This duty to
provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding
is brought by or on behalf of the Village of Bronxville.
§ 15-5. Obligation of Village to provide for indemnification.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in a state or
federal court, including a judgment for punitive or exemplary damages,
fines or penalties, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim,
provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or claim
arose occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his/
her public employment or duties; provided, further, that, in the case of a
settlement, the duty to indemnify and save harmless shall be
conditioned upon the approval of the amount of settlement by the
Village. The duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
section shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from
intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee
and, in the case of punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties,
shall be subject to the further provisions of Subsection D of this § 15-5.
B. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any costs, attorneys' fees, damages, fines or penalties which
may be imposed by reason of a judgment that an employee acting
within the scope of his/her public employment or duties has, without
willfulness or intent on his/her part, violated a prior order, judgment,
consent decree or stipulation of settlement entered in any civil action or
proceeding of this state or of the United States.
§ 15-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 15-5
15:15
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of a claim, as provided for in Subsections A and B above, the
employee shall serve a copy of such judgment or settlement, personally
or by certified or registered mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or
settlement, upon the Village Administrator, and, if not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall be
certified for payment by such Village Administrator. If the Village
Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement shall
be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
D. The Village's duty to indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
case of punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties shall be
subject to compliance with the following procedure and such additional
procedures as may be established by the Village Attorney:
(1) Within 20 days of the employee's delivery of a summons, complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading containing a demand for
punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties, the Village
Attorney shall make findings and an initial determination whether
the employee should or should not be indemnified against any
punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties, based upon the
facts and circumstances then known to the Village Attorney, as
follows:
(a) Whether the employee's actions were or were not within the
scope of his/her employment.
(b) Whether the employee's actions were or were not reckless,
malicious, grossly negligent or otherwise outside of the
standards required for employees holding comparable
positions with the Village.
(c) Whether the employee's actions were or were not made in
good faith and in the best interest of the Village.
(d) Whether the employee did or did not willfully violate a clearly
established provision of law or Village policy.
(2) In the event that the Village Attorney is a named defendant in an
action or proceeding or cannot serve for any other reason, the
Village Administrator shall appoint other counsel to serve instead
of the Village Attorney on the matter under review.
(3) In the event of a final judgment of punitive or exemplary damages,
fines or penalties against the employee, the employee shall serve
copies of such judgment personally, or by certified or registered
mail, within 10 days of entry, upon the Village Administrator. The
Village Board shall meet as soon as practicable in executive session
to review, make findings (taking into consideration the findings
made by the Village Attorney), and determine if the following have
been met, and, if so met, shall appropriate the funds necessary to
pay such punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties:
§ 15-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 15-5
15:16
§ 15-6. Representation by private counsel.
Subject to the conditions set forth in §§ 15-4 and 15-5, the employee shall be
entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney; provided, however, that
the employee shall be entitled to representation by private counsel of his/
her choice in any civil action or proceeding whenever the Village Attorney,
or other counsel designated by the Village Administrator, determines, based
upon his/her investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the
case, that representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate
or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or
by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his/
her choice. The Village Attorney, or other counsel designated by the Village
Administrator, shall notify the employee, in writing, of such determination
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his/
her choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a condition to payment of
the fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups of
such employees be represented by the same counsel. If the employee or
group of employees is entitled to representation by private counsel under
the provisions of this chapter, the Village Attorney shall so certify to the
Village Board. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be
paid by the Village to such private counsel from time to time during the
pendency of the civil action or proceeding, upon the audit and warrant of
the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple
employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or the
reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion
or by way of a special proceeding.
(a) The judgment was based on an act or omission of the employee
acting within the scope of his/her employment.
(b) At the time of the action or omission giving rise to the liability,
the employee acted:
[1] Without recklessness.
[2] Without maliciousness.
[3] Without gross negligence.
[4] Otherwise within the standards required for employees
holding comparable positions within the Village.
(c) At the time of the act or omission, the employee acted in good
faith and in the best interests of the Village.
(d) At the time of the act or omission, the employee did not
willfully violate a clearly established provision of law or Village
policy.
(4) Deliberation, findings and determinations of the Village Attorney
and Village Board shall remain confidential.
§ 15-5 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 15-7
15:17
§ 15-7. Preparation by Village Attorney to avoid default.
Where the employee delivers process and a request for defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 15-8, the Village Attorney shall take the
necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel under the terms
and conditions provided in § 15-6, on behalf of the employee to avoid entry
of a default judgment, pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
§ 15-8. Responsibility of employee.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Administrator by the
employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading within five days after he/she is served with such
document and the full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such
action or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against the
Village based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the
Village provide for his/her defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 15-9. Construal of provisions; applicability.
§ 15-10. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall be held unconstitutional or invalid in whole or in part by
any court, such holding of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way
affect or impair any other provision of this chapter or the application of any
such provision to any other person or circumstance.
Chapter 21
A. The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined
herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the right of any other party, nor
shall any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal
any provision of the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter,
limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any
policy of insurance.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
D. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity or any right to defense and/or
indemnification available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or
employee of the Village by, in accordance with or by reason of any other
provisions of state or federal statutory or common law.
§ 15-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 15-10
21:18
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 15.
§ 21-1. Declaration of policy.
§ 21-2. Definitions.
When used in this Code of Ethics, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGENCY — Any office, board, body, advisory board, council, commission,
agency, department, district, administration, division, bureau or committee
of the village.
A. The goal of village government is to provide fair, impartial, open and
lawful administration of the village, pursuant to the Code of Ethics of
the village, as defined below, and the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York.
B. In order to accomplish this goal, it is necessary that the village maintain
and support its tradition of having village residents serve as volunteer
village Officials, and that all village officials or employees, as those
terms are defined below, whether volunteer or paid or elected:
(1) Be independent, impartial and responsible to the residents of the
village;
(2) Observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and
discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
consideration, so that the public shall have the highest regard for
the integrity of its government and its village officers or employees;
and
(3) Make government decisions in the proper channels of government
in an open and nonsecretive manner.
C. In recognition of this goal, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics
which is based upon the Municipal Ethics Act for New York State
Municipalities dated December 1988 and recommended by the State of
New York Commission on Government Integrity. Although this Code of
Ethics deviates in various sections from the Municipal Ethics Act for
New York State municipalities, the studies and reports published by the
Commission on Government Integrity will provide guidance as to the
origin and interpretation of this Code of Ethics. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of this Code of Ethics and the provisions
of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, the latter shall
control.
§ 15-10 ETHICS, CODE OF § 21-2
21:19
APPEAR and APPEAR BEFORE — Communicating in whatever form,
whether personally or through another person.
BUSINESS DEALING —
DISCRETIONARY ACT — Any action involving the exercise of judgment
or discretion by a village officer or employee, either individually or as a
member of any agency, and includes, but is not limited to, negotiation,
approval, advice, recommendation, authorization or audit.
FAMILY MEMBER — A spouse, child, stepchild, brother, sister, parent or
dependent of a village officer or employee, as defined below.
MINISTERIAL ACT — An action performed in a prescribed manner without
the exercise of judgment or discretion as to the propriety of the act.
PARTICULAR MATTER — Any business dealing with the village or any
application for such business or any case, proceeding, determination,
investigation, charge, accusation or arrest or any other matter involving
a discretionary act of a village officer or employee, but does not include
the proposal, consideration or enactment of local laws, ordinances or
regulations of general application.
SPOUSE — A husband or wife from whom the village officer or employee is
not legally separated.
VILLAGE — The Village of Bronxville and all agencies thereof.
VILLAGE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — Any officer or employee of the Village
of Bronxville, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or any agency thereof. No person shall be
deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a Fire Chief or Assistant
Fire Chief.[Amended 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 3-19952]
§ 21-3. Conflicts of interest of village officers and employees.
A. Having or providing any contract, service or work with the village;
Buying, selling, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring from or
dispensing to the village any goods, services or property; or
B.
Applying for, petitioning, requesting or obtaining any approval, grant,
loan, license, permit or other privilege from the village.
C.
A. No village officer or employee shall:
(1) Act as attorney, agent, broker, employee, consultant or
representative for any person in connection with any business
dealing that person has with the village.
(2) Directly or indirectly solicit, accept or agree to accept any gift from
any person, other than a family member, who the village officer or
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 21-3
21:20
employee knows is considering, has or within the previous 12
months has had any business dealing with the village that involves
any discretionary act by the village officer or employee. However,
a village officer or employee may accept from such person a gift
or gifts which would otherwise be prohibited by the preceding
sentence and which are customary on family, social, holiday or
civic occasions, provided that they were not received under
circumstances in which it reasonably might be inferred that such
gift or gifts were intended to influence the village officer or
employee in the performance of his or her official duties or reward
him or her for any official action. A gift shall include money,
services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise
thereof or any other gratuity or promise thereof, including any
financial transaction on terms not available to the general public,
but shall not include a campaign contribution.
(3) Take or refrain from taking any discretionary action or agree to
take or refrain from taking any discretionary action or induce or
attempt to induce any other village officer or employee to take or
refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any matter before
the village in order to obtain a pecuniary or material benefit for:
(a) Himself or herself;
(b) A family member;
(c) Any partnership or unincorporated association of which the
village officer or employee is a member or employee or in
which he or she has a proprietary interest;
(d) Any corporation of which the village officer or employee is an
officer or director or of which he or she legally or beneficially
owns or controls more than 5% of the outstanding stock;
(e) Any person with whom the village officer or employee or his or
her family member has an employment, professional, business
or financial relationship; or
(f) Any person from whom the village officer or employee or his or
her spouse, has received within any twelve-month period
during the previous 24 months, a pecuniary or material benefit
having an aggregate value greater than $2,000.
(4) Appear before the village, except on behalf of the village or on his
or her own behalf.
(5) Appear as attorney or counsel against the interests of the village in
any matter in which the village is a party or a complainant.
(6) Except where such disclosure is authorized by law, disclose during
his or her office with the village, or thereafter, any confidential
information acquired in the course of his or her official duties or
§ 21-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 21-3
21:21
§ 21-4. Transactional disclosure and recusal.
use any such information to advance the financial or other private
interest of himself or herself or any other person.
(7) After termination of his or her term of office or employment with
the village, appear before the village or receive compensation for
services rendered on behalf of any person other than the village, in
relation to any particular matter upon which he or she took any
action or that came before him or her during his or her term of
office or employment with the village.
(8) During his or her term of office or employment with the village,
solicit, negotiate for or accept any employment from which he or
she would be disqualified under § 21-3A(7).
B. No partnership or unincorporated association of which a village officer
or employee is a member or employee or in which he or she has a
proprietary interest, nor any corporation of which he or she is an officer
or director or of which he or she legally or beneficially owns or controls
more than 5% of the outstanding stock, shall appear before the village
on behalf of any person other than the village or itself.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a village officer or
employee or any other person from receiving a village service or benefit
or using a village facility, which is generally available to residents or a
class of residents in the village.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any village officer
or employee listed in Section Eleven of the Domestic Relations Law
from accepting any gift or benefit having a value of $100 or less for the
solemnization of a marriage by that village officer or employee.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a village officer or
employee from performing any ministerial act.
F. Should the Village Ethics Board, defined below, conclude in a written
opinion that a contract has been entered by or with the village which
results in or from a violation of this section, the Board of Trustees may
elect to void that contract.
A. Whenever the village officer or employee is requested or required to
take any action on a matter before the village and, to his or her
knowledge, either the performance or nonperformance of that action
would provide a pecuniary or material benefit to himself or herself or to
any related person different from that which would be derived from the
action by reason of its general application to a broad class of persons
deriving such benefit, the village officer or employee shall not
participate in that matter. The village officer or employee also shall file
promptly with his or her immediate supervisor, if any and with the
Village Clerk, a signed statement disclosing the nature and extent of
that interest.
§ 21-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 21-4
21:22
§ 21-5. Maintenance of disclosure statements.
Transactional disclosure statements filed pursuant to § 21-4 of this Code of
Ethics shall be public records and shall be indexed and maintained on file
in an appropriate manner by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk promptly
shall transmit a copy of all disclosure statements to the Village Ethics
Board, Mayor and Village Counsel. The Village Clerk shall retain disclosure
statements for not less than seven years from the date of filing.
§ 21-6. Disclosure by applicants.
B. For purposes of this section, "related person" means:
(1) A family member;
(2) Any corporation of which the village officer or employee is an
officer or director or of which he or she legally or beneficially owns
or controls more than 5% of the outstanding stock;
(3) Any person with whom the village officer or employee or his or her
family member has an employment, professional, business or
financial relationship; and
(4) Any person from whom the village officer or employee or his or her
spouse, has received within any twelve-month period during the
previous 24 months, a pecuniary or material benefit having an
aggregate value greater than $2,000.
C. Whenever a vote is required from which the village officer or employee
must recuse himself or herself under this section, such recusal shall not
be counted for the purpose of determining whether a majority or other
ratio required by law to pass a measure has been reached; provided,
however, that no action may be taken by a body unless a majority of all
of the members appointed or elected to such body, votes on the matter.
If a body is reduced below such majority by reason of a recusal required
pursuant to this section, any member of such body may apply to the
Village Ethics Board for a waiver of the recusal requirements of this
section.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a village officer or
employee from performing any ministerial act or to require a village
officer or employee to file a disclosure statement pursuant to this
section prior to performing any ministerial act.
A. For purposes of this section:
(1) "Submission" means any written application, petition, bid, proposal
or other request concerning a business dealing with the village
which has a value or cost to the village of $5,000 or more, but shall
not include an application to be considered for eligibility to apply
for or bid on any business dealing; and
§ 21-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 21-6
21:23
(2) "Applicant" means any person making a submission.
B. For purposes of this section, a campaign contribution shall be
considered to have been made to the village officer or employee if such
contribution is made to any committee soliciting or receiving funds for
the purpose of supporting the candidate, except that a contribution to a
statewide political party shall not be considered a contribution to a
candidate unless it is earmarked for use for a specific candidate. Where
contributions are made to committees which support more than one
candidate, the contribution shall be considered to have been spent
equally on all the candidates and only the amount attributable to a
particular candidate shall be considered for disclosure purposes under
this section, unless the contribution to the committee was earmarked
for use for a particular candidate or candidates, in which case the entire
contribution shall be attributable to that candidate or equally to those
candidates or as specified by the contributor. For purpose of this
section, a loan to a candidate or campaign committee shall be
considered a campaign contribution.
C. Any person who makes a submission to the village shall disclose in
writing, as part of the submission, the name of any village officer or
employee to whom the applicant has made one or more campaign
contributions totaling $250 or more within any twelve-month period
during the previous 60 months; and the name of any village officer or
employee who, to the applicant's knowledge, has an interest in the
submission or in the applicant and is required to take any discretionary
act on the submission. The applicant also shall identify in the
submission the nature of the interest.
D. For purposes of this section, the village officer or employee shall be
deemed to have an interest in the submission or in the applicant when
the village officer or employee or his or her spouse:
(1) Is the applicant;
(2) Is a family member of the applicant;
(3) Is an officer or director of or legally or beneficially owns or controls
more than 5% of the outstanding stock of the applicant;
(4) Has or to the applicant's knowledge intends to enter into an
employment, professional, business or financial relationship with
the applicant or any principal of the applicant;
(5) Has received from the applicant, within any twelve-month period
during the previous 24 months, a pecuniary or material benefit
having an aggregate value greater than $2,000; or
(6) Will receive, pursuant to an agreement between the applicant and
any person, a pecuniary or material benefit if the village's
disposition of the submission is favorable to the applicant.
§ 21-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 21-7
21:24
§ 21-7. Village Ethics Board.
§ 21-8. Qualifications of members of Village Ethics Board.
§ 21-9. Removal of member of Village Ethics Board.
§ 21-10. Village Ethics Board meeting and quorum requirements.
A. A bipartisan Village Ethics Board consisting of five members who are
residents of the village is hereby established. The members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Trustees. Appointments shall be made for two-year terms to be
appointed in such a manner that there will always be one or more
experienced members on the Board when new members come upon the
Board.
B. The Village Ethics Board shall adopt rules and regulations as to forms
and procedures and shall at all times maintain appropriate records of
its opinions and proceedings.
A. No member of the Village Ethics Board shall hold office in any political
party or be employed as a lobbyist before the village. A Board member
may make campaign contributions, but may not participate in any
village election campaign, other than his or her own. No person may
serve on the Village Ethics Board while holding other office in or being
employed by the village.
B. No more than two members of the Village Ethics Board may be
members of the same political party. For purposes of this section,
"political party" shall mean any political party which appears on the
ballot for statewide elected office or which exists in the village.
A. A member of the Village Ethics Board may be removed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
B. Grounds for removal of a member or members of the Village Ethics
Board shall be substantial neglect of duty, misconduct in office, inability
to discharge the powers or duties of office or violation of this Village
Ethics Code, after written notice and opportunity for reply.
A. At its first meeting of the Village Ethics Board each year, it shall elect a
Chair from among its membership. A quorum of the Village Ethics
Board shall be necessary for the Board to vote upon any matter. A
quorum shall consist of no fewer than three members of the Board. A
vote of a majority of the members of the Village Ethics Board
constituting a quorum shall be required for the Board to take any
action. The Chair or any three members may call a meeting of the
Board.
B. The Board may hold as many meetings per year as it deems necessary
or as shall be called by the Chair or any three members, provided that a
meeting of the Board shall be held promptly after the filing of a
§ 21-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 21-10
21:25
§ 21-11. Powers and duties of Village Ethics Board.
§ 21-12. Investigations of alleged violations.
complaint alleging a violation of this Code of Ethics, at which meeting
such complaint shall be considered by the Board, as well as any other
matters before it.
A. The Village Ethics Board may act only with respect to village officers
and employees.
B. The termination of a village officer or employee's term of office or
employment with the village shall not affect the jurisdiction of the
Board with respect to the requirements that this Code of Ethics imposes
on the former village officer or employee.
C. The Village Ethics Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To prescribe and promote rules and regulations governing its own
internal or animation and procedures in a manner consistent with
this Code of Ethics;
(2) To conduct investigations pursuant to § 21-12 of this Code of
Ethics;
(3) To conduct hearings and recommend disciplinary action for
violations of this Code of Ethics.
(4) To grant waivers of the recusal requirements under the
circumstances described in § 21-4C of this Code of Ethics upon
written application and upon a showing of compelling need by the
applicant. Waivers shall be in writing and shall state the grounds
upon which they are granted.
(5) To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation or
application of this Code of Ethics upon written request by any
agency, individual village officer or employee or any applicant, as
defined in § 21-6 of this Code of Ethics.
(6) To review all transactional disclosure statements. If the Board
determines that a statement is deficient or reveals a possible or
potential violation of the Code of Ethics, it shall notify the person in
writing of the deficiency or possible or potential violation and of the
penalty for failure to comply with this Code of Ethics.
(7) To provide training and education to village officers and employees
and to make information concerning this Code of Ethics available to
all village officers and employees, to the public and to any person
who is interested in doing business with the village.
(8) To prepare an annual report and recommend changes to this Code
of Ethics, if any.
§ 21-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 21-12
21:26
§ 21-13. Administrative penalties for violation of the Code of Ethics.
Any village officer or employee who engages in any action that violates
any provision of this Code of Ethics may be warned or reprimanded or
suspended or removed from office or employment or be subject to any
other sanction authorized by law or collective bargaining agreement, by the
appointing authority or person or body authorized by law to impose such
sanctions. A warning, reprimand, suspension, removal or other authorized
sanction may be imposed in addition to any other applicable penalty
contained in any other provision of law. The appointing authority or person
authorized by law to impose the sanctions described in this Section shall be
guided by the requirements of § 21-12D.
A. Upon receipt of a sworn complaint by any person alleging a violation of
this Code of Ethics or upon determining on its own initiative that a
violation of this Code of Ethics may exist, the Village Ethics Board shall
have the power and duty to conduct any investigation necessary to
carry out the provisions of this Code of Ethics. In conducting any such
investigation, the Village Ethics Board may administer oaths or
affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance and require
the production of books and records which it may deem relevant and
material.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the Village Ethics Board to
conduct an investigation of itself or any of its members. Should the
Village Ethics Board receive a sworn complaint alleging that the Village
Ethics Board or any of its members has violated any provisions of this
Code of Ethics or any other law, it shall promptly transmit a copy of the
complaint to the Mayor and Village Counsel, who shall investigate the
complaint and take appropriate remedial action, should the results of
their investigation so warrant.
C. Subject to the requirements of § 21-12D, the Village Ethics Board shall
advise the relevant appointing authority of the disposition of every
sworn complaint that it receives and of every related investigation that
it conducts and shall set forth its related findings, opinions and
recommendations.
D. The Village Ethics Board shall, with respect to every complaint that it
receives and all related deliberations, findings, opinions,
recommendations and dispositions thereof:
(1) Use its best efforts to hold all such matters in confidence and not
publicly reveal them, to the fullest extent allowable by applicable
law, including the New York State Freedom of Information Law, as
it may be amended; and
(2) Meet only in executive session, closed to the public, to the fullest
extent allowed by the New York State Open Meetings Law, as it may
be amended.
§ 21-12 ETHICS, CODE OF § 21-14
21:27
§ 21-14. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
Chapter 46
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 46-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited hereinafter as the "Records
Access Law of the Village of Bronxville."
§ 46-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for a uniform procedure for giving
public access to public records in the Village of Bronxville.
§ 46-3. Purpose and scope.
§ 46-4. Records Access Officer.
A. The Mayor shall cause this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every
village officer or employee. Each such person who enters government
service after this distribution shall receive a copy of this Code of Ethics
before entering upon his or her duties and shall sign a statement that
he or she has read, understood and shall abide by its requirements.
Within 30 days after the effective date of this Code of Ethics, the Village
Administrator shall obtain a similar signed statement from every village
officer or employee whose office predates this Code of Ethics.
B. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer or employee
to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with
such code, nor the enforcement provisions thereof.3
A. The People's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. This chapter provides information concerning the procedures by which
records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law (Public Officers Law § 85
et seq.), as well as records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville is responsible for
ensuring compliance with the regulations herein, and the Board of
3. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 46-4
21:28
§ 46-5. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Village
Offices, 200 Pondfield Road, Bronxville, New York 10708.
§ 46-6. Hours for inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours regularly open for business.
§ 46-7. Requests for access.
Trustees shall appoint a Records Access Officer to assist said Board in
the administration of this chapter. The Records Access Officer shall be
the Village Clerk.
B. The Records Access Officer shall be responsible for ensuring
appropriate agency response to public requests for access to records.
The designation of a Records Access Officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
C. The Records Access Officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or an offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 46-10; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Village of Bronxville is not the custodian for such records;
or
(b) The records of which the Village of Bronxville is a custodian
cannot be found after a diligent search.
§ 46-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 46-7
21:29
§ 46-8. Subject matter list.
§ 46-9. Denial of access; appeals.
A. All Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)4 requests shall be written and
submitted either in person, by mail, fax, or electronically to the Records
Access Officer.
B. Within five business days of receiving a FOIL request, the Records
Access Officer shall either provide the records requested, deny the
request or send a written response to the requester acknowledging that
the FOIL request has been received.
C. A FOIL request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the Records Access Officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall have 20 business days to provide the documents. If more time
is needed to provide the requested documents due to the nature of the
FOIL request, the Records Access Officer shall inform the requester
that additional time is required. If the Records Access Officer does not
grant, deny or provide for additional time within 20 business days after
the date of acknowledgment of receipt of a request, the request may be
construed as a denial of access that may be appealed.
A. The Records Access Officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not records are available pursuant to Public Officers Law § 87(2).
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided within the time period required in
§ 46-7D of this chapter, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of
access.
C. The Village Attorney shall hear appeals for denial of access to records
under the Freedom of Information Law (§ 85 et seq. of the Public
Officers Law).
4. Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 85 et seq.
§ 46-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 46-9
21:30
§ 46-10. Fees.
§ 46-11. Public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the Records
Access Officer and appeals body and the location where records can be seen
or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are
kept and/or published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the body designated to hear appeals
shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 46-7.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The Village Attorney shall inform the requester of his or her decision, in
writing, within 10 business days of receipt of an appeal.
F. The Village Attorney shall transmit to the New York State Department
of State Committee on Open Government copies of all appeals upon
receipt of appeals.
G. The body designated to hear appeals shall inform the appellant and the
Committee on Open Government of its determination, in writing, within
10 business days of receipt of an appeal. The determination shall be
transmitted to the Committee on Open Government.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this chapter.
B. The fee for photocopies not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches is $0.25
per page.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B of this
section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost (which is the
average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the
Village, such as operator salaries).
§ 46-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 46-11
21:31
Chapter 47
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Village Administrator — See Ch. 61.
§ 46-11 BRONXVILLE CODE § 46-11
21:32
ARTICLE I
Village Clerk; Deputy Clerk; Treasurer; Deputy Treasurer; Village
Assessor; Deputy Assessor; Court Clerk; Assistant Court Clerk;
Election Inspectors5
[Adopted 2-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 47-1. Purpose; legislative authority.
The Board of Trustees finds that, due to the relatively small population of
the Village of Bronxville, it is not always possible to fill certain appointive
offices and nonjudicial positions in Village government requiring municipal,
administrative or financial expertise with Village residents who are duly
qualified to hold such positions. The Board further finds that it is authorized
to appoint qualified residents of Westchester County outside of the Village
to said offices pursuant to § 3-300 of the Village Law. The Board further
finds that it is authorized under said § 3-300 and § 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law to expand such residency requirements to allow residents
of Westchester County to be eligible for appointment to said offices.
§ 47-2. Residency within county required. [Amended 3-10-2008 by
L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 47-3. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York and shall apply to all persons currently
holding the positions of Village Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Village Treasurer and
Deputy Treasurer as well as any persons hereafter appointed to fill such
offices.
A. Notwithstanding any other general or special law, no person shall be
eligible to be appointed to or hold office of the Village Clerk, Deputy
Clerk, Village Treasurer, Deputy Treasurer, Village Assessor, Deputy
Assessor, Village Court Clerk or Assistant Court Clerk who is not a
citizen of the United States, is not at least 18 years of age and is not a
resident of Westchester County or of any village, town or city located
within the State of New York within 60 miles from the Village of
Bronxville at the time of such appointment. No person shall be eligible
to be appointed as an election inspector in the Village of Bronxville
unless such person is a resident of Westchester County. [Amended
10-20-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
B. This section shall change or supersede § 3-300, Subdivision 2, of the
Village Law, as last amended, § 3 of the Public Officers Law, as last
amended, and § 23 of the Town Law, as last amended, to the extent that
the provisions thereof conflict with or are contrary to the provisions of
this article.
5. Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted as Ch. 62, Art. I, but was renumbered to
maintain the alphabetical sequence of the Code.
§ 47-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 47-3
21:33
Chapter 61
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 61-1. Office created; Village Clerk designated Administrator;
term.
In order to provide the most economical and efficient over all direction,
coordination and control of the day-to-day activities and operations of the
Village of Bronxville, to minimize the administrative details now handled by
the Board of Trustees, to provide centralized direction and control of village
employees and to formalize the staff and advisory functions necessary to the
foregoing, the office of Village Administrator is hereby established. Unless
otherwise provided by resolution of the Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk
shall be the Village Administrator and shall serve at the pleasure of such
Board.
§ 61-2. Powers and duties.
Subject to the approval, direction and control of the Board of Trustees or
the Mayor, as the case may be, the Village Administrator shall:
§ 61-3. Designation as Budget Officer.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in § 61-2 hereof, the Village
Administrator shall serve as Budget Officer when so designated by the
Mayor in accordance with § 5-500, Subdivision 2, of the Village Law.
A. See that the laws of the state and the local laws, resolutions and rules of
the village are faithfully executed;
B. Exercise supervision over the conduct of all functions and activities of
the village and of its officers and employees, except the Village Justice,
Village Clerk, Village Treasurer and Village Counsel;
C. From time to time make reports to the Board of Trustees upon the
affairs of the village, and recommend to the Board such measures as he
or she may think necessary or appropriate;
D. Keep the Board of Trustees fully advised of the financial condition of the
village and its future financial needs;
E. Conduct a continuing study of all functions and activities of the village
for the purpose of devising ways and means of obtaining greater
efficiency and economy;
F. Have such powers and duties, not inconsistent with law, as from time to
time may be provided by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 47-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 61-4
61:34
§ 61-4. Reservation of power.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed as abolishing,
transferring or curtailing any powers or duties of the Board of Trustees or
of the Mayor, the Treasurer or Clerk, as prescribed by the Village Law or
other applicable laws of the state.
§ 61-5. Residency requirements.
Resolution of the Board of Trustees on April 1, 1974, with regard to waiver
of residency requirements was unanimously passed as follows:
RESOLVED, whereas Village Law, Section 3-300, as amended in 1973,
provides that the Board of Trustees may waive the residency
requirements for the appointment of the Village Clerk, who also serves as
Collector of Taxes and Registrar of Vital Statistics, and that the Treasurer,
who also serves as Assessor, providing that the individuals who hold such
office reside within Westchester County.
THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Board of Trustees approve the
appointment of persons to these positions that such persons reside within
Westchester County.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 74
AIR POLLUTION
Chapter 80
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Fees Schedule — See Ch. A321.
§ 61-4 AIR POLLUTION § 61-5
74:35

Part 1
[Adopted 7-8-19L9ic1e nBsyi nLg.L. No. 14-1991]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 80-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Alarm Devices and
Systems Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 80-2. Purpose.6
The purpose of this Part 1 is to regulate the use of emergency alarm devices
and systems designed to require Police Department response, investigation
and safeguarding of property at the location of an event reported by such
signal. That design will serve to protect and promote the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village of Bronxville through safer and more
efficient use of alarm devices and systems. It will further serve to reduce the
number of false alarms and to encourage the use and proper maintenance
of reliable emergency signal systems and devices.
§ 80-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 1, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM — A signal transmitted to police headquarters which is intended
to notify the Police Department of a burglary, robbery or other emergency
at a premises within the Village of Bronxville to which which the Police
Department is expected to respond. 7
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person engaged in the business of owning,
operating, maintaining, installing, leasing or selling an alarm device or
devices or system of alarm devices, which business is, as owner, operator,
provider of maintenance service, installer, lessor or seller of said device,
devices or system of devices, subject to the license requirements of this Part
1.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated, transmits a signal to
police headquarters or to a central alarm station and/or produces an audible
or visible signal to which the Police Department is expected to respond.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or aggregation of alarm
devices installed on or within a single building or on or within more than
one building or area located on a common site.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD — A board consisting of three members appointed
by the Mayor subject to approval by the Board of Trustees including the
Mayor. It is recommended that one of the members be a staff member
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: The definition of "alarm agent," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-1 AIR POLLUTION § 80-3
74:37
proposed by the Village Administrator, the Chief of Police or other member
of the Police Department, and a member of the Regional Alarm Association
residing in Westchester County. 8
CENTRAL ALARM MONITORING FACILITY — A facility owned by the
Village of Bronxville and located at police headquarters, which is monitored
by village employees who receive, record and verify alarm signals
transmitted from alarm devices or from central alarm stations.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility operated by a private firm
that receives and verifies alarm signals and relays information about such
verified signals to the central alarm monitoring facility.
DIGITAL DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or telephone attachment that
automatically or electronically selects a telephone line connected to the
central alarm monitoring facility or to a central alarm station to report
a burglary, robbery or other emergency requiring Police Department
response.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm device which transmits a signal over a leased
telephone line to the central alarm monitoring facility or to a central alarm
station.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm device, whether intentional or
automatic, that does not emit a valid emergency signal.
LICENSING OFFICER — The Mayor or a village officer designated by him
or her, which designation shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
LOCAL ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device not connected to the central
alarm monitoring facility or to a central alarm station which, when
activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated
at the premises on or within which the device is installed.
MALFUNCTION — A mechanical deficiency or other fault or failure in an
alarm device which results in a false alarm.
MANUAL ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device in which activation of the
alarm signal is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user.
NON-RESPONSE — Verification of a false alarm by the Police Department
by phone call only, which results in no officers being dispatched to the scene
of the false alarm. 9
PERSON — Any natural person or any other entity capable of being sued.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Bronxville Police Department.
RESPONSE — Acknowledgment that an alarm has been received at police
headquarters by an act of answering a telephone call, noting information
received and starting any process of verification, such as notifying vehicles
of receipt of an alarm or any other act commencing the process of acting as
a Police Department on account of such notification.
8. Editor's Note: The definition of "alarm user," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 80-3
74:38
VERIFICATION — Qualification of the legitimacy of an alarm signal by
various means which may, under normal conditions, include, but shall not be
limited to, customer call-in, central station call-out, automatic abort, built-in
delay.
§ 80-4. Alarm Review Board.
A. The Mayor shall appoint an Alarm Review Board as defined in § 80-3 of
this Part 1.
B. The term of office of each member shall be one official year or the
remaining portion thereof.
C. The Alarm Review Board shall act as a review board and perform such
other functions as provided in this Part 1 or as may be delegated to it by
the Board of Trustees.
§ 80-3 AIR POLLUTION § 80-4
74:39

ARTICLE II
Licenses and Permits
§ 80-5. Licenses and permits required.10
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an alarm device
or devices or system of alarm devices without first obtaining a license or
permit as provided in this Part 1.
§ 80-6. Issuance of alarm user permits.11
The Chief of Police is empowered to grant a revocable alarm user permit to
any owner of property located within the Village of Bronxville or the lessor
thereof to own or lease an alarm device or system.
§ 80-7. Applications. [Amended 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 5-199212]
Applications shall be made as follows:
§ 80-8. Permit fees.
All permit and subscription fees shall be established by resolution adopted
by the Board of Trustees. Payment of such fees must be made before the
issuance of such permit. No refunds of permit fees shall be made.
§ 80-9. Denial, suspension or revocation of permits.13
A. Alarm user permit. Any property owner or lessee of property in the
Village of Bronxville having on such premises an alarm device or system
of alarm devices shall apply to the Chief of Police for permit to own or
otherwise have such a device. No such device may be installed on the
premises of the owner or lessee prior to the issuance of a permit to such
owner or lessee. All applications shall require certification that the
device or system of devices is in good working order and meets all
applicable code requirements within 12 months of the application. Such
application shall be accompanied by a written report by the alarm
user's installer or service provider that an inspection has been made
within 30 days prior thereto and the results of such inspection shall be
clearly stated in such report. Permits shall expire on the last day of the
calendar year of issuance, when they must be renewed. For renewal
purposes, an application for renewal or an inspection of the device or
system of devices is not required.
A. Permits. The Chief of Police may for cause deny, suspend or revoke any
permit issued under this Part 1 which he or she deems appropriate but
before doing so, if the permittee requests the same, shall refer such
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-5 AIR POLLUTION § 80-9
74:41
matter to the Alarm Review Board for its recommendation. In case of
emergency, the Chief of Police may summarily suspend any permit until
the review is completed.
B. Hearing before Alarm Review Board.
(1) Any applicant whose application for a permit has been denied may
request the Licensing Officer or Chief of Police to refer the same to
the Alarm Review Board for its review and recommendation by
requesting a hearing within 10 days after notification of intended
action by the Licensing Officer or Chief of Police.
(2) The Alarm Review Board shall hold a hearing within 30 days after
referral to it and make its recommendation within 30 days after the
close of the hearing. Failure to make a recommendation within
such time period unless waived by all parties concerned, shall be
deemed to be approval of the proposed action.
C. Final action by Licensing Officer or Chief of Police. Upon receipt of the
recommendation, the Licensing Officer or Chief of Police may take
whatever action he or she deems appropriate. The decision of the
Licensing Officer or Chief of Police shall be final subject to review by an
Article 78 Proceeding in the Supreme Court.
§ 80-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 80-9
74:42
ARTICLE III
Obligation for Adequacy, Operation or Maintenance
§ 80-10. Village obligations.
A. Notwithstanding the payment of any fee and/or the issuance of any
permit as herein required, the Police Department and the Village of
Bronxville shall be under no obligation concerning the adequacy, the
operation or maintenance of any alarm device so installed or of the
operation of the central alarm monitoring facility or of any central
alarm station, and the Village of Bronxville and its authorized agents
assume no liability for any failure of any such alarm device or the
central alarm monitoring facility or of any central alarm system for
failure to respond to any such alarms or for any act of omission or
commission as a result of any alarm, device or system.
B. The alarm user or permittee, by acceptance of a permit, hereby agrees
to hold and save harmless the Village of Bronxville, its agents or
employees from any liability with respect to any such alarm device or
the operation thereof.
§ 80-10 AIR POLLUTION § 80-10
74:43

ARTICLE IV
Dial Alarm Devices
§ 80-11. Restrictions.
A. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any alarm device that
automatically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police Department
and then reproduces any prerecorded voice messages to report any
robbery, burglary or other emergency.
B. The use of any dial alarm device which relays a digital coded signal to
the central alarm monitoring facility is permitted under this Part 1.
§ 80-11 AIR POLLUTION § 80-11
74:45

ARTICLE V
External Alarms
§ 80-12. Restrictions.
Alarms which are designed to be heard outside of a building are prohibited,
except an external alarm that is installed which shall be capable of and shall
automatically terminate its operation within 15 minutes of being activated
is permitted.
§ 80-12 AIR POLLUTION § 80-12
74:47

ARTICLE VI
False Alarms
§ 80-13. Intentional alarms.
It shall be a violation of this Part 1 to intentionally cause a false alarm, and
any person who does intentionally cause a false alarm shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of this Part 1 in addition to any penalties provided by
state law.
§ 80-14. Fee for false alarms.14
Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm device or system on such
premises and any user of services or equipment furnished by a licensee
under this Part 1 shall pay to the village a fee for a false alarm as established
by resolution adopted by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 80-15. Collection of fees and charges.
§ 80-16. Waiver of charges.
Unintentional false alarm charges may be waived by decision of the Village
Administrator as recommended by the Alarm Review Board. Unintentional
false alarm charges for alarms that do not cause the dispatch of emergency
vehicles may be waived.
§ 80-17. Fee for costs incurred.
The village may require that a fee or fees be paid by any person operating
or owning an alarm device for costs incurred or which may be incurred by
the village on account of the installation and operation of such alarm device.
§ 80-18. Responsibility for maintenance and service.
A. All false alarm charges will be collected by the Village Treasurer.
Failure to pay a charge shall subject such alarm owner, lessee or user to
the penalty provisions of this Part 1.
B. Any alarm owner, lessee or user charged with an unintentional false
alarm may, within 10 days of receipt of notice of the charge, contest
such in the manner provided in § 80-9 of this Part 1.
A. The alarm device owner, lessee or user shall be responsible for the
maintenance and service of the alarm device and shall be responsible
for all malfunctions of such device.
B. A malfunction of an alarm user's system constitutes an unintentional
false alarm.
14.Editor's Note: See Part 2, Fees and Charges.
§ 80-13 AIR POLLUTION § 80-18
74:49

ARTICLE VII
General Regulations
§ 80-19. Change in monitoring facility.
If the location of the central alarm monitoring facility should be changed
at any time, the village shall not be responsible for any expense incurred
by the owner or lessee or business licensee or alarm agent for moving
alarm systems or reconnecting such systems to the relocated central alarm
monitoring facility.
§ 80-20. Removal of unlawful equipment.
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the Chief of Police of the
Bronxville Police Department, whenever he or she shall have knowledge of
the use of any alarm device, cabinet or attachment which is not operated
or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 or which is
contrary to regulations promulgated pursuant to this Part 1, may order the
disconnection of such device from the central alarm, and it shall be unlawful
to disobey such order.
§ 80-21. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.15
The Village Administrator shall promulgate rules, regulations and standards
applicable to alarm devices and alarm users which are necessary for the
purpose of assuring the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of alarm devices
under this Part 1. The rules, regulations and standards shall be set forth in
writing, filed in the Village Clerk's office, and copies shall be available for
applicants.
§ 80-22. Location and installation of direct alarm systems.
The Village Administrator is hereby authorized to prescribe the location
and manner of installation of all cabinets, accessories, connections and
equipment of an approved direct alarm system within police headquarters
where the visible and audible signals therefrom may be readily seen and
heard by police personnel.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-19 AIR POLLUTION § 80-22
74:51

ARTICLE VIII
Applicability
§ 80-23. Applicability.
None of the provisions of this Part 1 shall apply to an alarm device or
devices installed in a motor vehicle or trailer or to employees of a public
utility company engaged in the business of providing communication
services or facilities.
§ 80-23 AIR POLLUTION § 80-23
74:53

ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 80-24. Penalties for offenses.16
The failure of any person to obtain any permit as required by Article II
or to perform or obey any provision of this Part 1 or to obey any order
of the Licensing Officer, the Bronxville Police Department or the Village
Administrator pursuant to this Part 1 constitutes a violation punishable by
a fine of up to $250 for each violation or by imprisonment for up to 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that such violation
continues after the expiration of any period allowed for compliance under
the provisions of this Part 1 shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 80-25. Unpaid charges to become lien.
Unpaid false alarm fees, permit fees or other charges shall become a lien
upon the property from which the alarm originated in a call to police
headquarters, resulting in such fee or charge, and will be collected in
the same manner as real estate taxes after the provisions of § 80-9 are
exhausted if initiated by the owner or lessee.
Part 2
Alarm Fees and Charges
[Adopted 7-8-1991; amended 10-12-1992]
[For fees and charges in connection with emergency alarm devices and
systems and the annual user permit fee, see Chapter A321, Fee Schedule.
All references to "annual" or "per year" shall mean the calendar year
(January 1 - December 31).]
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-24 AIR POLLUTION § 80-25
74:55
Chapter 86
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 86-1. Legislative intent.
The Village of Bronxville, New York, recognizes that the use and ownership
of amusement devices must be adequately controlled so as to prevent public
disorder, nuisance, loitering and other acts detrimental to health, safety
and welfare of the resident of the Village of Bronxville and, in particular,
to protect the adolescents of the village against the evils associated with
gambling. This chapter is intended to provide such control and regulation.
§ 86-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes any coin- or token-operated computer
electronic amusement device of the type commonly known as "video
games."
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
corporation, association, society or any other legal entity, and any officer,
agent, servant or employee of the foregoing in charge of the premises
hereinafter mentioned.
PREMISES — Includes any parcel of land, building, structure, vehicle or
any other place where an amusement device may be kept, maintained,
exhibited, used or operated.
§ 86-3. Illegal use or purpose.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism
that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device.
B. No licensed amusement device under this chapter shall be operated or
devoted or permitted by the licensee, holder of a license or any person
in responsible charge of the premises to be operated or devoted for or
to any use or purpose prohibited by law.
C. No cash awards shall be made in any contest, tournament, league or
individual play on any game maintained or operated in any premises
and no amusement device shall be permitted to operate if said device
delivers to the player coins or slugs or metal tokens on certain scores, if
such delivery of coins, slugs or metal tokens is or is held to be contrary
to the laws of the State of New York or if said device may be readily
converted to deliver to the player such coins, slugs or metal tokens if
such delivery of coins, slugs or metal tokens is or is held to be contrary
to the laws of the State of New York.
§ 80-25 BRONXVILLE CODE § 86-4
86:56
§ 86-4. License required.
No person shall keep, maintain, use or exhibit or permit to be kept,
maintained, exhibited, used or operated in or upon any premises in his
possession or under his control within the village a manually or
mechanically operated amusement device, as herein defined, used or
designed in whole or in part for the amusement, entertainment or
recreation of the public, without first obtaining a license therefor from the
Village Clerk as provided in this chapter, except that this prohibition shall
not apply to vendors whose business is the placing of such devices on
location.
§ 86-5. License application.
§ 86-6. Issuance of license.
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to issue the license
required by this chapter upon the terms and conditions prescribed in this
chapter.
§ 86-7. License application: investigation of applicant by Chief of
Police.
The application for a license under this chapter shall be referred by the
Village Clerk to the Chief of Police for his investigation and recommendation
as to approval or disapproval, and he shall forward his recommendation
in writing to the Village Clerk. No such license shall be issued without
approval of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall cause such
inquiries, inspections and investigations to be made as he deems necessary
to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, including but not limited
to the device sought to be licensed or which shall be licensed, the premises
upon which such device is proposed to be or shall be located and the
moral character of the applicant or any person in responsible charge of
such premises. In order that the intent and purpose of this chapter shall be
carried out, the control and regulation of such devices shall be under the
supervision of the Police Department, and members of the Department may,
A. A verified application in duplicate shall be made by any persons
desiring a license required by this chapter to the Village Clerk for such
license, upon blanks to be furnished by him giving the location by street
and number where the amusement device is sought to be licensed, the
nature and use of the premises upon which the amusement device is
proposed to be kept, maintained, exhibited or operated, the number of
such devices already licensed and sought to be licensed upon the same
premises, and such further information as the Village Clerk may
require.
B. The application shall also contain a complete statement indicating
whether or not any previous application has been made hereunder,
whether any license has been received, refused, suspended or revoked,
with the circumstances thereof.
§ 86-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 86-7
86:57
at any and all times when such premises are open, visit the same and make
an inspection thereof.
§ 86-8. License; fees. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the Village Clerk
shall collect the fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees for
each amusement device on the premises.
§ 86-9. Number of devices to be licensed.
No more than two amusement devices shall be licensed under this chapter
for maintenance, exhibition or use in the same premises at any one time.
§ 86-10. License expiration.
Each license issued under this chapter shall expire the first day of January
next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked by the Village Clerk.
§ 86-11. Transfer of license.
§ 86-12. Revocation of license.
Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Village Clerk
for any of the following:
§ 86-13. License refusal and revocation procedure.
If the Village Clerk determines that the license required under this chapter
should be revoked or refused, the Village Clerk, within five days of such
determination, shall notify the licensee in writing of the reasons for the
determination, specifying, in the case of revocation, that the license will
A. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
or location other than those persons and locations stated in the
application thereof.
B. Each additional amusement device to be installed is subject to all the
provisions of this chapter, including the payment of all additional fees
as may be due.
A. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulations of any agency or
department governing or applicable to the maintenance or conduct of
the premises upon which such device is located.
C. The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or
applicable to the maintenance, possession, use or operation of the
licensed device.
D. Otherwise, for cause.
§ 86-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 86-13
86:58
be revoked 25 days after the date of the notice. The licensee or applicant,
within 15 days of the date of the notice of revocation or refusal from the
Village Clerk, may, in writing, request a hearing before the hearing panel to
determine the appropriateness of the Village Clerk's determination.
§ 86-14. Penalties for offenses.17
§ 86-15. Nonconforming premises.
Any person who, on the date of the adoption of this chapter, permits the
operation of, or maintains for operation, more than two amusement devices
on his or her premises may continue as a nonconforming use until May 1,
1983, at which time such nonconforming use shall cease or be changed to a
conforming use.
Chapter 92
ANIMALS
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any amusement device in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 86-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 86-15
86:59

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
§ 92-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Animal Law of the
Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 92-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the village
to assist in the enforcement of this article or any authorized officer,
agent or employee of an incorporated humane society or similar
incorporated dog protective association under contract with the village
to assist in the enforcement of this article.
AT LARGE — Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the
public or is on private property not owned or leased by the owner of
the dog unless permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog
shall be deemed to be at large if it is:
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog.
RECEIVING PROPERTY — Real property, including but not limited to
buildings, grounds, offices and dwelling units, from which sound levels
from sound sources outside such property may be measured. For the
purposes of this definition, individual offices or dwelling units within a
building may constitute a receiving property.[Added 10-12-2010 by
L.L. No. 3-2010]
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any excessive or unusually loud sound that
disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, injures or endangers the health or safety of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities or which causes injury to plant or animal
A guide dog, hearing dog or service dog which is properly
harnessed and has been or is being trained by a qualified person,
to aid and guide a person with a disability. Persons with a disability
accompanied by guide dogs, hearing dogs or service dogs are
guaranteed the right to have such dogs in their immediate custody
while exercising any of the rights and privileges set forth in Article
4-B of the Civil Rights Law;
(1)
(2) A police work dog in use for police work; or
Accompanied by its owner or other responsible person and is
actively engaged in hunting or training for hunting on unposted
land or on posted land with the permission of the owner of the land.
[Amended 5-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
(3)
§ 92-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 92-2
86:61
§ 92-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the village and to contribute to the public welfare, safety and good
order of its people by establishing certain regulations and restrictions on
the activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and privileges of
other residents of the village.
§ 92-4. Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer may be appointed or designated by the village to
enforce this article who shall have all the powers and duties contained in
§ 114 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 92-5. Restrictions on dogs running at large.
No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to be at large unless restrained
by a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length.
§ 92-6. Public nuisances prohibited.
life or damage to property or business.[Added 10-12-2010 by L.L.
No. 3-2010]
B. All other words and phrases used in this article shall for the purpose of
this article have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by § 108 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to chase or harass any
person in such a manner as to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
B. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to commit a nuisance,
except as provided below, upon any public place in the village including
a public park, school grounds, a paved sidewalk or station platform, or
inside of any store, station or public waiting room within the village, but
not including the gutter of a public street, or upon the property of
another person without the consent of such person; provided, however,
that if the dog should commit a nuisance upon such public place, the
penalties of this chapter shall not apply if the owner or person in charge
of such dog shall immediately remove such nuisance and dispose of it in
a proper manner. Failure to remove and dispose of such nuisance,
except as provided above, shall render such owner liable for the
penalties provided in this chapter. Provided, however, that if the dog is
a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog and the disability of the person
accompanied by said dog prevents such person from complying with
this subdivision, such person shall be exempt from the provisions in this
subdivision. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989; 5-11-1992
by L.L. No. 1-1992]
§ 92-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 92-6
86:62
§ 92-7. Seizure, redemption; impoundment fees; adoption.
The seizure, redemption, fees and disposal of dogs pursuant to this chapter
shall be governed by § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 92-8. License fees. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
C. No person having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall
cause or permit such dog to cause unreasonable noise, including, but
not limited to, any sound that is plainly audible at any location within
any residential receiving property as set forth below: [Amended
10-12-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
(1) At or after 7:00 a.m. and before 10:00 p.m., continuously for a
period of 10 minutes or more.
(2) At or after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m., continuously for a
period of five minutes or more.
A. The license fee authorized by the New York Agriculture and Markets
Law to be collected by the Village Clerk for a dog more than six months
of age shall be, for each spayed or neutered dog and for each unspayed
and unneutered dog, respectively, as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Trustees. (See Chapter A321, Fees Schedule.)
B. There shall be no fee for any license issued for any guide dog, hearing
dog, service dog, war dog or police work dog. Each copy of any license
for such dogs shall be conspicuously marked "Guide Dog," "Hearing
Dog," "Service Dog," "War Dog" or "Police Work Dog," as may be
appropriate, by the Clerk or authorized Animal Control Officer. [Added
5-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
§ 92-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 92-8
86:63

ARTICLE II
Other Animals
§ 92-9. Running at large prohibited; impoundment.
No owner or person in charge shall cause or permit any animal, other than
domestic cats, to run at large upon the streets or public property of the
village or property of another person. Any such animal running at large
shall be liable to be impounded by the police or Animal Control Officer.
§ 92-10. Disposition of impounded animals.
The owner or person in charge of an impounded animal shall claim such
animal within seven days. If no claim is made, then such animal may be
disposed of by sale or destroyed. If the disposition is by sale, the proceeds
thereof shall accrue to the village.
§ 92-11. Prohibited animals.
The police or Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to impound
any animal whose presence in the village presents a clear and present
danger to the health or safety or welfare of the public. The police or Animal
Control Officer shall release such impounded animal to its owner or person
in charge upon receipt of assurance that such animal will be removed from
the village upon a determination by the police that the danger to the health
or safety or welfare of the public has terminated. If the animal has not been
released seven days after impoundment, then such animal may be disposed
of by sale or destroyed. If the disposition is by sale, the proceeds thereof
shall accrue to the village.
§ 92-12. Prohibition on public nuisance.
A. No owner or person in charge of any animal shall permit such animal to
commit a nuisance upon any paved sidewalk or station platform or
inside of any store, station or public waiting room within the village.
B. No person having charge, care, custody or control of any animal shall
cause or permit such animal to cause unreasonable noise, including,
but not limited to, any sound that is plainly audible at any location
within any residential receiving property as set forth below: [Amended
10-12-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
(1) At or after 7:00 a.m. and before 10:00 p.m., continuously for a
period of 10 minutes or more.
(2) At or after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m., continuously for a
period of five minutes or more.
§ 92-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 92-12
86:65

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 92-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
Except as provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 92-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 92-13
86:67
Chapter 98
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 268.
§ 92-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 92-13
98:68
ARTICLE I
Income-Producing Property
[Adopted 4-4-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
§ 98-1. Income and expense statements.
Where real property is income-producing property, the owner shall be
required to submit annually to the Village Assessor not later than the first
day of September a statement of all income derived from and all expenses
attributed to the operation of such property as follows:
§ 98-2. Declaration.
Such statements shall contain the following declaration: "I certify that all
information contained in this statement is true and correct to the best of
my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of any false
statement of material fact herein will subject me to the provisions of law
relevant to the making and filing of false instruments and will render this
statement null and void."
§ 98-3. Form.
The form on which such statement shall be submitted shall be prepared by
the Village Assessor and copies of such form shall be made available at the
village offices in the Village of Bronxville.
§ 98-4. Failure to file statement; penalties; enforcement
procedures.
A. Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the
property are maintained on a calendar year basis, the statement shall
be for the calendar year preceding the date the statement shall be filed.
B. Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the
property are maintained on a fiscal-year basis for federal income tax
purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year concluded as of
the first day of August preceding the date the statement shall be filed.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subdivisions A and B of this section,
where the owner of the property has not operated the property and is
without knowledge of the income and expenses of the operation of the
property for a consecutive twelve-month period concluded as of the first
day of August preceding the date of the statement shall be filed, then
the statement shall be for the period of ownership.
D. The Village Assessor may for good cause shown extend the time for
filing an income and expense statement by a period not to exceed 30
days.
A. In the event that an owner of income-producing property fails to file an
income and expense statement within the time prescribed in § 98-1 of
§ 98-1 ASSESSMENTS § 98-4
98:69
§ 98-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INCOME-PRODUCING PROPERTY — Property owned for the purpose of
securing an income from the property itself, but shall not include residential
property containing six or fewer dwelling units or property classified in
Class one or two as defined in Article Eighteen of the Real Property Tax Law
containing six or fewer dwelling units and one retail store.
§ 98-6. Disclosure of information; penalties for offenses.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided
by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Assessor, or any official or
employee of the village, any member of the Board of Assessment Review,
any person engaged or retained by the village, the Village Assessor or
the Board of Assessment Review on an independent contract basis, or any
person, who, pursuant to this article, is permitted to inspect any income
and expense statement or to whom a copy, an abstract or a portion of any
such statement is furnished, to divulge or make known in any manner the
amount of income and/or expense or any particulars set forth or disclosed
in any such statement required under this article. The Village Assessor,
Board of Assessment Review and any official of or employee of the village
charged with custody of such statements shall not be required to produce
any income and expense statement or evidence of any contained in them in
any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the village or the
Village Assessor. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery
to an owner or his or her duly authorized representative or a certified copy
of any statement filed by such owner pursuant to this article or to prohibit
the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular statements and the items thereof, or the inspection of the legal
representatives of the village or of the Board of Assessment Review of the
statement of any owner who shall bring an action to correct the assessment.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not
this article (including any extension of time for filing), the Village
Board of Assessment Review shall deny any complaint in relation to the
assessment of such property by such owner.
B. In the event an income and expense statement required under the
provisions of this article has not been timely filed, the Village Assessor
may compel by subpoena the production of the books and records of the
owner relevant to the income and expenses of the property, and may
also make application to any court of competent jurisdiction for an
order compelling the owner to furnish the required income and expense
statement and the books and records to the income and expenses of the
property. In the event such an order is issued, the Village Assessor shall
be entitled to recover from the owner the costs and expenses, including
attorneys' fees, incurred by the village in connection with the
proceeding to obtain and enforce the order.
§ 98-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 98-6
98:70
exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, at
the discretion of the court, and if the offender is an officer or employee of
the village or member of the Board of Assessment Review, the offender shall
be dismissed from office.
§ 98-7. Rules and regulations.
The Village Assessor shall be authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article.
§ 98-6 ASSESSMENTS § 98-7
98:71
Chapter 112
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Oil-burning equipment — See Ch. 200.
Plumbers and electricians — See Ch. 222.
§ 112-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Building Code
Enforcement Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 112-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for enforcement procedures in the
Village of Bronxville of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code which was made effective in the Village of Bronxville on the
first day of January 1984.
§ 112-3. Definitions.
§ 112-4. No personal liability of village officers or employees.
No officer or employee of the Village of Bronxville, acting for the village in
the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter, shall thereby render
himself or herself liable personally, and all such officers and employees
are relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act or failure to act as required or
permitted in the discharge of his or her duties hereunder.
A. All words, terms and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in such Code.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEMOLITION — For purposes of this chapter, the term "demolition"
shall be deemed to include demolition and/or removal of all or part of a
building or structure.[Added 2-14-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
STRUCTURE — Includes a change in use of a portion thereof from the
use in effect on February 19, 1987.
§ 98-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-5
98:72
§ 112-5. Designation of Superintendent of Buildings as public
official.
There is hereby designated in the Village of Bronxville a public official to be
known as the "Superintendent of Buildings," who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees at a compensation to be
fixed by it. The Superintendent of Buildings shall act as Building Inspector
for the Village of Bronxville.
§ 112-6. Acting Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 112-7. Restrictions on Superintendent of Buildings.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall not engage in any activity
inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interests of the Village
of Bronxville or with Chapter 21, Code of Ethics, nor shall he or she be
engaged directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing
of labor, materials, supplies or appliances for, or the supervision of, the
construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair or maintenance of a
building or other structure or the preparation of plans or specifications
therefor within the Village of Bronxville, excepting that this section shall
not prohibit the Superintendent of Buildings from engaging in any such
activities in connection with the construction of a building or other
structure owned by him or her for his or her own personal use and
occupancy or for the use and occupancy of members of his or her immediate
family, and not constructed for sale.
§ 112-8. Duties and powers of Superintendent of Buildings.
A. In the absence of the Superintendent of Buildings or in the case of his or
her inability to act for any reason, the Mayor shall have the power, with
the consent of the Board of Trustees, to designate a person to act on
behalf of the Superintendent of Buildings and to exercise all the powers
and perform all the duties conferred upon the Superintendent of
Buildings by this chapter.
B. In the absence of such designation, the Village Clerk shall act on behalf
of the Superintendent of Buildings and shall exercise all the powers and
perform all the duties conferred upon the Superintendent of Buildings
by this chapter.
A. Enforcement duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
rule or regulations, or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall administer and enforce all laws, rules
and regulations applicable to plans, specifications and permits for the
construction, alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or other
structures, and the installation and use of materials and equipment
therein, and the location, use and occupancy thereof.
B. Rules and regulations. He or she may promulgate rules and regulations
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees to secure the intent and
§ 112-5 ASSESSMENTS § 112-8
98:73
§ 112-9. Application for building permit.
purposes of this chapter and the proper enforcement of laws, rules
and regulations applicable to the construction, alteration, moving or
demolition of buildings or other structures.
C. Applications and permits. He or she shall receive applications, approve
plans and specifications and issue permits for the construction,
alteration, moving or demolition of buildings and other structures and
shall examine the premises for which such applications have been
received plans approved, or such permits have been issued for the
purpose of insuring compliance with all laws, rules and regulations
applicable to the construction, alteration, moving or demolition of
buildings or other structures.
D. Notices and orders. He or she shall issue in writing all appropriate
notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction, alteration, moving or
demolition of buildings and other structures and to ensure compliance
during the entire course of such construction, alteration, moving or
demolition with the requirements of such laws, rules and regulations.
Such a notice or order may be served upon the owner or his or her
agent personally, or by sending a copy thereof by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner or his or her agent at his or her address
set forth in the application for permission for the construction,
alteration, moving or demolition of such building or other structure or,
if no such application has been filed, at the address of the owner or
agent as listed on the Village tax roll; and by posting the same upon a
conspicuous portion of the premises to which the notice or order
applies.
E. Inspections. He or she shall make such inspections as are necessary or
appropriate to determine compliance with the provisions of all laws,
rules or regulations applicable to the construction, alteration, moving
or demolition of buildings or other structures. In addition to such
inspections or in lieu thereof he or she may, in his or her discretion,
accept and rely upon written reports of tests in the field by experienced
professional persons or by accredited testing laboratories or service
and inspection bureaus or agencies.
F. Certificate of occupancy. He or she shall issue a certificate of occupancy
where appropriate for a building or other structure constructed, altered
or moved, or the occupancy of which has been changed, in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
G. Investigations and reports. He or she shall, when requested by the
Board of Trustees or when, in his or her opinion, the interests of the
Village of Bronxville so require, make investigation in connection with
matters referred to in this chapter or in the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and render written or oral reports
thereon to the Board of Trustees.
§ 112-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-9
98:74
A. Building permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall
commence the construction, alteration, moving, demolition or change
in the nature of the occupancy of any building or other structure, or
cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building
permit from the Superintendent of Buildings for each such building or
structure.
B. Information required. Application for a building permit shall be made to
the Superintendent of Buildings on forms provided by him or her and
shall contain the following:
(1) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant, and
the names and addresses of their responsible officers if any of them
are corporations, and the name and address of the owner's
authorized agent, if any.
(2) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done,
including the block and lot numbers as they appear on the Official
Village Tax Map of all lots included therein.
(3) A description of the nature of the proposed work.
(4) The valuation of the proposed work.
(5) A statement of the existing and proposed use or occupancy of all
parts of such land and of all proposed buildings and other
structures thereon, including a statement of the number of
dwelling units each such building is designed to accommodate.
(6) A statement that the applicant consents to permit the
Superintendent of Buildings and any person authorized by him or
her to enter upon the premises without a search warrant in the
manner prescribed in Subdivision A of § 112-17 hereof.
(7) The name, address, telephone number and a copy of a current
Westchester County Home Improvement Business License of the
contractor retained to perform the work described in Subsection
B(3) above.
(8) A statement that such application is made to construct, alter, move,
demolish or change the nature of the occupancy of a building or
other structure in accordance with the provisions of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(9) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Superintendent of Buildings to establish compliance of the
proposed work with the requirements of all zoning laws and all
other laws, rules and regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or other structures.
C. Execution of application. The application shall be made and signed and
sworn to by the owner or his or her duty authorized agent. Where an
application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be
§ 112-9 ASSESSMENTS § 112-9
98:75
accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the proposed work is
authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized to make
such application; and the application shall contain a statement that the
owner authorizes the applicant to consent to permit the Superintendent
of Buildings or any person authorized by him or her to enter upon
the premises without a search warrant in the manner prescribed in
Subdivision A of § 112-17 hereof.
D. Plans and specifications.
(1) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan,
drawn to scale, showing:
(a) The actual shape, dimensions, orientation, angles and area of
each lot on which each proposed and existing building or other
structure on the building site is, or is proposed to be, located.
(b) The location, height, number of stories and ground coverage of
all proposed and existing buildings or other structures on the
building site, including specification of all yard dimensions.
(c) The distance between each proposed and existing building or
other structure on the building site and each lot line and
between each such building or structure and any existing
building or structure on adjoining property.
(d) The nature and character of the proposed work and of the
materials to be incorporated therein and details of all proposed
structural, mechanical and electrical work, including
computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical
data.
(e) The widths and grades of all adjoining streets, walks and alleys
and of all proposed and existing streets, walks and alleys on
the building site.
(f) Such topographic or other information as may be required by
the Superintendent of Buildings to establish compliance of the
proposed work with the requirements of all zoning laws and all
other laws, rules and regulations applicable to the
construction, alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or
other structures.
(2) All such plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the
person responsible for the design and drawings and, where
required by §§ 7209 or 7307 of the Education Law of the State of
New York, the seal and the original or authorized facsimile
signature of a licensed architect or a licensed professional
engineer. All plans accompanying an application for a building
permit shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the architect,
engineer or other person who signed them stating that he or she
§ 112-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-9
98:76
§ 112-10. Issuance of building permit or disapproval of application.
§ 112-11. Permit for part.
The Superintendent of Buildings may approve and issue a permit for the
construction, alteration, moving, demolition or change in the nature of
occupancy of part of a building or other structure, subject to compliance by
has supervised the preparation of the plans as filed and the notes
thereon and that, to the best of his or her knowledge, information
and belief, the building or structure, if built in accordance with the
plans, will conform to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and will not conflict with any other applicable
laws, except as specifically noted.
E. Where, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Buildings, compliance
with any of the requirements of this section is not necessary to his or
her decision under § 112-10 hereof on any particular application for a
building permit, he or she may waive such requirements by a waiver in
writing.
A. The Superintendent of Buildings shall examine or cause to be examined
all applications for building permits and all plans, specifications and
other documents filed therewith. He or she shall approve or disapprove
the application within 60 days from the date of submission of the
application or within such longer period as may be required or
permitted by law.
B. Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of the fees therefor,
the Superintendent of Buildings shall issue a building permit to the
applicant upon the form prescribed by him or her and shall affix his or
her signature or cause his or her signature to be affixed thereto.
C. Upon approval of the application, all sets of plans and specifications
submitted therewith shall be endorsed with the word "approved." One
set of such approved plans and specifications shall be retained in the
files of the Superintendent of Buildings and another set shall be
returned to the applicant and maintained by the applicant at the
building site open to inspection by the Superintendent of Buildings or
his or her authorized representative during reasonable working hours.
D. If the application together with plans, specifications and other
documents filed therewith describe proposed work which does not
conform to all of the requirements of this chapter, all zoning laws and
all other laws, rules or regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or other structures, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall disapprove the same and shall return
the plans and specifications to the applicant. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Superintendent of Buildings shall cause such refusal,
together with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the applicant in
writing.
§ 112-9 ASSESSMENTS § 112-11
98:77
the applicant with the requirements of § 112-9 hereof with respect to his or
her application relating to such part, if he or she finds that an application
for a building permit for the entire building or structure at that time would
not be practicable or would impose substantial hardship on the applicant.
The Superintendent of Buildings may require an applicant for a building
permit for part of a building or other structure to make such submissions
in addition to those required by § 112-9 hereof as he or she considers
necessary to determine whether such impracticability or hardship exists.
§ 112-12. Change in plans or specifications. [Amended 2-14-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 112-13. Performance of work under building permit.
A. Prior to the issuance of a demolition or building permit, an applicant
may not make any change in the application or in plans or specifications
submitted with it, unless the Superintendent of Buildings shall consent
to such change in writing.
B. No deviation from approved plans or specifications for the construction,
alteration, moving, demolition or change in the nature of occupancy of
any building or other structure, for which a demolition or building
permit has been issued, shall be made until the permit holder has
obtained written permission from the Superintendent of Buildings, who
may give such permission by signing his or her name in approval of
such changes as may be submitted to him or her in writing on the
required form and filed with such fee as may be required, provided that
he or she finds them to be in conformance with this chapter and all
other laws, rules and regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or other structures.
Should the changes be so extensive as, in the opinion of the
Superintendent of Buildings, to require a new set of plans and
specifications, an entirely new application for a demolition or building
permit must be presented to him or her in regular form for his or her
approval.
A. Term of permit; extensions. A building permit shall be effective to
authorize the commencement of work for a period of six months after
the date of its issuance. For good cause the Superintendent of Buildings
may allow a maximum of two extensions of periods not exceeding three
months each. All work carried out pursuant to a building permit shall
conform to the approved application, plans and specifications and shall
be in accordance with this chapter and all other laws, rules and
regulations applicable to the construction, alteration, moving or
demolition of buildings or other structures.
B. Display of permit. Building permits shall be prominently displayed on
the job site at all times during the progress of the work so as be readily
visible from adjacent thoroughfares.
§ 112-11 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-14
98:78
§ 112-14. Limitations.
§ 112-15. Revocation of building permit.
The Superintendent of Buildings may revoke a building permit theretofore
issued in the following instances:
§ 112-16. Stop orders. [Amended 2-14-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
When the Superintendent of Buildings has reasonable grounds to believe
that work on any building or other structure is being carried out in violation
of the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, this chapter, or any other law, rule or regulation applicable
to the construction, alteration, moving or demolition of buildings or other
structures or in an unsafe or dangerous manner, or is not in conformity with
the application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a demolition
or building permit was issued, he or she shall notify the owner of the
property, or the owner's agent, to suspend all work, and any such person
shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building activities until the
stop order has been rescinded. Such stop order shall be in writing, shall
state the conditions under which the work may be resumed and may be
served upon the owner or his or her agent personally, or by sending a copy
thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or his or
her agent at his or her address set forth in the application for a permit to
construct, alter, move or demolish such building or other structure or, if no
A. Commencement of work. Unless extended by the Superintendent of
Buildings in writing, a building permit shall expire one year after its
date of issuance in the event that a substantial amount of construction
has not then commenced, and every building permit issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings shall contain this limitation.
B. Completion of work. Unless extended by the Superintendent of
Buildings in writing, a building permit shall also expire two years after
its date of issuance, unless the proposed work has been completed and
a certificate of occupancy has been issued, and every building permit
issued by the Superintendent of Buildings shall contain this limitation.
A. Where he or she finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based;
B. Where he or she finds that the building permit was issued in error and
should not have been issued in accordance with applicable law;
C. Where he or she finds that the work performed under the building
permit is not being carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
application, plans or specifications; or
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings.
§ 112-14 ASSESSMENTS § 112-16
98:79
such application has been filed, at the address of the owner or agent as
listed on the Village tax roll; and by posting the same upon a conspicuous
portion of the premises to which the stop order applies.
§ 112-17. Right of entry.
§ 112-18. Certificate of occupancy.
A. The Superintendent of Buildings or his or her authorized representative
shall be authorized, in the performance of his or her duties, to conduct
inspections of premises, or parts of premises, at such times and in such
manner as the Superintendent of Buildings or his or her authorized
representative may find convenient or necessary during regular
working hours, with the consent of the person in possession or
occupancy.
B. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the person, in
possession or occupancy, the Superintendent of Buildings or his or her
authorized representative shall be authorized to obtain a warrant to
make an inspection, provided that reasonable or probable cause is
shown.
C. In case of an emergency, the Superintendent of Buildings or his or her
authorized representative may, without a warrant, enter any premises,
or parts of premises, to inspect the same, at any time, without the
permission of the person in possession or occupancy.
A. Required. No building or other structure hereafter constructed or
moved shall be occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
B. Temporary use. No building or other structure hereafter altered, or
upon which any other work has been performed which required the
issuance of a building permit, shall be occupied or used for more than
30 days after the completion of the work unless a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
C. Change of use. No change shall be made in the nature of the occupancy
of an existing building or other structure unless a certificate of
occupancy authorizing such change shall have been issued by the
Superintendent of Buildings.
D. Application. The owner or his or her agent shall make application for a
certificate of occupancy. Accompanying this application and before the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the
Superintendent of Buildings such fee as may be required and an
affidavit of the licensed architect or licensed professional engineer who
signed the original plans, or of the licensed architect or licensed
professional engineer who administered the construction of the work,
except that in the event that no licensed architect or licensed
professional engineer was required to sign the original plans, such
§ 112-16 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-18
98:80
§ 112-19. Inspection prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Superintendent of Buildings
shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and
premises for which an application for such certificate has been filed, and he
or she may conduct such inspections as he or she deems appropriate from
time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a building
permit has been issued.
§ 112-20. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
affidavit may be made by the superintendent of construction who
supervised the work and who, by reason of his or her experience, is
qualified to superintend the work for which the certificate of occupancy
is sought. Such affidavit shall state that the applicant has examined the
approved plans of the building or other structure for which a certificate
of occupancy is sought, and that to the best of his or her knowledge,
information and belief, based on periodic observations at the site, the
building or other structure has been erected in accordance with such
approved plans and, as erected, complies with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (if applicable), subject to
any variance or modification thereof theretofore granted pursuant to
§ 385 of the Executive Law of the State of New York, and with all
other applicable laws governing building construction. There shall also
be filed with such application such electrical, plumbing, heating or
sanitation certificates, or other evidence of approval, by experienced
professional persons or by accredited testing laboratories or service
and inspection bureaus or agencies as the Superintendent of Buildings
shall require.
A. When, after final inspection, the Superintendent of Buildings finds that
the proposed work has been completed in accordance with all zoning
laws and all other laws, rules and regulations applicable to the
construction, alteration, moving, demolition or occupancy of buildings
or other structures, and also in accordance with the application, plans
and specifications filed in connection with the application for the
building permit, he or she shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon
the form provided by him or her. If he or she finds that the proposed
work has not been properly completed, the Superintendent of Buildings
shall not issue a certificate of occupancy and may order the work to be
completed in conformity with the building permit therefor and in
conformity with all such applicable laws, rules and regulations.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, where appropriate, within 30
days after written application therefor is made or within such longer
period as the applicant shall agree to.
C. The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed, and that the proposed occupancy is in conformity with all
zoning laws and all other laws, rules and regulations applicable to the
§ 112-18 ASSESSMENTS § 112-20
98:81
§ 112-21. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
Upon written request, the Superintendent of Buildings may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or other structure, or part
thereof, before the entire work covered by a building permit shall have been
completed, provided that such portion or portions as have been completed
may be occupied safely without endangering life or the public health or
welfare. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall remain effective for a
period not exceeding three months from its date of issuance. For good cause
the Superintendent of Buildings may allow a maximum of two extensions for
periods not exceeding three months each.
§ 112-22. Fees.
§ 112-23. Building records and reports.
§ 112-24. Penalties for offenses.
construction, alteration, moving, demolition or occupancy of buildings
or other structures, and shall specify the use or uses and the extent
thereof to which the building or structure or its several parts may be
put.
A. Upon the filing of an application, the fees shall be paid as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. All Building Department fees and related construction development
fees, including the fee for certificates of occupancy, will automatically
be doubled when work is commenced on or after September 15, 2001,
without first securing all required permits and approvals. [Added
9-10-2001]
C. An administrative fee of $250 shall be required in addition to all
Building Department fees and related construction development fees
when work was completed prior to September 15, 2001, without first
securing all required permits and approvals. [Added 9-10-2001]
A. The Superintendent of Buildings shall keep permanent official records
of all transactions and activities conducted by him or her including all
applications received, plans approved, permits and certificates issued,
fees charged and collected, inspection reports, all fee schedules
established by him or her, all rules and regulations promulgated by him
or her and all records open to public inspection during normal business
hours.
B. The Superintendent of Buildings shall annually submit to the Board of
Trustees a written report and summary of all business conducted by
him or her, including approvals, permits and certificates issued, fees
collected, orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made
and appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
§ 112-20 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-24
98:82
§ 112-25. Abatement of violation. [Amended 2-14-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
In addition to the penalties for set forth above, appropriate actions and
proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent unlawful demolition
or construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to prevent illegal
acts, conduct of business in or about any premises; and these remedies shall
be in addition to the penalties prescribed in the preceding section.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision
of this chapter or to fail in any manner to comply with a notice, directive
or order of the Superintendent of Buildings or other authority, or to
construct, alter or use and occupy any building or structure or part
thereof in a manner not permitted by an approved demolition permit,
building permit, or certificate of occupancy. [Amended 2-14-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the
Superintendent of Buildings or other authority, within the time fixed for
compliance therewith, and any owner, builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents
or any other person taking part or assisting in the construction,
demolition, or use of any building who shall knowingly violate any of the
applicable provisions of this chapter, or any lawful order, notice,
directive, permit or certificate of the Superintendent of Buildings or
other authority made thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $5,000. [Amended 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 2-2000; 2-14-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
C. Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be
deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment and
shall not impose any disability upon or affect or impair the credibility as
a witness, or otherwise, of any person convicted thereof.
D. This section shall not apply to violations of the provisions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code punishable
under § 385 of the Executive Law; nor to violations of the provisions of
the Multiple Residence Law punishable under § of the Multiple
Residence Law.
E. For the purposes of this section, each twenty-four-hour period or
portion thereof in which a violation of any provisions of this chapter or
any regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter, or in
violation of the provisions of any building permit or certificate of
occupancy, continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 112-24 ASSESSMENTS § 112-26
98:83
§ 112-26. Demolition permits. [Amended 2-14-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
A. Permit required.
(1) The demolition or removal of more than 25% of a principal building
or structure within any twelve-month period shall not be carried
out until a demolition permit is obtained.
(2) Unless waived by the Superintendent of Buildings, a demolition
permit shall be required for the demolition or removal of an
accessory building or structure.
(3) Provided, however, if the Superintendent of Buildings so elects,
demolition or removal may be approved as part of a building permit
for any building or structure that is proposed to be built as a
replacement for, or in or about the location of, the demolished
building or structure.
(4) If demolition is to be conducted in pursuance of, or in any way
related to, contemplated prospective additional construction
(including reconstruction) on the same property where demolition
is proposed, a demolition permit shall not be issued until the permit
for the additional construction is issued, and demolition shall be
covered under the building permit for such work. Provided,
however, this provision may be waived by the Superintendent of
Buildings where special circumstances (e.g., hazardous condition)
exist.
(5) If a demolition permit is issued without issuance of a building
permit for additional construction, except in the case of special
circumstances referenced above, no building permit for
construction (including reconstruction) on the same property
where the demolition occurred shall be issued for a period of one
year from the completion of the demolition. The property owner
can seek relief from this one-year waiting period from the Village
Planning Board. The Planning Board may grant such relief upon a
demonstration by the applicant that the construction (including
reconstruction) for which the permit is sought was not
contemplated at the time the demolition permit was issued.
B. Unless waived by the Superintendent of Buildings, the following
information in form and substance satisfactory to the Superintendent of
Buildings shall be submitted as part of a demolition permit application:
·
(1) The time frames during which demolition and site restoration may
occur and will be completed;
(2) A plan to manage parking and traffic at and adjacent to the subject
property throughout the demolition process;
§ 112-26 BRONXVILLE CODE § 112-26
98:84
(3) Documentation from utility companies evidencing that all utility
hookups have been or will be properly terminated;
(4) An asbestos clearance report, where applicable;
(5) An oil tank removal permit, where applicable;
(6) A plan for filling all exposed below-grade areas with soil and, if
relevant, that the lot be graded to match adjacent grades, all in
compliance with Chapter 257, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control;
(7) A plan to protect trees and other vegetation during demolition
operations; and
(8) A post-demolition landscaping plan in accordance with the
Superintendent of Buildings's requirements, which shall include
maintenance of such landscaping and a prohibition against bare
areas of soil.
C. Notice.
(1) In the Residence AAA, AA, and A Districts (except in the case of
emergencies/hazardous circumstances), at least 10 days prior to
issuance of a demolition permit, notice, containing a description of
the action proposed in the demolition permit application, shall be
mailed by the applicant using the U.S. Post Office Certificate of
Mailing process to the record owners of neighboring properties
within 100 feet of the subject property.
(2) No demolition permit will be issued for the demolition or removal of
a principal building or structure in the Residence AAA, AA, or A
Districts until proof of the above-required notice having been
mailed is provided to the Superintendent of Buildings.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the term "record owner(s)" shall
mean the person(s) shown on the real property tax records of the
Village of Bronxville on the date the notice is mailed as being the
owner(s) of the property.
(4) In the event there is substantial compliance with this section, the
failure of any property owner to receive the required notice shall
not invalidate any action taken by the Superintendent of Buildings
in connection with the application to which the required notice
refers.
D. Revocation. The Superintendent of Buildings may revoke a demolition
permit theretofore issued in the circumstances described in § 112-15,
Revocation of building permit.
E. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to penalties as set forth in § 112-24, Penalties for offenses.
§ 112-26 ASSESSMENTS § 112-26
98:85
Chapter 140
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 140-1. Designation of lead agency.
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Part
617.6 and 617.7, except that in the following Type I and unlisted actions the
lead agency shall be as provided herein:
§ 140-2. Superintendent of Buildings to recommend designation of
lead agency.
The Superintendent of Buildings shall act as the village clearinghouse
for lead agency designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and
applicants to identify other agencies, including federal and state, that may
be involved in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted
actions. The clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the
designation of a lead agency.
§ 140-3. Additional Type II actions.
The following are deemed Type II actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.5:
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations, other than
designation of a CD District, and not requiring a federal or state agency
permit or approval; Board of Trustees.
B. Construction or expansion of village buildings, structures and facilities
within the village not requiring a federal or state agency permit or
approval: Board of Trustees.
C. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the village, not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: Board of Trustees.
D. Applications for development, as defined in § 310-3 of Chapter 310,
Zoning, including developments involving a variance and/or
designation of a CD District, but not requiring a federal or state agency
permit or approval: Planning Board.
A. Reconstruction or repair of existing highways, including drainage, not
involving the addition of new travel lanes.
B. Installation or repair of utility facilities within a highway right-of-way.
C. Reconstruction or replacement of bridges on the same location.
§ 112-26 BRONXVILLE CODE § 140-3
140:86
Chapter 150
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 150-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Law
of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 150-2. Adoption of New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain Code known as the
"New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code," of which
Code not fewer than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of
the Clerk of the Village and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this
chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the limits of the Village of Bronxville.
§ 150-3. Designation of Chief of the Fire Department as
enforcement officer.
A. The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be
enforced by the Fire Department of the Town of Eastchester.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department is permitted to detail such members
of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend to the
Board of Trustees the employment of technical inspectors, who, when
such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to
determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open
to members and nonmembers of the Fire Department, and
appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term
with removal only for cause.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department shall make such periodic reports to
the Board of Trustees of the Village as the Board shall from time to time
reasonably request and the Chief of the Fire Department shall also
recommend any amendments to the Code which, in his or her judgment,
shall be desirable.
D. The Chief of the Fire Department may request and shall receive so far
as may be necessary, in the discharge of his or her duties, the
assistance and cooperation of other officials of the village.
E. Funds received from the State of New York under § 54-g, State Finance
Law, for the purpose of providing support of activities relating to
administration, enforcement and inspection as provided in the New
§ 140-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 150-3
150:87
§ 150-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPALITY — Wherever used in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, it shall be held to mean the "Village of
Bronxville."
CORPORATION COUNSEL — Wherever used in the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, it shall be held to mean the
"Village Counsel for the Village of Bronxville."
§ 150-5. Establishment of limits in which certain activities are to be
prohibited.
The limits referred to in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited, in which manufacture and storage of fireworks are prohibited,
in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids
are prohibited and in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted, are hereby established as the limits of the Village of Bronxville.
§ 150-6. Establishment of motor vehicle routes.
The routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents and
for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles
shall be established by the Chief of the Fire Department at the time of
issuing a permit for such transport.
§ 150-7. Establishment of fire lanes on private property. [Amended
12-10-1990 by L.L. No. 20-1990; 4-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code may be shared
with the Eastchester Fire District in recognition of the inspection
services provided by that agency in an amount to be fixed by action of
the Board of Trustees on an annual basis or as such funds are received
if not on an annual basis. [Added 3-14-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
A. Designated fire lanes. The fire lanes in the Village of Bronxville are
hereby established as follows:
(1) Alden Place - 15 feet on each side of hydrant.
(2) Latimer Lane - 15 feet on each side of hydrant No. 120.
(3) For a distance of 45 feet in from the corner of Sagamore Road and
Beechtree Lane along the south side of Beechtree Lane.
(4) For a distance of 30 feet in from the corner of Avon Road and
Beverly Road along the west side of Beverly Road.
§ 150-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 150-7
150:88
(5) For a distance of 80 feet on the north side of Avon Road at Beverly
Road going east toward Sagamore Road.
(6) Alden Place - for a distance of 100 feet from the intersection at
Midland Avenue on both the east side and west side.
(7) Both sides of the entrance road leading from Prescott Avenue to the
Gramatan Court Town Houses (located on the tax map as Section
12, Block 4, Lot 1), by posting sign at entrance from Prescott
Avenue: "No Parking Along Curbs - Fire Lane."
(8) On the outer perimeter of the courtyard at Gramatan Town Houses
in front of units numbered 1 to 16 and units numbered 29 and 30,
by posting sign at top of entrance drive: "No Parking Along Curbs -
Fire Lane."
(9) Midland Gardens.
(a) For a distance of 240 feet heading north from the corner of
Midland Avenue along the east side of the Midland Gardens
service road, adjacent to front (west facing facade) of Building
#4.
(b) For a distance of 71 feet from the northwest corner of Building
#4 heading east along the south side of the Midland Gardens
service road adjacent to the north side of Building #4.
(c) For a distance of 175 feet from the northwest corner of
Building #1 heading south along the east side of the Midland
Gardens service road adjacent to the west side of Building #1.
(d) For a distance of 85 feet from the southeast corner of Building
#3 heading south along the west side of the Midland Gardens
service road adjacent to the south side of Building #3.
(e) For a distance of 123 feet from the southwest corner of
Building #2 heading counter clockwise along the circular
portion of the Midland Gardens service road adjacent to the
front entrance of Building #3.
(10) Eastbourne Apartments.
(a) For a distance of 140 feet along the northerly property line of
Eastbourne Apartments between Stoneleigh Plaza and Lake
Avenue.
(b) Starting at Lake Avenue on the south connection road between
Lake Avenue and Stoneleigh Plaza in a westward direction for
a distance of 82 feet, then north along the east curbline of
Stoneleigh Plaza for a distance of 196 feet.
(11) Stoneleigh Plaza. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on
Stoneleigh Plaza:
§ 150-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 150-7
150:89
§ 150-8. Modifications.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code upon application in writing by the owner or the lessee, or his or
her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
(a) On the west side from the intersection of the north curbline of
Pondfield Road West and the west curbline of Stoneleigh Plaza
northerly to a point 236 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) On the west side from a point in the north line of the driveway
leading from the garage of Stoneleigh Apartment northerly
along the west side of same and curving to the east and then to
the south along the east side of Stoneleigh Plaza for a total
distance of 227 feet.
(12) Lake Avenue and Rivermere Apartments. The parking of vehicles is
hereby prohibited on Lake Avenue as follows: [Amended
1-8-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 6-11-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
(a) On the east side from a point five feet south of the northerly
line of the Lake Avenue apartments extended to a point 19 feet
northerly therefrom.
(b) Beginning at a point 30 feet southerly from the southeast
corner of the Rivermere Apartment building and 23 feet
westerly from the Metro North Railroad fence; thence westerly
for a distance of 15 feet; thence southerly for a distance of nine
feet; thence northeasterly 28 feet to the point of beginning.
(c) Beginning at a point in the Metro North/Lake Avenue Owners
property line 92 feet eight inches southerly from the southeast
corner of the Rivermere Apartment building; thence running in
a southerly direction along the property line for a distance of
33 feet.
(13) Southgate Apartments. The parking of vehicles is hereby
prohibited in the six feet area directly in front of the south
extension staircase exit on the connector road between Stoneleigh
Plaza and Lake Avenue.
(14) Bronxville Elementary School. From the driveway intersection with
Midland Avenue at the north end to the driveway intersection with
Midland Avenue at the south end including the entire traffic lane
closest to the school entrance for a distance of approximately 388
feet. [Added 1-11-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
B. Amendments. No fire lanes can be established on private property other
than those specifically set forth in this chapter, except by formal
amendment of this Section by the Board of Trustees pursuant to proper
legal notice, public hearing and other applicable provisions of law.
§ 150-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 150-8
150:90
of carrying out the strict letter of such Code, provided that the intent of
such Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records
of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
§ 150-9. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application
or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, in each case with respect to any property located
within the Village of Bronxville, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Bronxville within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 150-10. New materials, processes or occupancies which require
permits.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall determine and specify after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes
or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code. The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
§ 150-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code hereby adopted or fail to
comply therewith, except for violations of § 150-7 hereof, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall
build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail
to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Bronxville or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
violation, punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
B. Any person or persons violating § 150-7 hereof or neglecting to comply
with any fire or police directive made pursuant to § 150-7 shall be guilty
§ 150-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 150-11
150:91
Chapter 156
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 257.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 156-1. Statutory authorization; purpose.
of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $25 or imprisonment up to 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment for each offense.
C. The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
A. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville finds that
the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Bronxville and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and
injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such
damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set
forth, this chapter is adopted.
B. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages;
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
§ 150-11 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-1
156:92
§ 156-2. Word usage and definitions.
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood-blight areas.
(7) Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly
§ 156-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-2
156:93
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special
flood hazard.”
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
(1) A nonbasement building:
§ 156-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-2
156:94
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or,
in the case of a building in Zones V1-V30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(1)
§ 156-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-2
156:95
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
(4)
§ 156-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-2
156:96
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
§ 156-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-2
156:97
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 156-4D(2).
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual “start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. Substantial improvement also means
cumulative substantial improvement. The term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
(1)
§ 156-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-2
156:98
§ 156-3. General provisions; penalties for offenses.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Bronxville.
B. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Bronxville,
Community Number 360905, are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36119C0329F and
36119C0337F, whose effective date is September 28, 2007,
and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not
affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(b) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance
Study, Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions,” dated
September 28, 2007.
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file
at the office of the Village Clerk.
C. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
(1) This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the
most restrictive or that imposing the highest standards shall
govern.
§ 156-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-3
156:99
§ 156-4. Administration.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special flood
hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of
noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Village of Bronxville from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any
structure found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for
which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an
approved variance under § 156-6 will be declared noncompliant and
notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village
of Bronxville, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Designation of the local administrator. The Superintendent of Buildings
is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development permits in
accordance with its provisions.
B. The floodplain development permit.
(1) Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for
all construction and other development to be undertaken in areas
of special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of
protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring
that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any
development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 156-3B, without a valid
floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be
§ 156-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-4
156:100
made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may
include but not be limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the
area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
(2) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee, as set forth in § A321-7. In
addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the
Village of Bronxville for any additional costs necessary for review,
inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may
require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional
costs.
C. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate; additional information may be required on
the permit application form:
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH or
Zone A if base flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of
the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 156-5B(3).
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 156-5D.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 156-3B, when notified by
the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
§ 156-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-4
156:101
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
D. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local
administrator shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(a) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 156-4C, and for compliance with the
provisions and standards of this chapter.
(b) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If
a proposed building site is located in an area of special flood
hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall meet the applicable standards of § 156-5 and, in
particular, § 156-5A(1).
(c) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of
special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood
velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant
to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may
result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet
the requirements of § 156-5, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(d) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required
by state or federal law.
(2) Use of other flood data.
(a) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
designated areas of special flood hazard on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced
§ 156-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-4
156:102
water surface elevation data (these areas are designated Zone
A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed
pursuant to § 156-4C(7), as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(b) When base flood elevation data is not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the
purposes of this chapter.
(3) Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director, Region
II, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) Determine that the permit holder has provided for
maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(4) Construction stage. The local administrator shall:
(a) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor
or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially
improved structure, obtain from the permit holder a
certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level. The
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by the same. For manufactured homes, the permit
holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement
of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also
be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site
for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed
and ready for highway use).
(b) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval
of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project unless immediately corrected.
§ 156-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-4
156:103
(5) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development
permit and/or any variance provisions.
(6) Stop-work orders.
(a) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing
without a development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order
shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 156-3E.
(b) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall
subject the violator to the penalties described in § 156-3E.
(7) Certificate of compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 156-3B, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to
permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or
both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the local administrator stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(b) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development
in areas of special flood hazard.
(c) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 156-4D(5), and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
(8) Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(a) Floodplain development permits and certificates of
compliance;
(b) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 156-4D(4)(a) and (b), and whether or
not the structures contain a basement;
§ 156-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-4
156:104
§ 156-5. Construction standards.
(c) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 156-4D(4)(a)
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(d) Variances issued pursuant to § 156-6; and
(e) Notices required under § 156-4D(3).
A. General standards. The following standards apply to new development,
including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of
special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 156-3B:
(1) Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home
and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(a) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(b) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to
minimize flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
(2) Encroachments.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any location; or
[2] The Village of Bronxville agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Bronxville for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping
and reimburse the Village of Bronxville for all costs related
to the final map revision.
(b) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
§ 156-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-5
156:105
adopted in § 156-3B, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in the floodway (including
fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood; or
[2] The Village of Bronxville agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received
and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses
and mapping and reimburses the Village of Bronxville for
all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping
and reimburse the Village of Bronxville for all costs related
to the final map revisions.
(c) Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized
fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation
at or adjacent to the development site. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely to the watercourse. No
area below the waterline of a pond or other body of water can
be credited as a compensating excavation.
B. Standards for all structures.
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during the base
flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
(c) Enclosed areas.
[1] For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure
within Zones A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A, if base
flood elevation data is available, new and substantially
§ 156-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-5
156:106
improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement and which are subject to flooding designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
and
[b] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished
grade.
[2] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are
not permitted.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other
service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction
boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood
elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or
the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system;
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that
have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided
with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing
through a building's exterior wall; and
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
§ 156-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-5
156:107
C. Residential structures.
(1) Elevation. The following standards, in addition to the standards in
§ 156-5A(1) and (2) and § 156-5B, apply to structures located in
areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood level.
(b) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
(c) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet
above the depth number specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 156-3B (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified).
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures on slopes.
D. Nonresidential structures. The following standards apply to new and
substantially improved commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
structures, in addition to the requirements in § 156-5A(1) and (2) and
§ 156-5B:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
§ 156-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-5
156:108
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 156-5B(3).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of § 156-5D(1)(b), including the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to
be floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
E. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards, in addition to the standards in § 156-5A and B, apply, as
indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and
to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood
hazard.
(1) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE
and AH shall either:
[1] Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[3] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 156-5E(2), (3) and (4).
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect-
type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in
Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately
§ 156-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-5
156:109
§ 156-6. Variance procedure.
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
(3) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 156-3B (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
F. Critical facilities. In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain
facilities that would result in serious danger to life and health, or
widespread social or economic dislocation, no new critical facility shall
be located within any area of special flood hazard, or within any fivehundred-
year flood zone shown as a B Zone or a shaded X Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
A. Appeals board.
(1) The Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Bronxville
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
§ 156-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-6
156:110
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 156-6A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in § 156-6A(4)(a) through (l) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
§ 156-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 156-6
156:111
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of § 156-6B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section are
met.
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on
or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing chapters
or ordinances.
(7) Notification.
(a) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
§ 156-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 156-6
156:112
Chapter 164
GARDENERS AND GARDENING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. A321.
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Gardeners and
Gardening Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate gardening by hired employees
or independent contractors, the disposition of garden debris and related
material, the safeguarding of neighborhoods from intrusion by unauthorized
persons and generally to protect the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community.
§ 164-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings unless the context or subject matter otherwise require.
GARDENER — Any person who is retained to cultivate or care for a garden,
lawn, hedges, shrubs or trees as an employee or independent contractor or
the employee or subcontractor of an independent contractor.
HOUSEHOLDER — Any person occupying any residential premises with
permanent improvements thereon, whether as owner, tenant or a person
with permission of the owner, tenant or other person having a legal right to
occupy the premises.
HOUSEHOLD GREEN WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves and cuttings from
shrubs, hedges and trees, and garden debris. It shall not be construed to
include garbage, recyclable material, construction debris, refuse and other
items that are collectible for disposition under Chapter 72 of the Village of
Bronxville Code of 1981.
PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT — Any person legally occupying any
premises with or without permanent improvements.
§ 164-4. Licenses.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required in § 156-4D(8) of this chapter.
A. Required. No person shall engage in the business of gardening for hire,
individually as a hired employee of a householder or property owner or
§ 156-6 GARDENERS AND GARDENING § 164-4
164:113
occupant, or as an independent contractor or as an employee or
subcontractor of an independent contractor without first obtaining a
license therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Application. Applications for a license or a renewal thereof shall be
made to the Village Clerk on forms provided by the village. The
applicant shall provide his or her name, age, address, social security
number and whether or not he or she has been convicted of a crime and
such other information as may be necessary to establish the
qualifications of the applicant.
C. Issuance. The Village Clerk, upon being satisfied that the applicant is
familiar with all applicable laws pertaining to the disposition of
household green waste, whether federal, state, county or village, and is
otherwise qualified to carry on the trade of gardening, shall issue a
license therefor; otherwise, the Village Clerk shall deny the application.
D. Exemption. No person under 18 years of age shall be required to obtain
a license hereunder.
E. Term; renewal; fees. Licenses shall be issued for a term of one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed at any time one month
prior to the expiration thereof. The Board of Trustees shall determine
by resolution the fee therefor. 18 [Amended 6-13-1994]
F. Revocation; suspension; denial.
(1) The Village Clerk may at any time for cause revoke or suspend a
license issued under this chapter. A suspension shall not exceed 30
days and may be done at any time the Village Clerk determines that
public health, safety or welfare requires same.
(2) A license may be revoked only after a hearing before the Village
Clerk or a Hearing Officer designated by the Board of Trustees. The
hearing must be held no later than 10 days after written notice is
served in person or by regular mail on the licensee at his or her
address. The written notice shall specify the grounds, the facts and
the dates of any alleged violations. At the hearing, the licensee or
any interested party may present witnesses or other proof and shall
have the right to present evidence, to cross-examine witnesses and
to be represented by counsel. After the hearing is closed, the
Village Clerk or Hearing Officer shall determine whether to revoke
the license, to suspend the license for a term not to exceed an
additional 30 days or to declare that the licensee is exonerated of
any charges against him or her and shall give the reasons therefor.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Clerk or the
Hearing Officer may appeal same to the Board of Trustees within
10 days after the decision is filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
The Board of Trustees shall hear the appeal within 30 days of
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. A321, Fees Schedule.
§ 164-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 164-4
164:114
§ 164-5. Rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works may promulgate rules and regulations
to secure the intent and purpose of this chapter and the proper enforcement
of laws, rules and regulations applicable to the handling, collection and
disposition of household green waste.
§ 164-6. Appearance tickets.
The Superintendent of Public Works and the General Foreman of the
Department of Public Works are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets in the enforcement of this chapter. For the purposes
herein, the provisions contained in Chapter 7, entitled "Appearance
Tickets," of this Code shall be applicable to the issuance of appearance
tickets hereunder.
§ 164-7. Violations; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 172
GREASE TRAPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbers and electricians — See Ch. 222.
Storm drainage system — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 172-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to protect residents, businesses, and the
environment within the Village of Bronxville from blockages of the Village's
sanitary sewer system caused by grease, kitchen oils, and other substances
discharged from food establishments located in the Village.
receipt of the appeal and shall make its decision within 30 days
after close of the hearing on the appeal. The decision of the Board
of Trustees shall be final, subject to an Article 78 proceeding in the
Supreme Court.
A. Any person who shall carry on the trade of gardener without a license
within the Village of Bronxville shall be guilty of a violation pursuant to
the Penal Law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate violation.
B. Any person convicted of a violation under this chapter, or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the authority of this chapter, shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $250 or 15 days imprisonment, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 164-4 GARDENERS AND GARDENING § 172-2
164:115
§ 172-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING SEWER — A pipe or pipes maintained and controlled by private
persons for the purpose of conveying wastewater from the waste-producing
location to the sanitary sewer collection system.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A retail establishment serving prepared food
and drink within an enclosed building for consumption within the building
or off the premises, including, but not limited to, restaurants, lunch
counters, cafes, diners, fast-food establishments, food take-out
establishments, pizza parlors and luncheonettes.
GREASE — A material comprised of fatty matter from animal or vegetable
sources or hydrocarbons of petroleum origins. The terms "oil and grease"
and "oil and grease substances" shall be deemed grease by definition.
GREASE TRAP — A watertights device constructed to separate and trap
or hold grease from the wastewater discharged from a food establishment
in order to prevent grease from entering the sanitary sewer system, also
referred to as a "grease interceptor" or "grease recovery device." The
grease trap may be an internal grease trap located within the food
establishment, an external grease trap located outside the food
establishment, or both
WAREWASH SINK — Any sink, compartment sinks, containers, buckets, or
other device or vessel in a food establishment, where utensils, dishware
equipment and/or other items coming into contact with food are cleaned.
§ 172-3. Installation and maintenance of traps; storage and
disposal of grease.
A. Grease trap installation. The Superintendent of Buildings may at any
time require the installation and/or relocation of an internal or external
grease trap at a food establishment, as he/she may deem necessary to
maintain any particular building sewer pipe, and lateral sewer pipe, or
sewer main pipe free from obstructions caused by grease or oil
emanating from a food establishment. Parties required to install grease
traps shall be given a reasonable amount of time to complete the
installation.
B. Food establishment. In every case where a food establishment is
preparing or selling food, a suitable internal or external grease trap
conforming to applicable building and plumbing codes must be
installed.
C. New or remodeled food establishments.
(1) All food establishments with a warewash sink must install an
internal grease trap. New or remodeled food establishments, at the
discretion of the Superintendent of Buildings, may be required to
install an external grease trap. For the purpose of this regulation, a
§ 172-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 172-3
164:116
remodeled food establishment is a food establishment that
undergoes a renovation requiring the submittal of plans to the
Village Building Department during the plan review process.
(2) External grease traps must have a minimum capacity of 1,000
gallons and shall be sized in accordance with the standards set
forth in the Uniform Code of the State of New York, Grease Traps.
In the absence of seating, the minimum size grease trap shall be
1,000 gallons or 100% of peak daily water use, whichever is
greater, to ensure a twenty-four-hour detention time. For the
purpose of this regulation, when evaluating new construction, the
peak daily flow used may be established by water use records from
a similar food establishment.
D. Grease trap maintenance. All grease traps shall be maintained by the
food establishment at the food establishment's expense. At a minimum,
the food establishment or its designee shall inspect grease traps
monthly; and shall have all grease traps cleaned before the amount of
grease exceeds 25% of the grease capacity of the grease trap or once
every month for internal grease traps and once every six months for
external grease traps, whichever comes first. Written logs of
inspections, cleaning and pumpings shall be maintained in an on-site
binder readily accessible to the Superintendent of Buildings or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
E. Best management practices. Food establishments shall integrate best
management practices to reduce grease discharged to the sewer
system. In addition to maintenance of grease traps, best management
practices include, but are not limited to:
(1) Dry-wiping pots, pans, and dishes before putting them in the
dishwasher or warewash sink;
(2) Collecting and disposing of used grease through a licensed septage
handler instead of pouring it down the drain;
(3) Capturing the grease in ventilation and exhaust hoods.
F. Storage of waste grease from food preparation. All waste grease and
other related wastes requiring storage at the food establishment as a
result of removal from grease traps or otherwise shall be collected and
stored in an appropriate container(s) (i.e., fifty-five-gallon drums or
such other suitable storage containers) in an approved location at the
food establishment. The container(s) shall be stored on an impervious
surface such as concrete or pavement which will provide for secondary
containment in case of leakage. Containers shall be either sealed or
stored in a sheltered area, and maintained to prevent entry of
precipitation and of animals. All waste grease and related wastes shall
be removed from the food establishment only by a permitted septage
handler. All grease containers and surrounding areas must be kept in a
sanitary condition at all times.
§ 172-3 GARDENERS AND GARDENING § 172-3
164:117
§ 172-4. Inspection and recordkeeping.
§ 172-5. Enforcement.
G. Disposal. All waste grease and related wastes shall be removed from
the food establishment only by a permitted septage handler. All
material removed from grease traps, and hauling and disposal of grease
and other related waste, shall be documented in a written record, and
maintained as provided in § 172-3D above. The food establishment is
responsible for assuring that all waste grease and related wastes are
disposed of in accordance with all federal, state, and local disposal
regulations.
A. The Superintendent of Buildings and/or the Superintendent of Public
Works or their designees shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of these regulations. These officials may enter upon any
premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
B. All records pertaining to grease trap maintenance, purchasing, storage
and removal of grease and related products and waste products shall be
retained by the food establishment on premises readily accessible to
the Superintendent of Buildings, the Superintendent of Public Works or
their designees for no less than three years.
C. Upon request by the Superintendent of Buildings, the Superintendent
of Public Works or their designees, a food establishment shall furnish all
information required to enforce and monitor compliance with the
regulations, including, but not limited to, a complete inventory of all
food and maintenance-related products that are purchased by the food
establishment and receipts from permitted septage handler(s) retained
to remove waste grease or related wastes from the food establishment.
D. Refusal to provide reasonable cooperation and access shall constitute a
violation of these regulations subject to enforcement as set forth below.
A. Notice. The Superintendent of Buildings may serve upon any person in
violation of this regulation a written notice stating the substance of the
violation. Within 30 days of the date of such notice, a plan for correction
of the violation shall be submitted to the party who issued the notice.
Failure to correct violation(s) of any provision of this regulation may
result in enforcement and/or penalties as set forth below.
B. Local enforcement.
(1) This regulation may be enforced by the Superintendent of
Buildings or the Superintendent of Public Works.
(2) Whoever violates any provision of this regulation shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 per
day for each day of violation, commencing 10 days following the
day of receipt of written notice from the Superintendent of
Buildings or the Superintendent of Public Works. Each day or
§ 172-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 172-5
164:118
§ 172-6. Variances.
Chapter 186
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS
portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more than
one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Other. The Superintendent of Buildings or the Superintendent of Public
Works may enforce this regulation or enjoin violations thereof through
any lawful process, and the election of one remedy by the
Superintendent of Buildings or the Superintendent of Public Works, or
his or her respective designee, shall not preclude enforcement through
any other lawful means.
A. The Village Board may grant a variance or exemption from any
provision of these regulations when, in its opinion, the applicant for the
variance has established that:
(1) Enforcement of the provision of this regulation from which a
variance is sought would be manifestly unjust, considering all the
relevant facts and circumstances; and
(2) A level of protection to the Village of Bronxville sanitary sewer
system at least equivalent to that provided under this regulation
can be achieved without strict application of the provision from
which a variance is sought.
B. Requests for variances from these regulations must be submitted in
writing to the Village Board. Applicants for variances shall be afforded
the opportunity to appear in person, including any representatives and
experts, at a meeting of the Village Board to consider the variance
request. Information on food preparation, grease, oil and related waste
produced by or discharged from the food establishment, size of any
proposed grease trap, facility use, facility layout, plumbing plans and
other relevant documents must be presented for review. Wastewater
calculations, prepared by a licensed plumber, architect or engineer,
may be presented to establish grounds for a variance.
C. Applicants for variance(s) shall pay such application fees as may be set
by resolution of the Village Board from time to time.
D. Applicants for variance(s) shall be subject to the deposit and payment of
professional consultation fees under the same terms and conditions as
are provided for land use applications pursuant to Article X of Chapter
310 of this Code.
§ 172-5 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-1
186:119
§ 186-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Multichannel Service
Providers Regulatory Local Law for the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 186-2. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the applicable federal
and state laws governing multichannel service practices which specifically
includes the operation and provision of a cable television system. Moreover,
with respect to the operation and provision of a cable television system,
this chapter shall be construed in accordance with any applicable rules and
regulations of the NYSCCT.
§ 186-3. Scope; applicability.
This chapter shall apply within the geographical limits of the village,
including any areas subsequently annexed by the village, unless state law
prescribes otherwise, or in some fashion restricts or alters the effect of this
chapter to a subsequently annexed area of the village.
§ 186-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED CALLS — Those telephone calls that are connected to an
MCS provider's general information number or customer service telephone
system, without being answered by a representative of the MCS provider or
by a call response system within 30 seconds after receipt of the call.
A/B SWITCH or INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH — Any device that enables
a viewer to select between any programming source (including any type
of multichannel service) or any ancillary equipment. Such a device may
be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch, may utilize other
multichannel system interface equipment and may be built into television
receivers.
ACCESS CHANNEL — A government, education or public channel which is
carried on a multichannel system, but which is not part of any institutional
network.
ACTIVATED CHANNEL — A channel engineered at the headend of the
multichannel system for the provision of services generally available to
residential subscribers of the multichannel system, regardless of whether
such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for
governmental, educational or public use.
AFFILIATE — Another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled
by or is under common ownership or control with such person.
ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE — A charge used in place of an established
franchise fee that the Board requires as payment for the privilege of using
the streets, easements, public ways or rights-of-way of the village in order
§ 186-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-4
186:120
to construct, maintain and/or operate a multichannel system. An alternative
user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross revenues (as is the case in
a franchise fee), but rather is based, to the extent permitted by applicable
law, on the value of the village property that an MCS provider uses to
construct, maintain and operate its multichannel system.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application or proposal to the village
for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multichannel system
under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and any state
regulations (including, where applicable, those of the NYSCCT).
APPLICATION or PROPOSAL — Are synonymous for the purposes of this
chapter. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the
applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license or
franchise (where required) for all or a part of the village. An "application"
or "proposal" includes all written documentation and verbal statements
and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant
to the Board/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering
of services, maintenance or any other matter pertaining to the proposed
multichannel system.
ASSIGNMENT OF A FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER'S FRANCHISE — Any
transfer of a franchise, in whole or in part, to a party other than a related
entity, whether by sale, assignment, lease or other form of alienation or
change in operational or managerial control, other than a hypothecation
permitted pursuant to § 186-108 of this chapter.
AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT — Equipment supplied by the MCS provider
(including but not limited to a converter, remote control unit or device,
digital tuner or input selector switch), to permit, enhance or assist in the
reception or provision of multichannel service.
BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — Any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and government access channels. In the event that the
definition of "basic cable television service" is amended by either Congress
or the FCC, then this chapter's definition of "basic cable television service"
shall be deemed to be amended to conform thereto and be consistent
therewith.
BOARD or BOARD/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Village Board of
Trustees of the Village of Bronxville, New York.
CABLE ACT or CCPA — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended by the Cable Television Protection and Competition Act of 1992
and as otherwise amended, which in large part is codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521
et seq.
CABLE CHANNEL or CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL or DATA CHANNEL
or INFORMATIONAL CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic or light
frequency spectrum used in a cable system which is capable of delivering
a television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC
regulations).
§ 186-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-4
186:121
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility consisting
of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
which includes video, voice or data programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within the village. However, such terms do not include
the following:
CHANGE IN OPERATIONAL OR MANAGERIAL CONTROL — Shall be
deemed to have occurred when control of or the right to determine the
principal business policies of the MCS provider (including any franchised
MCS provider and any franchisee) or to appoint, select or determine its
principal managerial employees and officers has been sold, transferred,
assigned, disposed of or otherwise passes from the entity holding such as
of the date of this agreement or when the power, authority or ability to
vote more than 50% of the issued and outstanding stock or other ownership
interest of the MCS provider (including any franchised MCS provider and
any franchisee) or its parent corporation, company or entity has been sold,
transferred, assigned, disposed of or otherwise passes from the parent
Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
A.
Otherwise controls or is responsible, through any arrangement, for the
management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any or other programming which is required
for the selection of such video programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more broadcast stations; or
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management unless
such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes
of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 541] to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice or data
programming or service directly to subscribers; or
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility.
D.
§ 186-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-4
186:122
corporation, company or entity holding such as of the date of this
agreement.
CHARGE — A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the
subscriber and which is associated with the installation, maintenance,
service or repair of the multichannel service. Specifically, a "charge"
includes, but is not limited to, address change charges for subscribers;
disconnection fees; downgrade charges; costs for closed-captioned devices
and equipment, remote control devices and equipment for hearing-impaired
customers; installation charges for video camera recorders and players;
installation charges for digital radio; and trip or service call charges.
COLLECTION CHARGE — A charge or fee imposed on a customer by an
MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting or attempting to
collect a past due account.
COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE — With respect to any requirement
applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for
such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of one or
more conditions which are beyond the control of such MCS provider and the
nonoccurrence of which was a basic assumption on which the requirement
was based.
CONVERTER — Any electric, electronic or other device, separate and apart
from the subscriber's receiver, that is capable of converting or changing
signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within
the television, video or data receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or
otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations or such other
reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the
practical use of the signal.
CUSTOMER — A lawful subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities
of the multichannel system provided by an MCS provider.
DECODER or DESCRAMBLER — A device which enables a subscriber to
convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise usable signal.
DISASTER EMERGENCY or EMERGENCY — An imminent, impending or
actual, natural or humanly induced, situation wherein the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the village is threatened. A "disaster emergency"
(by illustration) may include a sudden or unexpected insect infestation
(such as with locusts, grasshoppers or bees), snowstorm, flood, hail storm,
tornado, severe thunderstorm, hazardous waste infiltration, fire, petroleum,
munitions or nuclear explosion or aircraft crash.
DOWNGRADE — A change in the level of a subscriber's multichannel
service from a more comprehensive level of multichannel service (in terms
of services or channels provided) to a less comprehensive level of
multichannel service (in terms of services or channels provided). Though
not mandatory, a "downgrade" in the level of service normally results in the
decrease in the periodic rate for the provision of such multichannel services
to the subscriber.
§ 186-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-4
186:123
DROP — A small branch of cable or other transmitting medium which
connects the terminals on the subscriber's receiver to the trunk or feeder
cable or future technical equivalent.
EASEMENT — Includes any public easement or other compatible use
created by dedication or by other means, to the village for public utility
purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television or any
multichannel service. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for
the provision of cable service or any other multichannel service.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and/or such other federal
regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction to oversee
MCS providers.
FIBER CABLE or FIBER OPTIC CABLE — Very thin and pliable cylinders
or strands of glass or plastic or any future developed technical equivalent,
used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted by
the Board/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate
and/or maintain a franchised MCS system in all or part of the village.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate contract by which the Board/
franchising authority grants an MCS provider the right to operate a
franchised multichannel system within all or a part of the village.
FRANCHISE EXPIRATION or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT EXPIRATION —
The date of expiration or the end of the term, or any extension thereof, of a
franchised MCS provider, as provided in a franchise agreement.
FRANCHISE FEE — A fee or charge that the village requires as payment for
the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways and easements
of the village in order to construct, maintain and operate a franchised
multichannel system.
FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER or FRANCHISEE — A person that is
awarded a franchise by the Board/franchising authority to construct or
operate a franchised multichannel system, within all or part, of the village.
The term "franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable
operator."
FUNCTIONAL EQUIVALENT or FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT — With
respect to a specifically named piece of multichannel system equipment,
means another piece of multichannel system equipment that has either:
The same or substantially similar characteristics, qualities, operational
capabilities or design functions as the original, specifically named piece
of multichannel system equipment; or
A.
Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the original,
specifically named piece of multichannel equipment; or
B.
Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original,
specifically named piece of multichannel equipment.
C.
§ 186-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-4
186:124
GROSS REVENUES — Any and all revenues for that period which are
derived from or attributable to the operation of any MCS system within
the village or, in the case of a franchised MCS provider, derived from
the exercise of its franchise, unless excluded hereinafter or by the Board/
franchising authority. "Gross revenues" include any and all revenues in
whatever form (cash, exchange or other consideration) of the franchisee or
any related entity, derived directly or indirectly from the operation of the
MCS system or providing to any other party access to the subscribers of the
MCS system within the village; excluding, however, revenues from activities
by a related entity that are not ordinarily receivable by an MCS provider
(e.g., revenues from the production or sale of programming as such to both
related and unrelated parties).
For purposes of this definition, gross revenues derived from
multichannel services, MCS operations and MCS-related activities
within the village include but are not limited to revenues from
subscriber rates; bulk billing rates; menu-driven services; pay-per-view
events or channels; premium channels; service tiers; service clusters;
multiplexing any channel and/or multichannel programming services;
institutional networks; infomercial channels; transmission of
programming; channel leases; instructional programs; commercial
access; advertising; installations; late charges; collection charges; and
rebates or commissions received from services offered through the
MCS system, including travel, home shopping services, digital radio,
interactive game channels or music services which allow a sharing of
revenues from cassette or compact disc or video disc sales.
A.
Unless prohibited or preempted by either federal or state law, gross
revenues shall include any and all compensation from all ancillary
multichannel service or other services provided by use of the system,
MCS operations and MCS-related activities within the village, including
but not limited to user fees, sale of MCS equipment; revenues from
advertising inserts placed into periodic billing statements or other
notices; revenues from 900 numbers or revenues from other interactive
cable or informational services (including revenues or commissions
from any interactive video game channels or services); revenues from
any service providing signal alert, safety alert or related technology;
revenues from personal communications networks (PCN's); rental or
sale of descrambling converters or other devices; rental or sale of
remote control devices (including those with volume control); rental
or sale of A/B or input selector switches; rental or sale of interactive
games or software offered on or via the system; and rental or sale of
digital radio equipment.
B.
Included within gross revenues are any revenues within the provisions
of this definition to which the franchisee would have been entitled had
the arrangement between itself and a related entity been at arms length
between or with an unrelated entity.
C.
Gross revenues do not include any revenues billed but not collected;
any revenues credited or refunded to subscribers; any taxes imposed
D.
§ 186-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-4
186:125
HEADEND — The electronic control center, where incoming signals,
including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated,
filtered, converted or in any way processed or converted for redistribution
to subscribers.
HOLIDAY — A day in which a substantial portion of the area's workers
are exempt from work even though paid, including, but not limited to, all
holidays recognized by either the state or federal government.
HYPOTHECATION — Providing security for a loan or indebtedness of an
MCS provider in a manner and method that does not specifically include
the assignment, transfer of possession or sale of the multichannel system or
franchise.
LATE CHARGE — A charge which is added to a customer's account or bill
for nonpayment of a previously due and delinquent account.
LOCAL LAW — The MultiChannel Service Providers Regulatory Local Law
for the Village of Bronxville, New York.
MAIL and MAILING — The deposit of an item, properly addressed and first
class postage paid, in a post office or post office box under the exclusive
control of the United States Postal Service.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Village of Bronxville or the Mayor's authorized
designee.
MCS — Multichannel service.
MCS PROVIDER or MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER —
and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including state sales taxes or
use taxes, but excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS
provider collects and pays in full to the applicable authorities; and,
except as hereinabove provided, any revenues received by any person
other than such franchisee or MCS provider with respect to cable
service or other service provided by such person over the franchisee's
or MCS provider's cable system for which charges are assessed to
subscribers but not received by such franchisee or MCS provider.
Any person or group of persons who:
Provides multichannel communications service over a multichannel
system, irrespective of the technology employed and subject to
federal and state pre-emption or limitation and directly or
indirectly owns a significant interest in such multichannel system;
or
(1)
Who otherwise controls or is responsible, through any
arrangement, for the management and operation of such a
multichannel system.
(2)
A.
The term "MCS provider" or "multichannel service provider"
specifically includes the terms "cable operator," "MDS provider" or
"multipoint distribution system provider," "MMDS provider," personal
B.
§ 186-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-4
186:126
MDS — Multipoint distribution system.
MDS PROVIDER or MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM PROVIDER —
Any person or group of persons authorized by the FCC to transmit
specialized multichannel programming to subscriber-selected locations.
MENU-DRIVEN or MENU-DRIVEN CABLE or MENU-DRIVEN PROGRAM/
SERVICE — The process whereby the MCS provider offers multichannel
services via the multichannel system in a format that allows the subscriber
to select and be charged for multichannel services on either a per channel,
per program or per event basis. Menu-driven cable allows the subscriber
to create his or her own service tier(s) or cluster(s) and the opportunity to
change the composition of his or her tier(s) or cluster(s) on a periodic basis.
MULTICHANNEL PROGRAMMING SERVICE or MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE —
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER — The same as MCS provider.
MULTICHANNEL SYSTEM —
communications network system provider" (where applicable and
permitted under state rule or regulation, including that of the NYSCCT)
and "SMATV operator"; provided, however, that when used in reference
to a franchised MCS provider, such use shall mean only the
"franchisee."
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service, irrespective of the technology employed
and subject to federal and state pre-emption or limitation; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility consisting of closed transmission paths and associated signal,
generation reception and control equipment; or
A.
A facility consisting of infrared transmission or point-to-point
transmission (as permitted by law); or
B.
Any functional equivalent that is designed to provide multichannel
service which includes video, voice or data programming to multiple
subscribers within the village. However, such term does not include the
following:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more broadcast stations; or
(1)
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiunit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management,
unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
(2)
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communication Act of
1934, except that such facility shall be considered a multichannel
(3)
C.
§ 186-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-4
186:127
NYSCCT — The New York State Commission on Cable Television.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that an MCS provider
(specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers
generally.
PAY-PER-VIEW or PREMIUM CHANNEL — The delivery over the
multichannel system of audio and/or video signals for a rate or amount (over
and above the rate for basic service) on a per event or per program or per
channel basis.
PEG — Public, educational and governmental.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, jointstock
company or governmental entity.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK or PCN or PRIVATE
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Any ancillary or aligned component of
an MCS provider's system consisting of communications lines, cables,
equipment or facilities which are used to provide telecommunications
service that in any manner uses or occupies the streets, easements, public
ways or rights-of-way within the village (as annexed). However, "private
communications network" does not include any part of a state or FCC
licensed local government local exchange telephone company or any part
of a federal, state, county or local government owned telecommunications
system.
PROPOSED ABANDONMENT OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE or
PROPOSED WITHDRAWAL OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE or PROPOSED
CESSATION OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE — The imminent or expected
(either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion or
removal of an MCS provider's operation and provision of multichannel
service from all or part of the village for a projected period exceeding four
months in duration.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES —
PUBLIC WAY — Any public street, public way, public place, public easement
or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below
it and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the area served by the
MCS provider.
system [other than for purposes of Section 621 (c) of the Cable
Act, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 541] to the extent such facility is used
in the transmission of video, voice or data programming or service
directly to subscribers; or
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
(4)
Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental
use; and
A.
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
§ 186-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-4
186:128
RATE — The periodic price paid by a subscriber for the receipt of any
multichannel service provided by an MCS provider.
RELATED ENTITY — Any affiliate, subsidiary, parent or other person, firm
or corporation in which the MCS provider (including any franchised MCS
provider and any franchisee) has a financial interest through record or
beneficial ownership of stock or otherwise in such affiliate, subsidiary,
parent or person, firm or corporation; and it further means any affiliate,
subsidiary, parent or other person, firm or corporation which has a financial
interest in the MCS provider (including any franchised MCS provider and
any franchisee) through record or beneficial ownership of stock in the MCS
provider or otherwise.
REVOCATION, TERMINATION or NONRENEWAL — An official act by the
village whereby the Board/franchising authority removes, repeals or
rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised
MCS provider to operate a multichannel system within the village.
SERVICE CLUSTER — The grouping, aligning or packaging of one or more
multichannel programming services by category (such as sports and/or
news) or by rate or by some other identifiable method and charging a
separate price or rate for each service cluster.
SERVICE OUTAGE — For purposes of credit, means the loss of picture or
sound on all basic subscriber channels or one or more other programming
channels (including tiers and clusters). For purposes of response to a
service call, a "service outage" means a loss of picture or sound or other
service provided by an MCS provider which is not caused by the failure
or malfunction of a subscriber's television receiver or monitor or by the
misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber.
SERVICE TIER — A category of multichannel service or other programming
service provided by an MCS provider for which a separate rate is charged
by an MCS provider.
SMATV — Satellite master antenna television.
SMATV OPERATOR or SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION
OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
SMATV SYSTEM — A private multichannel system not crossing any public
rights-of-way and which is located on private property and serving private
dwellings located within a multiple occupancy building or buildings that
are co-owned or managed, provided that such a system is exempt from
municipal franchise requirements by applicable provisions of federal or
state law.
STATE — The State of New York.
A. Provides multichannel service over an SMATV system; or
Otherwise controls or is responsible, through any arrangement, for the
management of an SMATV system.
B.
§ 186-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-4
186:129
STREET — The surface of and the space above and below a public street,
road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by
the village (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent
domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements
or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the village (including any
easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with
their proper use and meaning, entitle the village and MCS provider to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting multichannel
system transmissions over poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits,
viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property
as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to a multichannel system.
SUBSCRIBER — A person lawfully receiving multichannel service delivered
by an MCS provider.
USC — United States Code.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a multichannel system and/or its
equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
VILLAGE — The Village of Bronxville, New York.
§ 186-5. Statement of intent.
A. The Board recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving
the Cable Act (expressed in Section 601, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521). As
such, the Board reaffirms and adopts those principles and purposes as
part of the village's intent with respect to cable television and expands
its intent (where applicable) to cover all MCS providers.
B. As expressed by Congress and adopted by the Board, the Board's intent
is to:
(1) Establish a local policy concerning communications and
technologies;
(2) Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems and which assure that
cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the
village;
(3) Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect
to the regulation of cable systems;
(4) Assure that cable communications provide and are encouraged to
provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the
public;
§ 186-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-5
186:130
(5) Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects
franchisees against unfair denials of renewal where a franchisee's
past performance and proposal for future performance meet the
standards set by the Cable Act and this chapter; and
(6) Promote competition in cable communications and minimize
unnecessary regulation that would impose an undue economic
burden on cable systems.
C. In addition to the principles and purposes listed in Subsection B, the
Board's intent covers the following:
(1) To create a set of regulations, standards and procedures for MCS
providers;
(2) To create a comprehensive customer service and consumer
protection policy for MCS providers;
(3) To provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books
and records in order to monitor compliance with local, state and
federal laws and any franchise agreement (if one has been
granted);
(4) To create a thorough construction and installation policy for an
MCS provider's system;
(5) To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
village in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation and
maintenance of the system;
(6) To provide for the periodic inspection of an MCS provider's
facilities and equipment by the village or its designated agents;
(7) To provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the
village may be warned of a potential, imminent or actual disaster or
emergency situation that exists in the area;
(8) To provide for the introduction and installation of safety alert
technology, in order to notify both subscribers and non-subscribers
of imminent disaster emergencies;
(9) To create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring
franchise fees and alternative user charges;
(10) To create an alternative to franchise fees in case such fees or their
collection, are ruled invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional;
(11) To create a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed
and franchised MCS providers;
(12) To provide for continuity of services in the event of Village
acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service,
revocation, termination, nonrenewal or expiration of an MCS
provider; and
§ 186-5 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-5
186:131
§ 186-6. Administration; delegation of powers and authority.
§ 186-7. Applicability to an MCS provider.
(13) To create a performance review procedure, in order to assist the
village in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's
performance.
D. Further, the Board recognizes that with respect to MCS providers
classified as cable operators, the Board's power to adopt regulations is,
in part, authorized under Sections 632, 634 and 636 of the Cable Act
(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 552, 554 and 556, respectively), as well as the
Board's police powers, due to the potential for physical scarcity and
public disruption when an MCS provider either occupies or uses the
public rights-of-way.
E. With respect to the rules and regulations of the NYSCCT, it is expressly
understood that such rules and regulations establish threshold
requirements that are to be met in order to operate a multichannel
system classified as a cable system within the village. Consequently,
such threshold rules and regulations of the NYSCCT may be
supplemented and/or exceeded, unless specifically preempted by the
NYSCCT or unless the extent of the village's authority is determined
otherwise by way of formal NYSCCT action.
F. However, unless determined otherwise by the state or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the rules and regulations of the NYSCCT are
applicable only to MCS providers classified as cable operators. For all
other MCS providers the Board/franchising authority may develop and
implement its own set of rules and regulations, to the extent permitted
by both state and federal law.
A. The Mayor is hereby designated the person who is responsible for the
continuing administration of this chapter.
B. Unless prohibited by federal or state law (including the NYSCCT), the
Mayor may delegate his or her powers and authority with respect to
administering this chapter with regard to a franchise agreement to a
duly authorized representative or subordinate body of the village.
However, the Board/franchising authority may never delegate its
franchising or revocation power to another person or representative.
A. Unless exempted entirely from this chapter or exempted from one or
more provisions of this chapter by a franchise agreement or granted
relief (by either the NYSCCT, if permitted, or the Board/franchising
authority) from one or more provisions of this chapter, this chapter shall
be applicable to an MCS provider and this chapter shall have full effect
and be enforceable in its entirety against such MCS provider. However,
the Board/franchising authority may permit an MCS provider up to six
months to comply with specified provisions of this chapter after its
effective date, except where a different compliance date is provided
§ 186-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-7
186:132
§ 186-8. Exemption for certain MCS providers.
§ 186-9. MCS providers seeking relief.
(including a different date provided in an applicable franchise
agreement).
B. Subsection A of this section shall not terminate any franchise
agreement that presently exists between the Board/franchising
authority and an MCS provider.
C. As a result of Subsection B of this section, the provisions of this chapter
shall have no effect on an existing franchise agreement until the
expiration of such agreement or until one of the following occurs:
(1) Prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the Board/
franchising authority and the affected franchised MCS provider
either execute an amended franchise or renewal franchise
agreement in which both parties agree to be bound by the terms of
this chapter (except where the MCS provider has been specifically
granted relief, exemption or clarification or has a comparable
policy); or
(2) Both parties agree to a date for expiration of said existing franchise
that is prior to the present expiration date.
A. MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions
of this chapter are:
(1) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable FCC or NYSCCT ruling; or
(2) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable judicial ruling from which no subsequent appeal can
be taken.
B. An exempted MCS provider remains exempted only as long as it meets
one or more of the specifications of this section.
C. A qualified MCS provider is exempt only from this chapter.
Consequently, such an exempted MCS provider shall comply with any
other applicable village, state (including NYSCCT) or federal laws and
regulations, including any applicable federal or state consumer
protection or customer service laws and regulations.
A. Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition, at
any time, with the Board/franchising authority seeking relief from one
or more provisions of this chapter. The relief requested may include the
exemption from or delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS
provider only) of one or more provisions of this chapter or that a
specific provision be required for only part of any franchise term. The
§ 186-7 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-9
186:133
petition shall set forth the relief requested and the basis thereof with
such supporting information and material as may be applicable.
B. In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of this
chapter, an MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Board/
franchising authority that at least one of the following facts exist:
(1) The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC or state law or (where applicable) NYSCCT rule or
regulation; or
(2) Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects
and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically
provided in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term
of the existing franchise) [This provision covers situations where an
MCS provider classified as a cable operator seeks and is granted
modification of an existing franchise agreement under Section 625
of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 545).]; or
(3) That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement
will be commercially impracticable for an MCS provider; or
(4) That one or more time frames listed in this chapter are either
impossible to meet or commercially impracticable to meet in light
of the MCS provider's operational policy; or
(5) That the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance,
operation or customer service policy which the Board/franchising
authority deems comparable to or exceeding, any provision from
which the MCS provider seeks relief; or
(6) That the health, safety and welfare interests of the village
otherwise warrant the granting of such relief.
C. Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the village,
the Board/franchising authority shall have the responsibility to
determine whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance,
operation or customer service policy is comparable to or exceeds a
similar provision in this chapter.
D. As an alternative to seeking an exemption or requesting relief, an MCS
provider may petition for clarification of the effect that one or more
provisions of this chapter is intended to have on the petitioning MCS
provider.
E. In accordance with this chapter, the Board/franchising authority may
charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for
processing such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside
consultants who are retained by the village to review an MCS provider's
petition; provided, however, that no such charge may be imposed upon
a franchisee that is otherwise committed to pay a franchise fee that is at
the maximum limit of such fees pursuant to applicable federal or state
§ 186-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-9
186:134
§ 186-10. Failure of the Board/franchising authority to enforce
chapter.
An MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements of this chapter or any subsequently adopted amendments to
this chapter, by any failure of the Board/franchising authority on any one or
more occasions to seek or insist upon, compliance with such requirements
or provisions.
§ 186-11. MCS providers subject to present and future local laws.
§ 186-12. Repeal of prior inconsistent legislation.
Any prior resolution, ordinance or local law (other than one approving a
franchise agreement with an MCS provider) that is inconsistent with this
chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
law, unless the franchisee by petition seeks a substantial waiver of
material provisions of this chapter previously understood to be
applicable to the franchisee and such petition causes the Board/
franchising authority to incur administrative costs not previously
anticipated in the determination of the franchise fee.
F. In those instances where the Board/franchising authority grants an
exemption or relief to a franchised MCS provider or deems a franchised
MCS provider's operational policy to be comparable to a local law
provision, the franchise agreement (initial, existing or renewal) shall be
amended within 60 days to whatever extent such amendment may be
necessary to reflect the exact extent of such exemption and/or relief.
The benefit of such exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy
shall extend only to the MCS provider in question.
A. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to and
comply with, all local laws now or hereafter adopted and in effect within
the village, including this chapter, to the extent that said MCS provider
or its predecessor in interest has not received an exemption or relief
from said local law(s).
B. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to and
comply with, all federal and state laws and all rules and regulations
issued by all applicable regulatory agencies (including, where
applicable, the FCC and NYSCCT) now or hereafter in existence.
C. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to all
lawful exercise of the village's police power.
D. With respect to future local laws referred to in this section, nothing
contained herein shall prevent an MCS provider from exercising any
and all, of its administrative and legal rights in order to challenge the
constitutionality, applicability and enforceability of said future local
laws.
§ 186-9 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-13
186:135
§ 186-13. Resolution of inconsistencies with federal or state rules,
regulations or laws.
§ 186-14. Resolution of conflicts between chapter and subsequent
franchise agreement.
§ 186-15. Reserved.
§ 186-16. Penalties for offenses; assessed charges or liquidated
damages for breach of franchise agreement.
A. In any case of an inconsistency between any provision of this chapter
and any provision of a federal or state rule, regulation or law, the
federal or state rule, regulation or law shall supersede this chapter and
shall control in any local application, unless such federal or state rule,
regulation or law does not pre-empt or supersede this chapter.
B. The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an
applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an inconsistency
with any provision of this chapter. In such a situation, the federal or
state judicial decision shall supersede the effect of this chapter and
shall control in any local application.
A. Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and
a subsequent franchise agreement this chapter shall control, unless
administratively or judicially determined to be invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional or unless the provisions of Subsection B of this section
apply to the MCS provider and its franchise agreement.
B. Where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption, relief from or
clarification of one or more provisions or sections of this chapter or has
one or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision contained
in this chapter, the franchise agreement shall be amended to note the
same to whatever extent may be necessary and to the extent that an
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy is inconsistent with
a provision contained in this chapter, such exemption, relief,
clarification or comparable policy contained in the franchise agreement
shall control.
A. Any franchisee or other MCS provider willfully violating or willfully
failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
civil violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $250 and not more than $2,500 as set by a court of
appropriate jurisdiction. Each day upon which such a violation or
failure to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter
exists, after due notice, shall constitute a separate violation and shall
subject the MCS provider to a separate fine or civil penalty.
B. In addition, the Village Attorney may maintain an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction any violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 186-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-16
186:136
§ 186-17. Reserved.
§ 186-18. The Board/franchising authority's retained rights and
authorities.
C. In instances where a franchise agreement provides for assessed
charges or liquidated damages for the breach or violation of that
franchise agreement, such assessed charges or liquidated damages
shall constitute a separate and independent remedy for the village to
pursue.
A. Subject to pre-emption by or other approval authority of the FCC or any
other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including where
applicable, the NYSCCT) and to the extent permitted by any applicable
law, the Board/franchising authority retains the authority to provide for:
(1) The regulation and control of any multichannel system within the
geographical limits of the village;
(2) The grant of an MCS franchise (where required) after review of an
application or proposal by the Board/franchising authority;
(3) The periodic review, amendment or repeal of all or part, of this
chapter; except that the Board may not unilaterally impose
substantial capital requirements not anticipated in a franchise
agreement; and
(4) If agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic review
and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.
B. The Board/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by Section 623
(codified at 47 U.S.C. § 543) or other provisions of the Cable Act, retains
the power to approve the rates or charges associated with the providing
of multichannel service classified as cable service by an MCS provider
classified as a cable operator.
C. Subject to pre-emption by or other approval authority of, the FCC or
any other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including in
certain instances the NYSCCT), the Board/franchising authority retains
the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to
multichannel customer service practices and consumer protection.
D. If the FCC, Congress, the state, NYSCCT or other governmental agency
with authority over cable or any other MCS provider ever abrogates,
deletes, removes or otherwise eliminates rules or standards that are
referred to in this chapter or relied upon by the Board/franchising
authority for purposes of MCS provider compliance with this chapter,
the Board/franchising authority may, to the extent not preempted by or
inconsistent with, later adopted law or regulations, reinstate such rules
or standards. In such case, the reinstated rules will have the same
weight (as allowed under prevailing law) as they had prior to their
initial deletion.
§ 186-16 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-19
186:137
§ 186-19. Reserved.
§ 186-20. Notices.
§ 186-21. Reserved.
§ 186-22. Reserved.
§ 186-23. Reserved.
§ 186-24. Reserved.
§ 186-25. Indemnity.
A. Both the Board/franchising authority and each MCS provider shall
provide the other party with the name and address of the contact
designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents and
other correspondence. All notices given by one party to the other shall
be delivered to each party's contact by certified mail, return receipt
requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery or
overnight with receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records,
documents and other correspondence may be delivered by any
permissible means including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission
("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or package delivery; or
delivery via cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records and other
correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt
(unless otherwise designated by state law or NYSCCT rule or
regulation).
B. If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, the designation
of such contact person for notice purposes may be contained within a
franchise agreement.
A. To the extent permitted by law, a MCS provider shall be required, as a
condition of the exercise of its rights to use the village's streets or ways,
at all times to defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless and exempt the
village, the Mayor, the Board/franchising authority, their officers,
agents, servants, employees and advisory committees or commissions
from any and all, penalty, damage or charges arising out of claims,
suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages whether
compensatory or punitive or expenses arising therefrom, either at law
or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may
arise out of or be caused by, the construction, erection, location,
products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal or restoration of the multichannel system within
the village by a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents
or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors or
implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties,
damages or charges referred to herein, reasonable attorneys' fees,
§ 186-19 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-25
186:138
§ 186-26. Liability insurance.
consultants' fees and expert witness fees are included as costs which
may be recovered by the Board/franchising authority.
B. The village, the Mayor and the Board/franchising authority specifically
reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own
expense.
C. With respect to an MCS provider's defense of actions referred to in this
section, such MCS provider reserves the right to select and retain,
without the Board/franchising authority's approval, counsel of its
choice, at its own expense.
D. The obligation to indemnify the village, the Mayor, the Board/
franchising authority, their officers, agents, servants, employees and
advisory committees and commissions, shall not be limited to the MCS
provider operating under authority of this chapter, but shall include any
parent of such MCS provider which has agreed in writing to provide
such indemnity or has otherwise guaranteed the obligations of the MCS
provider.
A. An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
multichannel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage
insurance and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:
(1) Public liability: $2,000,000 per person/per occurrence;
(2) Property damage: $2,000,000 per any one claim;
(3) Umbrella liability: $10,000,000 with a reasonable deductible and/
or base insurance.
B. An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage
insurance policy shall specifically include the village, the Mayor, the
Board/franchising authority, their officers, agents, servants, employees
and advisory committees and commissions, as named insureds or as
additional insureds.
C. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state.
D. Should the Board/franchising authority make a formal determination
that, due to the financial, operational, technical or legal status (or lack
thereof) or condition of the MCS provider, the requirements referred to
above for minimum insurance are inadequate, the Board/franchising
authority may require the MCS provider to obtain and maintain
insurance for greater minimum amounts (up to, but not exceeding,
$5,000,000 for public liability, $5,000,000 for property damage and
$15,000,000 for umbrella liability).
§ 186-25 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-26
186:139
§ 186-27. Performance and construction/completion bond.
E. The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain
an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the Board/
franchising authority with at least 30 days written notice in advance of
the cancellation of the insurance.
F. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
Board/franchising authority before the expiration of the insurance
which such policies are to renew or replace.
G. Before a multichannel system provides multichannel service to
subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates
representing the insurance to the Board/franchising authority.
H. If the Board/franchising authority, state or NYSCCT permits an MCS
provider to self-insure, the MCS provider may exercise its right to selfinsure
or to provide other evidence of adequate security for its
obligations, so as long as the minimum amounts of insurance coverage
outlined in this section or similar levels of security, are met and
maintained for the entire period that the affected MCS provider is selfinsured.
However, for the reasons listed in Subsection D of this section,
the Board/franchising authority (unless preempted by either the state
or NYSCCT) may make a formal determination and require an increase
in the minimum amounts of insurance coverage.
A. Unless an alternative form of financial guaranty or security is accepted
by the Board/franchising authority, an MCS provider shall furnish to the
Board/franchising authority, in an amount totaling at least $1,000,000,
a performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to
do business in this state and acceptable to the Board/franchising
authority. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The
purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any
requirements imposed by this chapter on an MCS provider. Further, the
purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any
obligations imposed by this chapter (or where applicable a franchise
agreement), the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any
monetary losses incurred by the village.
B. An MCS provider shall furnish to the Board/franchising authority a
construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a
construction, upgrade, rebuild or repair/maintenance project that has a
capital construction cost or outlay exceeding $100,000 in value. The
amount of the bond shall equal 100% of the projected capital
construction cost or outlay. The construction/completion bond shall
remain in force at all times until the subject construction is complete,
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is set forth in an
agreement between the Board/franchising authority and the MCS
provider.
§ 186-26 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-27
186:140
§ 186-28. The Board/franchising authority's policy with respect to
reports and records.
C. The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by any construction,
upgrade, rebuild or repair/maintenance schedule provided for by its
contract or permit for the multichannel system and/or any timetable for
technical and service improvements or additions to the multichannel
system that may agreed upon from time to time by the Board/
franchising authority and MCS provider.
D. If the village draws on a performance or completion bond or cash
deposit or other guaranty, as a result of an MCS provider's failure to
timely discharge its obligations or failure to construct and activate the
multichannel system or failure to complete a multichannel system
upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, the MCS provider shall be
required, within 30 days to replenish the completion and performance
bond or security bond or other guaranty, to the minimum level required
by the Board/franchising authority.
E. If the Board/franchising authority shall make a formal determination
that, based upon the MCS provider's past performance (such as a
documented history of repeated or multiple franchise violations) or
increased cost (greater than 50% of the original estimated cost), the
amounts of the bonds above provided for are inadequate, the Board/
franchising authority (unless preempted by either the state or NYSCCT)
may increase the required amount of either the performance or the
construction/completion bond.
F. The performance bond or security bond, shall be in force at all times
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is set forth in an
separate agreement executed between the MCS provider and the
Board/franchising authority.
A. The Board/franchising authority recognizes that advances in
technology and the adoption and application of multichannel laws,
rules, regulations and court decisions, may have a profound effect on an
MCS provider in any given year.
B. Consequently, it is incumbent that the Board/franchising authority take
measures to reduce the risk that multichannel service or the
multichannel system will be adversely affected in any given year.
C. Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, character
qualifications and practices related to customer service and consumer
protection of an MCS provider is viewed as a continuing undertaking on
the part of the village. Each MCS provider shall maintain and retain all
records and reports necessary for the Board/franchising authority to
determine compliance with the obligations imposed on it by this
chapter and to determine the MCS provider's legal, technical, financial
and character qualifications.
§ 186-27 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-29
186:141
§ 186-29. Furnishing of reports.
§ 186-30. Books and records.
A. Within 90 days after this chapter becomes effective or the grant of a
franchise or license pursuant hereto and thereafter upon the request of
the village, an MCS provider shall submit a list to the Board/franchising
authority or designee, of the principal files, reports, records, data and
other information that the MCS provider periodically files with the FCC
or another federal or state agency. As part of a performance evaluation
or for any legitimate matter related to the administration of an MCS
provider agreement, the Board/franchising authority may specifically
request that it be provided with any or all pertinent listed reports,
records, data or other information that were originally filed with the
FCC or another federal or state agency (including the NYSCCT).
However, unless specifically authorized by the state, an MCS provider
shall not be required to provide to the Board/franchising authority any
state or federal tax returns or any documents (inclusive of all abovereferenced
categories) exempted under state or federal privacy laws,
including Section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 551).
B. In addition to the requirements noted in Subsection A of this section, an
MCS provider shall timely submit those reports, statements and logs
required by this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
(1) A periodic gross revenue statement, in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(2) A periodic certification that answering of phones is meeting the
specifications listed in this chapter;
(3) Evidence of the satisfactory resolution of problems and complaints
in the manner set forth in this chapter;
(4) Preventive maintenance reports, in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(5) Any other reports or information required by another section of this
chapter or by the Board/franchising authority, which are necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
village; and
(6) If required, an annual registration and compliance statement.
A. An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts
and records of the business and operations under and in connection
with, the MCS system.
B. The Board/franchising authority shall have the right to be provided for
review (either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office all records
needed for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and/or
franchise agreement on seven days written notice, unless specifically
§ 186-29 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-30
186:142
§ 186-31. Reserved.
§ 186-32. Reserved.
§ 186-33. Reserved.
§ 186-34. Reserved.
§ 186-35. Annual registration and compliance statement for certain
classes of MCS providers.
exempted by the Board/franchising authority. Such review, unless
mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered, shall occur within the MCS
provider's regular office hours.
C. The Board/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its own
expense, an independent certified public accountant or other business
or financial expert, to review the books and records of an MCS provider.
If after a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has
underpaid amounts owed to the village by any material amount (in
excess of 5% of the amount due annually or $5,000, whichever is lower),
the village may require the MCS provider to reimburse the village for
the actual cost of the audit. Absent fraud, any such audit agreed to by
the parties by an independent certified public accountant shall be
binding on all parties concerned.
D. A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by
an MCS provider, of a material and substantial nature shall constitute a
material violation of this chapter. However, an erroneous entry, made in
good faith, shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter.
E. An MCS provider shall keep or provide at an office within Westchester
county complete and accurate books and records of the pertinent
aspects of the multichannel system's operation for at least the
preceding three years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to
the village can be easily produced and/or verified at the village's
request. The MCS provider shall also keep or provide at such office and
shall provide upon request, any other applicable records and
information that may be required by any other federal or state agency
(including NYSCCT) having jurisdiction over one or more classes of
MCS providers.
F.
A. Within 90 days from the date that this chapter becomes effective, the
village shall develop a registration and compliance statement for any
MCS provider or class of MCS provider that is not a franchisee and is
not subject to the periodic performance evaluation set forth elsewhere
in this chapter.
B. The Board/franchising authority declares as its purpose that the
registration and compliance statement is intended to furnish the Board/
franchising authority with periodic operational and compliance
§ 186-30 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-35
186:143
§ 186-36. Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws.
In addition to any and all requirements of this chapter, each MCS provider
shall comply with all applicable provisions of any state law concerning
consumer sales practices (including where applicable, consumer protection
rules and regulations of the NYSCCT).
§ 186-37. Notification of customers and MCS providers' rights and
responsibilities; general policy.
information concerning MCS providers operating within all or part, of
the village, who are not otherwise subject to a periodic performance
evaluation and are not franchisees.
C. Prior to January 15 of each calendar year the village shall furnish each
such affected MCS provider with a registration and compliance
statement.
D. Prior to March 1 of each calendar year the affected non-franchised MCS
provider shall file with the village a completed and executed
registration and compliance statement.
E. There shall be no charge or fee for filing the annual registration and
compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider supplies
incomplete information which requires independent verification by the
village (including a consultant hired by the village, the MCS provider
may be required to reimburse the village for all costs associated with
the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by
the deadline or the submission of false information (of a material nature
within the statement, may subject the affected MCS provider to any and
all, penalties referred to in this chapter. However, before subjecting an
MCS provider to potential penalties, the Board/franchising authority
must first allow the affected MCS provider the opportunity to correct
the submission or the item of alleged noncompliance, except in the case
of submission of false information of a substantial and material nature.
A. The Board/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a
customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights
and responsibilities of both the customer and the MCS provider with
respect to the provision, maintenance and repair of multichannel
service.
B. Furthermore, the Board/franchising authority believes that provision of
sufficient, timely and easily understood information to customers on
certain customer service practices, such as rates, billing periods,
number and types of services provided and rules concerning equipment
use and return, is essential to enable customers to make informed
decisions as to what, if any, multichannel services they wish to
subscribe to and receive.
§ 186-35 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-37
186:144
§ 186-38. Notice of customers' and MCS providers' rights and
responsibilities with respect to the provision of multichannel
service; minimum contents.
C. In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to
make an informed decision and to ensure that customers are notified of
their and the MCS provider's, rights and responsibilities with respect to
the multichannel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer
with a written "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and
Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of MultiChannel Service"
or the effective equivalent thereof, subject to the review and criticism of
the contents of the effective equivalent by the Board/franchising
authority.
D. Said notice shall be provided at the time of initial installation.
Thereafter, a subscriber shall be provided with a written notice at least
once every 12 months. If, however, an MCS provider amends, repeals,
adds, deletes, modifies or makes other changes to any customer service
practice that is required in this chapter, said MCS provider shall
provide a subscriber with written notification thereof within no more
than 30 days following the effective date of such amendment, repeal,
addition, deletion, modification or other change, unless earlier notice is
required by applicable federal or state law or rules.
E. The notice may be delivered to a subscriber by an insert in the
subscriber's periodic invoice or through a special mailing.
F. In addition to providing the written notice require above and unless
expressly prohibited by the state or NYSCCT, an MCS provider may also
provide said notice over the MCS system, on a channel clearly
designated for the dissemination of such information. Such a channel
need not be solely designated for dissemination of such information and
may, in fact, be used at other times for any lawful purpose.
G. If the notice in Section E preceding is provided over the MCS system,
on a channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such
information, such notice shall be cablecast at least once hourly, 24
hours a day, for 30 consecutive days.
A. At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual
notice, such notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A timely listing of the specific multichannel services provided,
clearly indicating and isolating the basic, premium and
informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or
service clusters offered;
(2) Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease, from the
MCS provider, a lock box, parental control mechanism or other
device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multichannel
service during a period selected by the subscriber;
§ 186-37 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-38
186:145
§ 186-39. Billing practices.
(3) A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges
(including rates for basic and premium channels/services,
particular service tiers or service clusters, generally applicable
discount or promotional fees, installation charges and security
deposits, if any);
(4) If service clustering is available, a description and explanation of
any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within 60 days of the
notice) service clustering changes or differing alignments or other
pertinent information;
(5) A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options
available (such as monthly, quarterly or yearly and/or discounts for
prepayments);
(6) The customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a
manner consistent with the policy set forth in this chapter;
(7) The billing practices of an MCS provider, in a manner consistent
with the policy set forth in this chapter;
(8) The customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is adopted
and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the
parameters set forth in this chapter;
(9) The method of securing a voluntary disconnection, in a manner
consistent with the policy set forth in this chapter;
(10) Rules relating to both connections and involuntary disconnections;
(11) The extent of the credit/refund policy, in a manner consistent with
the policy set forth in this chapter;
(12) The equipment use and return policy together with any required
security deposits, in a manner consistent with the policy set forth in
this chapter; and
(13) The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatoryimpaired
customers, in a manner consistent with the policy set
forth in this chapter.
B. The notice shall be understandable and legible, and any exclusions,
limitations or caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the notice.
A. Within the notice that is required by this chapter, subscribers shall also
be informed of at least the following billing practices of an MCS
provider:
(1) Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service;
(2) Payment due and delinquent dates;
§ 186-38 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-39
186:146
§ 186-40. Billing credit or refunds for service outages,
interruptions; substandard signal or picture quality or unsolicited
service.
(3) Amount or percentage of late charges, if any;
(4) Advance billing options;
(5) Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints and
inquiries;
(6) Refund/credit policy for service interruptions or uncontracted
service;
(7) Current service rates, in a detailed and understandable format;
(8) Procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of
an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment;
(9) Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and
(10) Any lower-income or fixed-income rates, together with any
qualifications to obtain such rates.
B. Any information concerning billing practices which is contained in the
notice shall be consistent with and include any matter specified by
NYSCCT rules and regulations.
C. All periodic service bills shall plainly state that service may be paid on
an individual monthly basis, the date by which payment is due and the
date after which late charges or penalties may be imposed for
nonpayment.
D. Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in Subsection
A of this section at least once every 12 months.
E. Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at
least 30 days before such billing practices or payment requirements
become effective, if within the control of the MCS provider, unless
otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law or rules.
F. Pursuant to NYSCCT regulations, in any case where a subscriber
requests a cancellation or reduction of service within 30 days after
notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, the subscriber's
liability for such service received from the effective date of such
changes until the cancellation or reduction of service shall be
determined in accordance with the rates or charges in effect prior to
such change.
§ 186-39 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-40
186:147
§ 186-41. Prohibition against negative option promotional
packages.
A. An MCS provider shall adhere to and comply with applicable state laws
and regulations, including those of the NYSCCT, with respect to service
outages or interruptions.
B. Consistent with Subsection A of this section and to the extent permitted
by either state law or NYSCCT rule and regulation, the Board/
franchising authority requires that an MCS provider (not covered by
pre-emptive state law or NYSCCT rules and regulations) automatically
(without a separate request from the subscriber) provide a subscriber
with credit for one day's service for a service outage or interruption or
loss of any signal or service exceeding, four hours in length. For a
service outage or interruption of a pay-per-view event that exceeds
more than 1/4 of the scheduled or projected length of the pay-per-view
event or four hours (whichever is shorter), the MCS provider must
provide a subscriber with a credit for the full amount of the pay-perview
event.
C. To the extent not prohibited by the rules of the FCC or by the state or
NYSCCT, the Board/franchising authority may prescribe rules for giving
credit to a subscriber in cases where a substandard signal or
substandard picture quality is furnished by the MCS provider.
D. In the case of a charge for unsolicited service (as defined in federal and
state law and rules), an MCS provider shall, to the extent required by
applicable federal and state law or rules, provide a subscriber with an
adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement.
Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider a
subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.
A. The Board/franchising authority determines that, as a matter of
consumer protection, a subscriber should be charged only for those
services that such subscriber has affirmatively requested. Therefore, an
MCS provider may not bill or invoice any subscriber for any
multichannel service that is not affirmatively requested by the
subscriber.
B. For purposes of this section, a subscriber's affirmative request need not
be in writing, but an MCS provider relying on an oral request must keep
an accurate record of the date the request was made.
C. For purposes of this section, a subscriber shall be deemed to have
affirmatively requested a multichannel service if:
(1) The subscriber voluntarily makes payment for the multichannel
service after an initial free trial period; and
(2) There was included, in the notice or advertising material
describing the service, as well as on the first periodic invoice after
the service was instituted, a statement clearly advising the
§ 186-40 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-41
186:148
§ 186-42. Special rules for menu-driven systems, service clusters
and packaging of service tiers.
subscriber that such subscriber has incurred no obligation to pay
for such service and that such subscriber need not take any action
to avoid incurring any such obligation.
D. Moreover, an MCS provider may not automatically enroll a subscriber
into a different class or tier of multichannel service, including any or all
equipment needed, without promptly informing such subscriber of any
and all costs associated with such different class or tier of multichannel
service or equipment.
E. Additionally, an MCS provider may not invoice a subscriber for
disconnecting or downgrading from a negatively promoted or
automatically enrolled class or tier of multichannel service.
F. Should a subscriber be charged for a multichannel service in violation
of this section, the MCS provider shall provide the subscriber with an
adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement.
Moreover, in such case, the MCS provider shall not consider a
subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for a non-affirmatively
requested multichannel service.
G. If the NYSCCT adopts rules and regulations concerning this practice,
those rules and regulations shall control with respect to an MCS
provider classified as a cable operator.
A. The Board/franchising authority recognizes that the concept of menudriven
program/service selection has both positive and negative
aspects. On the one hand, menu-driven program/service selection
allows the greatest flexibility for a subscriber in that it permits the
subscriber to essentially create a program/service package tailored to
the subscriber's budget, viewing habits and informational needs. On the
other hand, menu-driven program/service selection is susceptible to
unauthorized or unknowing purchases and to uninformed program
choices if certain procedural and operational safeguards are not
maintained.
B. Should an MCS provider implement and/or offer menu-driven program/
service selection for all or the majority, of the MCS provider's
multichannel services, the Board/franchising authority reserves the
power to adopt (consistent with any applicable NYSCCT rules and
regulations) additional rules and regulations (subject to the conditions
listed in Subsection C of this section) concerning the following potential
problem areas:
(1) Notification to the subscriber at least annually of the costs for each
menu-driven program/service, including any installation or
equipment rental charges;
§ 186-41 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-42
186:149
§ 186-43. Customer service hours; capabilities of customer service
office; and telephones.
(2) Notification of what constitutes or what is required, for selection or
subscription to a particular program/service;
(3) Limitations on negative option marketing plans when done in
connection with a menu-driven system, unless the subscriber is
initially informed, consents (in writing) and periodically (at least
semiannually) renews the consent to be included on a list of
potential subscribers; and
(4) Restricting access to menu-driven program/service selection by
subscribers (through the use of individual, non-duplicative access
codes or some other means) in order to limit unauthorized
purchases or purchases above a certain preset amount.
C. If, at the time an MCS provider implements and/or offers menu-driven
program/service selection, such MCS provider also adopts an
operational policy which protects subscribers from those potential
problem areas listed in Subsection B of this section, the Board/
franchising authority shall not exercise its additional regulatory
authority on this subject, unless there is documentation that the
adopted policy of the MCS provider is not being enforced or is
ineffective in safeguarding subscribers from the potential abuses listed
above.
D. As for service clusters and the packaging of service tiers and to provide
both a disincentive for bait and switch tactics and to promote cluster
and tier stability, an MCS provider may not switch any particular
multichannel service from one tier or cluster to another without
furnishing 30 days' advance notice to the subscribers and 45 days'
advance notice to the Board/franchising authority; provided, however,
that an MCS provider may make a change of program service location
on less than the notice above required whenever such change is beyond
its control or it has less than the above required notice of such change,
in which event such notices must be provided within 30 days after the
MCS provider first knows of such change.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as mandating any
particular programming choice being provided to a subscriber. Nor
shall this section be construed as requiring any particular program,
service, cluster or tier. Rather, this section is designed to promote
cluster and tier stability, so that a subscriber may choose a program,
service, cluster or tier that best suits the subscriber's individual
programming and informational needs.
A. In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS provider
shall maintain a customer service office which:
§ 186-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-43
186:150
(1) Is located not more than three miles from the Town Hall of the
Town of Eastchester, New York;
(2) Provides adequate parking;
(3) Is accessible to the physically and ambulatory-impaired;
(4) Is adequately staffed during business hours to handle the flow of
customers; and
(5) Is equipped with up-to-date and properly functioning computer and
telephonic equipment, so that all customers may be properly and
promptly served.
B. The customer service office shall be open at least 40 hours per week
(exclusive of holidays).
C. Within the 40 hours per week that a customer service office must be
open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two
evenings (after 5:00 p.m.) or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if not
prohibited by state law, including NYSCCT rules and regulations).
D. The customer service office shall have an adequate and knowledgeable
staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer service inquiries,
specifically including, but not limited to, billing inquiries, refunds,
credits, service outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills
and other charges and inquiries from disabled or physically impaired
customers.
E. An MCS provider may install (at its customer service office an afterhours
depository in order to collect invoice payments and receive
requests for service appointments (including connections and
disconnections) after scheduled office hours.
F. An MCS provider may install an automated (audio or video) customer
assistance device or machine which can handle various types of
customer inquiries, so long as the caller has the option and ability at all
times to speak with a live representative of the MCS provider.
G. Where not prohibited by the state (including NYSCCT rules and
regulations), an MCS provider may install an interactive customer
assistance service over one or more multichannels which can handle
various types of customer inquiries.
H. Neither the presence of an after hours depository, an automated
customer service device, nor an interactive customer service channel,
shall relieve an MCS provider from maintaining the minimum required
number of office hours or a customer service representative (CSR) staff
adequate to handle service inquiries.
I. Any MCS provider shall be able to certify to the Board/franchising
authority, upon request, that each customer service representative
(CSR) has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course
§ 186-43 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-43
186:151
§ 186-44. Special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired
or ambulatory-impaired customers.
Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter and any
requirements of federal or state law (including NYSCCT rules and
regulations), an MCS provider shall comply with the following special
service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory-impaired
customers:
designed to train customer service representatives (CSR's) to handle
their jobs in a courteous, efficient, knowledgeable and responsive
manner.
J. An MCS provider shall maintain at least one toll-free and/or local
telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.
K. An MCS provider shall maintain a twenty-four-hour toll-free and/or
local telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of
equipment and extended interruption of service. During any hours that
the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have or
make available, in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries.
During other hours, a telephone may be manned by an automatic
answering device, provided that, incoming calls are monitored to
determine the existence of service outages. The MCS provider shall not
be required to make in-person telephone contacts to subscribers at a
rate which exceeds 60 calls per hour.
L. An MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines
(except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles
and service outages) in order to handle calls and inquiries directed to
the general information number, so that the following standards may be
met:
(1) Ninety-five percent of all customer calls received in any given
thirty-day period shall be answered and responded to within three
minutes by a representative of the MCS provider or by a device that
is capable of complaint/inquiry resolution; and
(2) The rate of abandoned calls shall be less than 5% over any thirtyday
period of time. "Abandoned calls" shall not include calls in
which the caller hangs up within 45 seconds of making the call.
M. With respect to the standards listed in Subsection L of this section, it
shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to certify, upon request, to
the Board/franchising authority that the affected MCS provider is
meeting the minimum standards.
A. Provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service
office;
B. For any customer declared legally blind by the state, an MCS provider
must provide, if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice
§ 186-43 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-44
186:152
§ 186-45. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills and other pertinent
multichannel system information;
C. Provide, at a nondiscriminatory charge, a special closed-captioned
converter for the hearing-impaired;
D. If otherwise made available, provide at a nondiscriminatory charge, a
remote control device and/or converter for wheelchair subscribers or
subscribers with a permanent medical or physical ambulatory
impairment;
E. Where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of
equipment by individuals who have physical impairments;
F. In times of a disaster emergency or other instances requiring an
emergency alert, provide an all channel video blanking capability, so
that all channels will be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert
signal, in order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sightimpaired
customers will be alerted; and
G. If permitted by the NYSCCT and approved by the Board/franchising
authority, provide for the inclusion, within broad programming services
offered, of one or more services designed specifically or primarily for
sight-impaired, hearing-impaired or ambulatory-impaired subscribers.
A. An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service or use of a provider's facilities and equipment,
make, allow or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person,
nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age,
race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap or religious affiliation.
B. Consistent with Section 621(a)(3) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541 (a) (3)], MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not
deny cable service or the extension of cable service, to any group of
potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the local area in which such group resides.
C. Subsection A of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS
provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or
charge. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider from
offering special incentive rates such as one month basic service free if
12 months of basic service are paid in one payment or within a certain
time frame or similar types of prepayment discounts (as long as such is
not prohibited by the NYSCCT).
D. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise
agreement (if applicable.
§ 186-44 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-45
186:153
§ 186-46. Use of equipment, return of equipment, security deposits
and their return.
E. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service to a subscriber who is more than 30 days
delinquent in the payment of any periodic service or special service bill,
so long as the requirements for disconnection (as outlined in this
chapter) have been satisfied.
F. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from implementing a service tier or service cluster for lower income
and/or fixed income individuals.
G. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from making agreements or entering into multichannel service
agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel
and mobile park owners) to provide multichannel service under a bulk
billing or other type of arrangement.
A. Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including equipment which
is auxiliary to that owned by a customer, an MCS provider shall have
tested a representative sample (at least 1%) of such equipment to make
sure that it is in proper working order, unless the franchisee can
provide proof, if requested, that such equipment has already been
pretested or such equipment is tested at the time of installation.
B. An MCS provider shall deliver to a customer printed instructions
detailing the proper use of rented, loaned or purchased equipment.
Unless required by another section of this chapter, an MCS provider
may comply with this section by delivering the manufacturer's
instructions to a customer.
C. Subject to the provisions contained in Subsection F of this section and
under the circumstances provided in Subsection G of this section, an
MCS provider may seek a security deposit from a customer for use or
rental of the MCS provider's equipment.
D. An MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable state rules
(including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations) concerning
the imposition, retention and return of security deposits.
E. If the state, FCC and/or NYSCCT is silent on the security deposit for a
particular piece of equipment, the MCS provider shall be prohibited
from charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the
replacement cost to the MCS provider.
F. As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be
prohibited from charging any security deposit for multichannel service
which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate.
G. An MCS provider may charge an appropriate security deposit
(consistent with Subsection F of this section) in those instances where a
§ 186-45 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-46
186:154
§ 186-47. Service inquiry logs.
customer is reconnected after an involuntary disconnection for
nonpayment or prior history of unsatisfactory payment.
H. An MCS provider shall return a security deposit held to secure
equipment return (together with any interest earned) after the
equipment is satisfactorily returned and a deposit held to secure
payment for service shall be returned when the subscriber maintains a
satisfactory payment history (i.e., no payment delinquencies within the
preceding twelve-month period).
I. A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS
provider in good working order and operate such equipment only in the
manner specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the
equipment.
J. A customer shall reimburse an MCS provider for any damage or loss to
an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the customer's failure to
properly maintain and operate such equipment.
K. A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an
MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate
due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment and for equipment
which fails to operate or improperly operates, due to natural
occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such
equipment.
A. An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry
logs, subject to any limitations imposed by the NYSCCT or by state or
federal law, including (for MCS providers classified as cable operators)
any subscriber privacy limitations imposed by the Cable Act.
B. The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the village in
assessing (in the aggregate the type, degree and resolution of customer
service requests, inquiries and complaints.
C. At a minimum, the service inquiry logs shall contain the following:
(1) The time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry
or complaint, relating to service outage, transmission problems,
unsafe conditions or any other circumstances requiring further
response, together with the time and date of initial response to that
service request, inquiry or complaint;
(2) The nature of the service request, inquiry or complaint;
(3) The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the
service inquiry, request or complaint;
(4) Whether the service request, inquiry or complaint was resolved by
allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and
§ 186-46 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-47
186:155
§ 186-48. Reserved.
§ 186-49. Reserved.
§ 186-50. Reserved.
§ 186-51. Reserved.
§ 186-52. Reserved.
§ 186-53. Reserved.
§ 186-54. Reserved.
§ 186-55. Restoration of a subscriber's property.
(5) The area, location or quadrant of the village where the service
request, inquiry or request was generated.
D. In addition to any other right of inspection that the Board/franchising
authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a
compilation of such logs. However, the Board/franchising authority
shall not have the right of access, review or inspection for any service
inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs
that are otherwise protected from access, review or inspection by
federal or state law (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and
regulations).
E. The term "service inquiry logs," as used in this section, shall not include
logs on scheduled installations.
A. If at any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate and maintain a multichannel system), shall disturb the yard,
residence or other real or personal property of a subscriber, upon a
request by the subscriber for restoration of such property such MCS
provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence or other
personal property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
comparable to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
work.
B. The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider,
unless the disturbance was made at the request of the subscriber or
property owner. This subsection also requires the MCS provider or the
subscriber, to reimburse a private property owner for any physical
damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor or its
independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a private
property owner's property.
§ 186-47 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-55
186:156
§ 186-56. Service inquiries, requests, complaints and response
times.
C. The types of acts specifically included in this section are the following,
subject to existing easement rights:
(1) Removal of a property owner's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery
,flowers, trees, driveway or fence to install, trench, repair, replace,
remove or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;
(2) Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS
provider on a subscriber's property or within his or her residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering or the like on the
part of the MCS provider;
(3) Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning or heating unit or the like, in order to perform
construction, maintenance or repair on the multichannel system; or
(4) Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due
to either the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of a franchise
(if applicable or the abandonment, withdrawal or cessation, of
multichannel service to any portion of the village.
D. The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any
subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider may
employ to perform the tasks outlined in this section.
E. In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the responsibility to
diligently take all reasonable steps to protect the system and its
components from contact with tree limbs (e.g., employing the accepted
practice of installing tree guards).
A. Except in case of emergencies or an appointment scheduled with the
mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall, under normal
operating conditions (as defined in the federal rules), respond to the
service inquiries, requests and complaints of subscribers, within such
MCS provider's normal business or service hours and within the time
schedules detailed in Subsections B through G of this section. The MCS
provider shall be considered in compliance by the Board/franchising
authority if the standards of service outlined in Subsections B through
G are met or exceeded at least 95% of the time over any calendar
quarter. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider
shall inform the customer that there is a choice as to whether the
service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon or evening hours. If
the service call has to be canceled or rearranged by the MCS provider,
the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon
as possible and shall reschedule the service call for a time within 24
hours of the cancellation or the next available time convenient to the
subscriber.
§ 186-55 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-56
186:157
B. In the case of a signal or service interruption (such being defined as a
visually discernible degradation in picture or sound), an MCS provider
shall use its best efforts to respond and remedy the problem the same
day, but in no case later than 24 hours or one working day, whichever is
greater, from the time the MCS provider first received notification of
the signal or service interruption.
C. In the case of a "blank" or "no-picture" situation at any given level of
billing or service (except for pay-per-view events), an MCS provider
shall make such repairs as are necessary to return the multichannel
service to proper operation within 24 hours from the time the MCS
provider first received notification of the "blank" or "no-picture"
situation.
D. In the case of a defective, improperly operating or nonoperating piece
of equipment affecting the transmission of cable television or MCS
service, an MCS provider shall use its best efforts to respond and
remedy the problem the same day, but in no case shall the response be
later than 24 hours or one working day and such MCS provider shall
make the repairs necessary to correct the problem if reasonably
possible within 36 hours from the time the MCS provider first received
notification of the defective, improperly operating or nonoperating
piece of equipment.
E. Repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's residence or repair to
the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) shall be completed
and the situation resolved, at the conclusion of the first service visit. If
the repair is not completed and resolved within three visits and if as a
result of the insufficient repair there remains a visually or audibly
detected degradation of a multichannel signal, the MCS provider must,
immediately and completely, either replace all drop cable (coaxial, fiber
or its functional equivalent) or isolate and correct the source of signal
degradation in order to rectify the situation.
F. In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry relating to an
area service outage (three or more subscribers) go unresponded to for
more than 12 hours from the time the MCS provider first received
notification of the service inquiry or request. If a cancellation of a
service call occurs, the MCS provider shall reschedule the call in a
manner consistent with the guidelines provided in Subsection A of this
section.
G. In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider
received notification or the precise circumstances surrounding the
MCS provider receiving the notification or whether notification was
received at all, the Board/franchising authority reserves the right and
authority to settle such a dispute. However, MCS providers classified as
cable operators have the option of choosing the NYSCCT for the
resolution of the timing dispute.
§ 186-56 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-57
186:158
§ 186-57. MCS providers required to maintain sufficient repair
parts and sufficient repair personnel.
§ 186-58. New installations; regular, promotional, seasonal, shortterm,
pay-per-view and menu-driven connections; reconnections.
A. Except in emergencies, an MCS provider shall at all times have access
to and be able to secure sufficient maintenance and repair parts and
equipment for the MCS system, so that the MCS provider can respond
to and begin appropriate steps to correct all subscriber service
interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter, except
for reasons beyond the MCS provider's control.
B. Having access to and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and
repair parts and equipment is necessary to promptly restore a
subscriber's multichannel service and to avoid delays caused by having
to obtain needed parts and equipment.
C. Except in case of emergencies or labor disputes with the employees of
the MCS provider (whose duration has been less than 72 hours), an
MCS provider shall have sufficient maintenance and repair personnel,
so that the MCS provider can respond to subscriber service
interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter.
D. An MCS provider shall certify to the Board/franchising authority, upon
request, that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS
provider-implemented course designed to train service technicians to
handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, knowledgeable and
responsive manner. The course shall also be designed to provide
continuing education to service technicians in changes in technology,
repair/maintenance procedures and related matters.
E. Notwithstanding the other provisions contained in this section, an MCS
provider shall maintain at least one service technician on call 24 hours
per day.
A. Under normal operating conditions, new installations, promotional,
short-term or seasonal connections, reconnections and upgrades of
multichannel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and
completed within seven days (excluding holidays) of a customer
requesting such. This standard shall be met no less than 95% of the
time as measured on the basis of a calendar quarter.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to pay-perview
or menu-driven connections.
C. While an MCS provider may charge a customer for installing,
connecting or reconnecting multichannel service, such charge must be
explained to and approved by the customer prior to the installation,
connection or reconnection.
§ 186-57 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-58
186:159
§ 186-59. Disconnection for nonpayment.
D. In the case of a promotional or seasonal connection, any limitations or
restrictions must be explained in printed form to the subscriber prior to
such connection.
E. An MCS provider may charge an appropriate reconnection charge, as
permitted by applicable federal or state law. It may also require a
security deposit in those instances where a customer is reconnected
after an involuntary disconnection for nonpayment or a prior history of
unsatisfactory payment. However, such security deposit must be based
on the prior unsatisfactory payment history or involuntary
disconnection of the customer and not the location or address of the
residence or structure.
F. To the extent provided by applicable federal or state law, downgrading
a particular service level or service cluster to a lower-priced or less
comprehensive service or cluster level shall not be considered an
installation or connection to the lower-priced or less comprehensive
level of service; provided, however, that in no event shall there be any
charge for complete discontinuance of service by a subscriber.
G. An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall comply with any
and all rules and regulations of the NYSCCT concerning downgrading.
A. A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at
least:
(1) Sixty days have elapsed after the mailing of the bill to the
subscriber;
(2) Service for the first thirty-day period billed for has been delivered;
and
(3) Payment for said period has not been received by an MCS provider.
B. Before disconnection of a subscriber's multichannel service (either
physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:
(1) The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment for
multichannel service; and
(2) At least five days shall have elapsed after a separate written notice
of impending disconnection has been personally served upon the
subscriber or deposited at his or her residence; or
(3) At least eight days have elapsed after mailing a separate written
notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or
(4) At least five days have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for or refused to accept a separate written notice of
impending disconnection.
§ 186-58 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-59
186:160
§ 186-60. Voluntary disconnections and downgrades.
C. The written notice of disconnection must clearly state the amount that
is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum amount
required to be paid to avoid disconnection and the date and place where
such payment must be made.
D. Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day and
within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber
agrees otherwise or is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of
the past due account.
E. An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment (including, but
not limited to, converter, remote control unit or digital audio tuner)
from a subscriber must do so within both a normal service day and
normal service hours of the MCS provider, unless otherwise agreed to
by the subscriber.
F. Receipt of a bad check from a subscriber, in response to a written notice
of disconnection, does not constitute payment and the affected MCS
provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to
disconnecting multichannel service.
G. An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter and any
applicable state regulations (including those of the NYSCCT) are
followed.
H. Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made
within 60 days of the disconnection for nonpayment, unless no
forwarding address is available.
A. At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier,
service cluster, menu-driven program/service, premium channel,
informational service or the entire multichannel service be
disconnected.
B. Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a
downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive
level of service or a less expensive level of service.
C. From the date that a subscriber requests either a disconnection or
downgrade, the MCS provider shall have 72 hours or three service
days, whichever is longer, to disconnect or downgrade the service tier,
pay channel, premium channel, informational service or entire
multichannel service. In the event that an MCS provider does not
disconnect or downgrade service within said period, a subscriber's
obligation to pay for such service shall cease, or, in the case of a
downgrade, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more
comprehensive and/or higher priced service shall cease as of the end of
such period.
§ 186-59 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-60
186:161
§ 186-61. The Board/franchising authority's policy regarding the
provision of seamless or see-through technology.
The Board/franchising authority recognizes that it is in the public's interest
to be able to utilize the functions inherent in a subscriber's receiving
equipment without having to incur additional costs to obtain the same
functions. Consequently, the Board/franchising authority may require that,
unless an MCS provider can demonstrate to the village that it is not
technically feasible or that it is commercially impracticable, such MCS
provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in
subscriber equipment in a seamless or see-through manner which allows:
D. For a service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium
channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a
subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such
service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium channel or
informational service.
E. Once a valid connection to a menu-driven program or a pay-per-view
event occurs, the MCS provider may collect the full advertised or
quoted rate, should the customer later attempt to disconnect the menudriven
program or pay-per-view event.
F. For MCS providers classified as cable operators, any charge or billing
imposed on a subscriber as a result of a downgrade shall be no more
than the maximum permitted by NYSCCT rules and regulations. For
other MCS providers, the Board/franchising authority reserves the
right to approve any charge or billing that would be imposed on a
subscriber as a result of a downgrade in service.
G. If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is or has been lost,
appropriated or damaged by a subscriber prior to such disconnection,
the MCS provider may charge the subscriber the entire cost of such loss
or damage, provided that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber
within 30 days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall not be required
to pay for equipment failure, if the circumstances fall within the normal
wear and tear or acts of nature guidelines established in this chapter.
H. Any refund due a subscriber after voluntary disconnection and/or
downgrade shall be made within 60 days after such disconnection,
unless no forwarding address is available.
I. In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and
remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution
process outlined in this chapter.
J. The provisions contained in this section concerning downgrades shall
be considered supplemental to any applicable rules and regulations of
the NYSCCT.
A. The use of any built-in remote control capability of a subscriber's
television receiver/monitor for the control of any and all television
§ 186-60 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-61
186:162
§ 186-62. Reserved.
§ 186-63. Reserved.
§ 186-64. Reserved.
§ 186-65. Protection of subscriber privacy.
§ 186-66. Resolution of complaints/inquiries.
channels provided by the MCS provider without the use or necessity of
additional on premises equipment; and
B. The ability to record video programming on any channel provided by
the MCS provider while watching video programming on any different
channel, without the use or necessity of any additional in-home
equipment other than the television receiver/monitor and a video
recorder.
A. An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or
regulations of the federal or state governments (including any
applicable rules and regulations of the NYSCCT).
B. MCS providers classified as cable operators shall also comply with any
subscriber privacy protection requirements and procedures listed in
Section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 551).
A. An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy which adheres to this chapter and any rules or
regulations promulgated hereto.
B. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
to writing and such policy shall be available upon request to any person.
In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the
manner that is prescribed by this chapter and any state rules and
regulations (including those of the NYSCCT). Further, nothing in this
section shall prohibit a subscriber from seeking relief from the NYSCCT
for any matter within its jurisdiction.
C. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at
least the following minimum standards:
(1) The initial response to a complaint/inquiry involving a service
interruption shall occur no later than 24 hours after receipt of the
complaint/inquiry;
(2) The MCS provider shall use its best efforts to resolve the
complaint/inquiry relating to service problems within 24 hours
after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
(3) Complaints/inquiries relating to service changes or additions shall
be responded to in accordance with this chapter;
§ 186-61 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-66
186:163
§ 186-67. Policy and provisions with respect to continuity of
multichannel service.
(4) Subscribers shall be informed of the credit/refund policy, which
shall be consistent with this chapter and any applicable state
regulations (including those of the NYSCCT); and
(5) Subscribers shall be informed of the billing disputes policy, which
shall be consistent with this chapter and any applicable state
regulations (including those of the NYSCCT).
A. The Board/franchising authority declares that, as part of its right to
establish multichannel customer service guidelines, it is in the public
interest to ensure continuity of multichannel service for all subscribers.
In that light, the Board/franchising authority also determines that it
may take appropriate measures to ensure that no portion of the village
is threatened or faced with a disruption, interruption or discontinuance
of multichannel service due to the actions of any MCS provider.
B. Consistent with the principles and purposes enumerated in Subsection
A, it is the Board/franchising authority's policy:
(1) To provide for continuity of multichannel service in the event of
acquisition by the village;
(2) To provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed
abandonment, withdrawal or cessation of multichannel service by
an MCS provider;
(3) To provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation,
termination or nonrenewal of a franchised MCS provider's
franchise;
(4) To provide for continuity of service in the event that a transaction
occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider,
such as an assignment, sale, transfer or merger;
(5) To provide for continuity of service in the event of expiration of a
franchise;
(6) To prevent disruption of multichannel service, which would provide
a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multichannel system
as their primary or secondary source of information; and
(7) To prevent the interruption or cessation of multichannel service,
which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming
choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multichannel system and
thereby restrict their ability to receive information.
C. In any situation (including any of those mentioned above) which
threatens the village and subscribers with loss of or interruption in the
continuity of multichannel service, the MCS provider shall, to the extent
that it has adequate advance knowledge, provide the Board/franchising
§ 186-66 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-67
186:164
§ 186-68. Continued use of individual antennas protected.
authority with at least 45 days' notice prior to the effective date of any
action which would cause a loss of or interruption in the continuity of
multichannel service.
D. Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above)
which threatens the village and subscribers with the loss or
interruption of multichannel service, the MCS provider shall use its
best efforts for a period of up to 24 months to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multichannel service of
the same quality, mix and level(s), regardless of the circumstances.
E. During the interim period, the Board/franchising authority shall work
with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multichannel system
owner or rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is
removed at the earliest possible date.
F. During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to
provide multichannel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is
entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including
franchise fees, alternative user charges and taxes) to the village or to
other persons.
G. In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within 24
months, the Board/franchising authority may extend the interim period
on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily resolved.
Also, in such a circumstance, the Board/franchising authority may
adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the
subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multichannel service
of the same quality, mix and level(s).
H. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring an MCS provider
to operate a multichannel system at a continued financial loss (due to
bankruptcy or insolvency) for an extended period of time. In such case,
while the Board/franchising authority may require continuity of service,
it must lift such requirement as soon as the threat of loss of service is
removed. Consequently, the Board/franchising authority must take
appropriate steps to ensure the continuity of service.
A. The Board/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the erection
or continued use of individual television antennas within the village so
long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all
applicable zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person
shall be required to receive multichannel service or to physically
connect to a multichannel system.
B. No person shall be penalized or fined (through either a home sales
contract, deed with restrictive covenants or other type of agreement)
for failing or refusing to receive multichannel service or for failing or
refusing to physically connect to a multichannel system.
§ 186-67 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-69
186:165
§ 186-69. Reserved.
§ 186-70. Reserved.
§ 186-71. Reserved.
§ 186-72. Reserved.
§ 186-73. Reserved.
§ 186-74. Reserved.
§ 186-75. Construction schedule and construction-related
requirements.
In order to establish minimum uniform standards, each MCS provider shall
adopt the following minimum construction schedule and constructionrelated
requirements:
§ 186-76. Construction of good quality.
During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of
the multichannel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and
durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner.
§ 186-77. Conditions on use of streets and public ways.
A. Construct, install, maintain and repair the multichannel system in
accordance with this chapter;
B. Use streets and public ways in the manner set forth in this chapter;
C. Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as set
forth in this chapter;
D. Adopt the construction standards set forth in this chapter;
E. Adopt the system expansion standards set forth in this chapter;
F. Adopt the construction schedule referred to in this chapter;
G. Abide by and act in strict accordance with, all current technical codes
adopted by the village, the state or the United States; and
H. Maintain all permits and licenses required by this chapter.
A. All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) and
other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located,
constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel
upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the
§ 186-69 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-77
186:166
village. To prevent the unnecessary disruption of the flow of traffic
during peak traffic hours, any MCS provider shall make reasonable
efforts to minimize work associated with construction or installation
activities (other than in subscriber homes) that involve working on or
within the street system between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between
3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on regular business weekdays.
B. In the event that an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or
unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, such
MCS provider shall at its own expense, either voluntarily or upon the
request of the Board/franchising authority, remove or modify such part
of the system as may be required to eliminate such condition from the
subject property.
C. An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with
the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures
or with water hydrants or mains or with wastewater lift stations, any
traffic control system or any other service or facility that benefits the
village's or its residents' health, safety or welfare.
D. An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect rights-of-way and easements and shall support
or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public
way any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason
of:
(1) Traffic conditions;
(2) Public safety;
(3) A street closing;
(4) Street construction or resurfacing;
(5) A change or establishment of street grade;
(6) Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift
stations, force mains, power or signal lines and any traffic control
system; or
(7) Any improvement, construction or repair related to the village's or
its residents health safety or welfare.
E. It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in
conjunction with another person), upon reasonable request and without
charge, to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others
to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional
equivalent) before employees, agents or independent contractors of any
entity perform work in the marked-off area.
F. An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to
allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal
§ 186-77 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-77
186:167
§ 186-78. Franchised MCS provider's duty to remove franchised
properties from the public streets.
shall be paid by the person requesting it and such MCS provider may
require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given
not less than 21 days' notice of a contemplated move to arrange for
temporary wire changes.
G. For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this
chapter and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the
multichannel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber or
functional equivalent) shall be placed underground, when and if all
other utilities are placed underground. Further, where both power and
utilities are presently underground, multichannel system cable shall
also be placed underground.
A. This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the village.
B. Unless the village or another MCS provider uses such multichannel
system under the continuity provisions outlined in this chapter or
unless other arrangements have been agreed to by the Board/
franchising authority or the owners of the property where the subject
facilities are located, the affected franchised MCS provider shall at its
expense promptly remove its multichannel system property or any
abandoned portion of the system, from the streets, public ways and
private property located within the village whenever the following
occurs:
(1) A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all or part, of the
multichannel system for a continuous period of six months;
(2) A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the
multichannel system outlined in the application or proposal for
renewal or renewal franchise agreement;
(3) The Board/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; or
(4) The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
C. If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, the Board/
franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if
removal of the property is not accomplished within 270 days or
substantial progress towards removal is not made within 210 days, the
Board/franchising authority may direct officials or representatives of
the village to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property
at that franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or
construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit or full faith
and credit guaranty required as set forth in this chapter shall be
available to pay for such work.
§ 186-77 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-78
186:168
§ 186-79. Construction standards.
D. If officials or representatives of the village remove a franchised MCS
provider's system property and such franchised MCS provider does not
claim the property within 90 days of its removal, the Board/franchising
authority may take whatever steps are available under state law to
declare the property surplus and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale
going to the village.
E. When such franchised MCS provider removes its multichannel system
property from the streets, public ways and private property located
within the village, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own
expense and in a manner approved by the Board/franchising authority,
replace and restore such public or private property to a condition
comparable to that which existed before the work was done.
A. Methods of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of any
multichannel system shall comply with the most current editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electric Code that
affect the construction, installation and maintenance of electrical
supply and communication lines, attachments and supports. To the
extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise
agreement or state or local law, state law shall apply unless the state
allows the local law to control.
B. All construction, installations, maintenance and repairs shall treat the
aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not unreasonably impair
the appearance or substantially affect the integrity of any structure and
shall not be installed on the bias across any property or side of a
residence or other structure without the property owner's or other
authorized person's permission.
C. All underground drops shall follow all reasonable construction and
installation standards required under village, state or federal rules.
Underground installations shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications and requirements of the Village of Bronxville and the
National Electric Safety Code and the National Electric Code and must
be designed to minimize disruption to the village's underground
facilities associated with the computerized traffic control system
network.
D. For existing multichannel system construction, installation and repair,
the provisions of Subsection C of this section shall apply only at the
time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild of the MCS provider's
multichannel system is actually commenced. For newly served areas,
the provisions of Subsection C of this section shall apply at the time of
initial construction and/or installation.
E. In instances where either electrical or telephone utilities install wire or
cable aerially, the MCS provider may construct its multichannel system
§ 186-78 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-79
186:169
§ 186-80. System construction schedule for franchised MCS
providers.
§ 186-81. System expansion for MCS providers.
aerially, unless otherwise required by state law (including NYSCCT
rules and regulations).
F. In instances where both electrical and telephone utilities install wire or
cable underground, the MCS provider shall construct its multichannel
system underground, unless otherwise permitted by state law
(including NYSCCT rules and regulations). However, where existing
aerial electrical or telephone utilities convert to underground facilities,
an existing aerial MCS provider shall have the option to continue
remaining aerial for as long as it does not constitute a safety hazard and
is permitted by state law (including any NYSCCT rules and regulations).
A. This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the village.
B. A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the
multichannel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a
form and format determined by the Board/franchising authority.
C. A franchised MCS provider who does not comply with the system
construction schedule shall be subject to the penalties provided in this
chapter or, where applicable, a franchise agreement.
A. The Board/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary
purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest
diversity of programming sources be available to the greatest number
of village residents. The Board/franchising authority is also cognizant
that an MCS provider may have some constitutionally protected rights
with respect to when and what areas of the village are provided service.
B. In order to balance those interests, the Board/franchising authority sets
the following minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part
of a franchised MCS provider.
C. A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within six months of the
effective date of this chapter, a detailed plan for multichannel system
expansion to any area in which the public streets are not presently
served within the village. Such plan shall not be construed as a
requirement for universal service, but rather as a means for achieving
the Board/franchising authority's goals mentioned in Subsection A.
However, at a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend
multichannel service to any area within the village that has a density of
20 home or building passings per mile or fractional equivalent thereof,
as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the unserved
area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed subscriber shall not be
assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual
§ 186-79 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-81
186:170
§ 186-82. Permits and licenses.
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by local law, rule, regulation or ordinance and maintain the same
in full force and effect, as long as required by the village or other
appropriate entity.
§ 186-83. Technical and performance standards.
§ 186-84. Proof-of-performance tests.
The MCS provider shall design and conduct any and all tests necessary to
verify the performance and technical integrity of the multichannel system.
Such tests shall be performed at least annually and shall be in accordance
(where applicable) with any and all rules and regulations of the NYSCCT
concerning proof-of-performance.
§ 186-85. Reservation of right to inspect construction, documents
related to construction and tests related to performance, technical
integrity and quality of signal, preventive maintenance and safety.
and normal connection fees paid by subscribers and except for the costs
of custom service arrangements or exceptional distance from the public
streets or ways, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible.
D. The detailed plan must include criteria for extending the provision of
service to isolated subscribers. For purposes of this section, "isolated
subscribers'" means any potential customer of a franchised MCS
provider who dwells in a house more than 1/2 mile from the nearest
franchised MCS provider connection.
A. It shall be the responsibility of any MCS provider to comply with the
most current FCC technical standards.
B. The MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable rules and
regulations of the NYSCCT concerning the performance and integrity of
the multichannel system.
A. In order to verify that an MCS provider constructed and maintained the
multichannel system in the manner required by this chapter and
conducted the various performance, technical integrity [including
cumulative leakage (CLI)], preventive maintenance and safety tests
required by federal, state (including NYSCCT) and local laws, the
Board/franchising authority reserves the right to inspect all facets of an
MCS provider's construction, as well as to inspect documents related to
construction and inspect test results related to performance, technical
integrity, preventive maintenance and safety.
B. The Board/franchising authority shall pay for all of its costs associated
with such an inspection, except for those costs occasioned by an MCS
provider's refusal to provide necessary information (such as strand
§ 186-81 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-85
186:171
§ 186-86. Reserved.
§ 186-87. Reserved.
§ 186-88. Reserved.
§ 186-89. Board/franchising authority's policy with respect to safety
requirements.
§ 186-90. Provisions to alert subscribers in the event of an
emergency; standby power.
maps or similar documentation) and costs occasioned by the repeated
failure to construct, install, maintain, repair, rebuild or upgrade, in the
manner specified and required by this chapter, or, where applicable,
a franchise agreement. In such instances, the MCS provider shall pay
for such costs incurred by the village caused by the MCS provider's
refusal to supply necessary information or repeated failure to abide by
the rules.
A. The Board/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's
construction, operation and maintenance of the multichannel system
meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the
public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multichannel service.
B. Consequently, the Board/franchising authority requires any MCS
provider to adopt the following safety requirements:
(1) Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(2) Minimum standby power as required by this chapter;
(3) Implementation of a periodic preventive maintenance program, as
set forth in this chapter;
(4) Compliance with all FCC rules and regulations concerning
maximum cumulative leakage index (CLI) limits; and
(5) Compliance with any construction, safety or fire codes required by
this chapter.
A. In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending or
actual, natural or man-made emergency, all MCS providers shall ensure
that the multichannel system providing multichannel service to all or
part of the village is designed so as to permit an authorized official of
the village to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone
phone (or functional equivalent) from any location.
B. In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS
provider shall:
§ 186-85 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-90
186:172
§ 186-91. Provisions concerning safety alert technology.
(1) Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts
of both audio and video (this channel need not be solely used for
emergency broadcasts and may in fact be used for any lawful
purpose);
(2) Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a
periodic basis;
(3) Maintain all-channel video blanking capability to facilitate the
needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers;
(4) Test the emergency override system quarterly and remedy any
problems or operational deficiencies immediately;
(5) Cooperate with the village on the use and operation of the
emergency alert override system; and
(6) Develop a plan (with the village's concurrence) to provide
continuity of multichannel service and to respond to service calls in
the event of an emergency.
C. As one method of providing continuity of multichannel services in the
event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall,
unless exempted by the Board/franchising authority, have the capacity
for three-hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and
feeder cable and at the system headend and at all sub-headends, hubs,
fiber optic distribution nodes and receive sites associated with the
distribution of cable service to and throughout the village.
A. All MCS providers, including all franchisees, shall promptly comply
with any applicable federal or state laws, regulations or
recommendations for the provision of safety alert technology which
may accomplish any one or more of the following:
(1) Effective instantaneous access into potentially every home,
whether or not one subscribes to basic multichannel service;
(2) No requirement that the television or monitor be turned on or the
volume be turned up, in order to receive the notification;
(3) No requirement that the village citizen be home at the time of
transmission of the notification in order to receive the notification;
(4) Coverage of the entire range of human hearing;
(5) Storage of the notification in case no one is home at the time;
(6) An emergency audio alert intended to waken a sleeping individual;
(7) Notification of any one individual or discreet segments of the
village citizenry, without unnecessarily alarming the rest of the
populace;
§ 186-90 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-91
186:173
§ 186-92. Implementation of a preventive maintenance program.
(8) A different alert notification for emergency and non-emergency
situations; and
(9) Connection to the local office of the National Weather Service's Site
Select weather warning service and standard weather radio
service.
B. Notwithstanding any requirement of applicable federal or state law,
regulations or recommendations, in the event the Board/franchising
authority chooses not to require the provision of this technology or
service by the MCS provider, the MCS provider nonetheless shall
reserve the bandwidth necessary for the provision of this service for use
by any other party designated or approved by the Board/franchising
authority.
C. The Board/franchising authority designates the necessary bandwidth as
a form of governmental access and, as such, may require the provision
of the necessary bandwidth at no charge to the Board/franchising
authority.
D. If, when and as any federal or state law, regulation or recommendation
for such safety alert technology becomes applicable, the Board/
franchising authority may require the MCS provider to cooperate with
the village, the Board/franchising authority and/or any other party
designated or approved to provide such technology or service, in all
matters related to the provision of such technology or service, including
but not limited to:
(1) Making the public aware of the availability of the technology or
service;
(2) Educating the public as to the benefits, value and use of the
service;
(3) The distribution and installation of any in-home device(s) needed
for the reception and use of the technology or service; and
(4) The provision of the technology and/or service to the public.
E. If, when and as any federal or state law, regulation or recommendation
for such safety alert technology becomes applicable, the Board/
franchising authority may allow the operator to propose an alternative
or functionally equivalent, technology or service that meets, to the
greatest extent possible, the capabilities set forth in Subsection A of
this section.
A. It shall be the duty of each MCS provider to devise and implement a
periodic preventive maintenance program for the multichannel system,
in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the
multichannel system that would affect the citizens' health, safety and
§ 186-91 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-92
186:174
§ 186-93. Construction, Fire and Safety Codes.
welfare or negatively affect the quality of multichannel services being
provided.
B. The MCS provider shall provide a copy of the written summary of such
program to the Board/franchising authority and any revisions,
modifications or amendments thereof as may be made from time to
time.
C. Within 45 days after the completion of any preventive maintenance
component test, the MCS provider shall prepare and provide, upon
request, a written report (except for daily or weekly components and
tests which may be submitted once a quarter) to the Board/franchising
authority detailing the results of the tests conducted and all items
performed or addressed during the periodic preventive maintenance
program. Although not exhaustive, the following areas shall be included
in a preventive maintenance program and subsequent report:
(1) Inspection and repair, if needed, of the headend;
(2) Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower and its
lighting, if required;
(3) Inspection and repair, if needed, of the weatherproofing and
protection of the antenna lead connectors and on any other
exposed fittings;
(4) Conduct of signal leakage tests in accordance with FCC
requirements;
(5) Removal of tree roots, limbs and branches that interfere with or
come in contact with the MCS provider's cable;
(6) Periodic servicing, testing and calibration of the MCS provider's
equipment, including service vehicles and field test equipment;
(7) Use of a status monitoring system or other adequate practices, to
identify problems or situations in which the multichannel system
electronics are operating outside preprogrammed parameters;
(8) Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function
properly during an emergency situation;
(9) Testing of any safety alert system or technology;
(10) Testing and the recording of test data, for all signals (audio and
video) at the headend and all system extremity points;
(11) Testing as required or allowed by federal or state law (including
any applicable or required NYSCCT testing; and
(12) Meeting or exceeding all operating parameters set or allowed by
the FCC, as such may be revised or amended from time to time.
§ 186-92 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-93
186:175
§ 186-94. Reserved.
§ 186-95. Reserved.
§ 186-96. Reserved.
§ 186-97. Reserved.
§ 186-98. Reserved.
§ 186-99. Alternative user charge.
A. An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove,
replace or restore the multichannel system in strict compliance with all
current technical codes adopted by the Board/franchising authority, the
state (including any applicable codes of the NYSCCT) or the United
States.
B. The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to,
construction, fire and safety and zoning codes.
A. This section is applicable to any unfranchised but otherwise authorized
MCS provider and to any franchised MCS provider which has had its
franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid. For all
franchised MCS providers, the provisions concerning franchise fees
shall be applicable, unless the franchise fee is replaced by an alternate
user charge.
B. Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law and as an
alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this
chapter, the Board/franchising authority may impose, extract and
collect, a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such
provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the
village.
C. Such an alternative user charge shall be based on the value of the
public rights-of-way being used by the affected MCS provider. However,
in no event shall the alternative user charge exceed 5% of the affected
MCS provider's gross revenue from operation of its multichannel
system within the village for the reporting period.
D. The Board/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user
charge, in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS
provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such
compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on
such MCS provider's annual gross revenue. However, an affected MCS
provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat
percentage of gross revenue, as long as that charge does not exceed 5%
of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenue from operation of
its multichannel system within the village.
§ 186-93 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-99
186:176
§ 186-100. Franchise required; exception.
E. Also, recognizing that an alternative user charge may affect a
franchised MCS provider, the franchise agreement may contain express
language which sets forth a different method or manner to handle a
situation in which franchise fees as historically calculated (as a
percentage of gross revenue) are ruled unconstitutional or
unenforceable, in order to protect and preserve the village's source of
revenue and compensation for the use of the public rights-of-way.
F. A franchise fee and an alternative user charge shall not be imposed on
the same MCS provider at the same time and for the same period.
G. An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to
pay an alternative user charge that exceeds 5% of such provider's gross
revenue (as defined by this chapter) from operation of its multichannel
system within the village for any particular reporting period. In the
event that the alternative user charge does exceed 5% of gross revenue,
such alternative user charge shall be reduced to reflect an amount not
greater than the five-percent cap.
H. An affected MCS provider shall pay 25% of the alternative user charge
at the end of every three months.
A. Except as provided in Subsections B, C and D of this section, no person
or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a
multichannel system which requires the laying or positioning or use of
cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of
the village, without having first obtained from the village a MCS
franchise which is then in effect or whose provisions have been
renewed or extended temporarily.
B. No franchise shall be required for the village or any local or municipal
authority affiliated with it to operate as an MCS provider.
C. If, as a result of annexation (either previous to or subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter), a previously unfranchised MCS provider
comes under the jurisdiction of the village, such MCS provider shall not
be required to obtain a franchise or to enter into a franchise agreement,
unless the Board/franchising authority expressly gives written
notification to the MCS provider that it is required to do so.
D. Where a person or MCS provider is required by the Board/franchising
authority to obtain a franchise, the Board/franchising authority shall
notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within 30 days of the
Board/franchising authority's formal action.
E. After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider shall
have 90 days in which to submit an application or proposal as required
by the Board/franchising authority. The MCS provider's application
shall be processed in accordance with state and local law.
§ 186-99 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-101
186:177
§ 186-101. Authority to grant nonexclusive franchises.
§ 186-102. Franchise agreement; minimum requirements.
A. Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541), the Board/franchising authority may award one or more
nonexclusive multichannel service franchises within its geographical
limits.
B. A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public
proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the village
and the applicant, and in accordance with the procedure set forth by
the federal, state (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and
regulations) and local laws and regulations.
A. An MCS provider may not lay or use any cable (coaxial, fiber or
functional equivalent) until a franchise agreement is fully executed and
is in effect.
B. A franchise agreement shall be sufficiently detailed so as to clearly
delineate the rights and duties of both the franchised MCS provider and
the Board/franchising authority.
C. At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain, to the extent
required or appropriate, provisions for the following:
(1) A detailed definition of "annual gross revenue," in order to
determine what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or
alternative user charge;
(2) The term or duration of the franchise;
(3) Indemnity and hold harmless clauses;
(4) Insurance;
(5) Performance and completion bonds or security deposits;
(6) Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;
(7) Compensation, including franchise fees;
(8) Continuity of multichannel programming service;
(9) Assignment, transfer or sale of an existing franchise;
(10) Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements;
(11) A severability clause;
(12) The law that governs the franchise agreement; and
(13) Any exemptions or relief from this chapter granted or any local law
clarifications noted, with respect to the MCS provider's operation
of a franchised multichannel system.
§ 186-101 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-103
186:178
§ 186-103. Extent of grant of franchise.
§ 186-104. Term of franchise.
§ 186-105. Application for franchise; application fee.
A. Upon an award of a franchise, in accordance with the terms of such
franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain
a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair,
replace, remove or restore a multichannel system within the
geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement.
B. The franchised multichannel system may be located in, upon, along,
across, over and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public
ways of the village.
C. Except to the extent that easement rights are conveyed by the grant of
a municipal franchise pursuant to the provisions of federal law, a
franchised MCS provider shall be responsible for obtaining any
required easements for private property (including privately owned
utility or streetlight poles).
D. A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multichannel system
on or within the property of such utility company. This provision
specifically includes MCS providers classified as cable operators.
A. The term of an initial MCS franchise shall not exceed 10 years from the
date that a franchise agreement is both approved and executed by the
Board/franchising authority (and, where applicable, the NYSCCT).
B. The term of a renewal franchise shall be for a period not less than five
years, nor more than 10 years from the date that a franchise renewal
agreement is both approved and executed by the Board/franchising
authority (and, where applicable, the NYSCCT).
C. If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six years or
less, the village shall set forth the reasons for granting the shorter
franchise, either in the franchise agreement or elsewhere.
A. The Board/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations with
respect to the submission and processing of applications for a
franchise. Such rules shall be consistent with and/or subordinate to any
applicable rules and regulations of the state (including, where
applicable, those of the NYSCCT). Further, such rules and regulations
shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical
and character qualifications of the applicant for a franchise.
B. Unless prohibited by any state agency (including the NYSCCT) and
unless inconsistent with applicable federal law, an applicant shall pay
an initial application fee, which shall be no greater than the
administrative and consulting costs associated with processing an
§ 186-103 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-105
186:179
§ 186-106. Franchise fees.
initial application for a franchise. The total application fee must be paid,
unless waived, when the initial application for the franchise is filed.
A. Any franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider
classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise
after the date this chapter becomes effective shall pay to the village for
the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public
ways and other facilities of the village in the operation of the
multichannel system and for the village's supervision thereof during the
term of the franchise, a sum equal to 5% of the gross revenue of such
franchised MCS provider, provided that such fee shall be reduced to the
extent necessary to comply with applicable federal and state law and
rules.
B. If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over
multichannel service ever allows a governmental entity or Board/
franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond 5%, the
Board/franchising authority shall have the authority to increase the
franchise fee to the maximum percentage allowable; provided, however,
that no increase in fee may be imposed upon a franchisee during the
term of a franchise agreement without the consent of the franchisee.
C. Franchised MCS providers classified as cable operators (consistent
with the Cable Act and the applicable rulings of the FCC or the
NYSCCT) may pass through to subscribers the amount of any increase
in a franchise fee, unless the Board/franchising authority demonstrates
that the rate structure specified in the franchise agreement reflects all
costs of franchise fees and so notifies the franchised MCS provider
classified as a cable operator in writing. Franchised MCS providers not
classified as cable operators must petition and be granted the authority
to pass through any increase in a franchise fee.
D. Franchised MCS providers shall, to the degree required by the
applicable rulings of the FCC and NYSCCT, pass through to subscribers
the amount of any decrease in a franchise fee.
E. A franchised MCS provider shall file with the Board/franchising
authority, within 45 days after the expiration of each of the franchised
MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and revenue
statement clearly showing the franchise fee due for the preceding
quarter together with the bases of the calculations thereof. Such
statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or officer of
a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness and
veracity of the revenue figures. Such statement shall be in a form and
format adequate to show the subject revenue and fees due (subject to
reasonable review by the Board franchising authority) and shall include
revenue from any source that is gross revenue as defined hereinabove.
Revenue shall be reported by service category, type and level, showing
computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels,
§ 186-105 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-106
186:180
tiers, clusters, types of service and other revenue sources by kind and
type, subject to appropriate protection of proprietary information and
the confidentiality of subscriber information under federal law.
F. The quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be paid to the village at
the time the financial and revenue statement is filed.
G. In the event that payment is not made by the due date or within 10 days
after proper demand, such franchised MCS provider may be declared in
default of the franchise and the franchise may be revoked, terminated
or canceled in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
H. The Board/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a franchised
MCS provider's books, if the Board/franchising authority deems it
necessary, subject to appropriate protection of the confidentiality of
subscriber information under federal law. If such audit discovers an
underpayment of franchise fees in any amount, the affected franchised
MCS provider shall reimburse the village for the cost of such audit
(unless such cost is waived by the Board/franchising authority). The
right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid as a
franchise fee shall always reside in the Board/franchising authority.
I. If an audit or other research discovers that franchise fees have been
either materially underpaid or not paid for a period exceeding six
months from the original due date, the village may seek full recovery of
the underpaid or non-paid fees, plus interest, not to exceed 15% per
year or the maximum allowable under state law (whichever is less).
J. All annual reports pertaining to the payment of franchise fees shall be
certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider and shall be
provided in the form, format and detail applicable to quarterly reports
under Subsection F above. Such provider shall maintain records used in
the preparation of said reports, to be produced in their original form
and in their entirety upon request or demand by the Board/franchising
authority, subject to protection of the privacy of subscriber information.
K. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of or an
accord and satisfaction of any claim that the village might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or
for the performance of any other obligation of a franchised MCS
provider hereunder.
L. Except as otherwise provided by law, payments of compensation made
by a franchised MCS provider to the village pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be considered in addition to and not exclusive of,
any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other
levies and assessments presently in effect or subsequently adopted.
M. A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Section
622(g)(2)(d) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(d)].
§ 186-106 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-106
186:181
§ 186-107. Assignment of franchise.
N. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
Board/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of
any kind on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with
respect to multichannel service or other programming or
communications service provided by such person over a multichannel
system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received
by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this
subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service
directly bills a subscriber or the franchised MCS provider acts as
collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber or
where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells
advertising or goods on that channel and receives the money directly or
through a third party.
O. For any twelve-month period, the fees paid by any person subject to
Subsection N of this section who provides any such multichannel
service shall not exceed 5% of such person's gross revenue or such
higher percentage as may be authorized by the FCC, Congress or other
governmental entity, derived in such period from the provision of such
service over the multichannel system within the village.
P. If at any time the highest court of the nation or the highest court of the
state invalidates, voids or rules as unconstitutional the concept of
franchise fees, the Board/franchising authority may impose an
alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider in the manner
set forth in this chapter and not inconsistent with the terms of an
applicable franchise agreement or the lawful rights of the franchisee.
Q. In light of Subsection P of this section, the franchise agreement may
contain express language which permits a different method or manner
for collection of franchise fees should the applicable provision of the
franchise agreement be ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, so
that the village's source of revenue and compensation for the use of the
public right-of-way may be protected.
A. There shall be no assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise
by the MCS provider without prior written approval by the Board/
franchising authority. Any substantial change in the ownership or
control of the MCS provider or a parent company or corporation shall
constitute an assignment of the franchise requiring such prior approval.
B. Any assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall
constitute a default of such franchise.
C. In the event of such a default, the Board/franchising authority shall
proceed according to this chapter and any applicable state law
(including any applicable rules or regulations of the NYSCCT).
§ 186-106 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-107
186:182
D. At least 120 days before such a proposed assignment of an MCS
provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised
MCS provider shall petition in writing for the Board/franchising
authority's written consent for such assignment.
E. The Board/franchising authority shall not unreasonably withhold its
consent to such an assignment, nor disclose confidential or proprietary
information considered in connection with such a petition. However, in
making such a determination, the Board/franchising authority may
consider all relevant facts, including the following:
(1) Experience of the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer;
(2) Qualifications of the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer;
(3) The legal integrity of the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer;
(4) The financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee,
transferee or buyer, both before and after the proposed
assignment;
(5) If requested by the Board/franchising authority, submissions from
the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer, as to what, if any,
changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the
multichannel system;
(6) The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS
provider and the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer;
(7) The economic viability or non-viability of the multichannel system
that may result from the proposed assignment in the future, based
upon certain factors, including the impact of the purchase price on
the village and/or the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer;
(8) Any claimed benefits which may accrue from the assignment; and
(9) Any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's, transferee's
or buyer's background which could affect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizenry of the village as it relates to the operation of
the multichannel system.
F. A copy of the completed sales agreement or a functionally equivalent
instrument, between the franchised MCS provider and the proposed
assignee, transferee or buyer shall be provided to the Board/franchising
authority, so that the Board/franchising authority may discover any
assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and the
proposed assignee, transferee or buyer with respect to the
multichannel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the Board/
franchising authority may accept an attested summary of obligations
assumed by the above-referenced parties. The village may request any
additional information that is not prohibited by law.
§ 186-107 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-107
186:183
§ 186-108. Special rules for hypothecation.
§ 186-109. Default of franchise; revocation, termination or
cancellation of franchise.
G. Before an assignment is approved by the Board/franchising authority,
the proposed assignee, transferee or buyer shall execute an affidavit,
acknowledging that it has read, understood and will comply with both
this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.
H. In the event of any approved assignment, the assignee, transferee or
buyer shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former
franchised MCS provider, except as noted in Subsection I. Any consent
by the village if granted may be absolute or conditional, e.g., with
respect to assumption or non-assumption of liability, including but not
limited to assumption of all obligations of the franchise and all monies
owed the village.
I. An assignment shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of
its financial liabilities and obligations to the village under the franchise
agreement unless specifically relieved by federal or state law (including
any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations) or unless specifically
relieved by the Board/franchising authority (or, where applicable, the
NYSCCT) at the time an assignment is approved.
A. Except as provided herein, an MCS provider may hypothecate its
multichannel system without prior, formal approval of the Board/
franchising authority. However, in those instances where an MCS
provider allows the hypothecation to exceed 25% of the fair market
value of the multichannel system (including equipment and facilities),
the Board/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider receive
the prior approval of the Board/franchising authority.
B. In those instances where an MCS provider allows the hypothecation to
exceed 40% of the fair market value of the multichannel system
(including equipment and facilities), the MCS provider shall submit
(along with its petition for approval) a plan detailing where and in what
manner or for what purpose the funds from such hypothecation will be
expended.
C. While the Board/franchising authority may not unreasonably withhold
its consent to such hypothecation, it may nonetheless withhold approval
and consent in those instances where the technical or financial integrity
of the multichannel system would be compromised to such an extent
that the subscribers' ability to receive multichannel services might be
jeopardized.
A. When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS
provider) occurs which represents a violation of a material provision of
this chapter or compromises the corporate character or the legal,
financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the multichannel
§ 186-107 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-109
186:184
system or the franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the
interests of the subscribers may be adversely affected, such event,
act or omission shall be considered a major breach of this chapter.
Under such circumstances the Board/franchising authority shall notify
the affected MCS provider in writing of the specific breach and shall
direct such franchised MCS provider to comply with all such provisions
of its franchise agreement and this chapter.
B. For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include,
but are not limited to, bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or
franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable),
failure to receive written Board/franchising authority approval for an
assignment or failure to abide by the material terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement or material provisions of this chapter, such as
cooperating with the village in the conduct of a periodic ascertainment
of the adequacy of the MCS provider's record of reasonably meeting
identified community needs, including those involving matters of
customer service and consumer protection needs as expressed by
subscribers. For purposes of this section, "material" means a provision
which either affects the ability of the subscriber to receive multichannel
service, affects the ability of the Board/franchising authority to receive
compensation for the use of its right-of-ways, or affects the ability of the
Board/franchising authority to evaluate an MCS provider's performance
in the technical, financial and legal aspects of the multichannel system,
as well as matters involving customer service practices and issues of
consumer protection as determined by the village.
C. Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the
enumerated conditions within 60 days, the enumerated condition shall
not be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any
subsequent review of franchise performance.
D. A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on
the performance bond, unless otherwise directed by state law
(including any applicable rule or regulation of the NYSCCT).
E. Within 75 days after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS
provider, the Board/franchising authority shall conduct a public hearing
on the matter [unless state law (or NYSCCT rule or regulation) requires
a different procedure, in which event the state (or NYSCCT) procedure
shall control].
F. The Board/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a
franchised MCS provider and to its surety of the time and place of said
public hearing in a manner consistent with either state law or approved
by the Board/franchising authority (including, where necessary, the
NYSCCT).
G. At the time of the hearing the affected franchised MCS provider may
present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the
franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved or steps are
§ 186-109 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-109
186:185
§ 186-110. Performance evaluations.
The Board/franchising authority is authorized, but not required, to design a
performance evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance
of the franchised MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both
the franchise and this chapter. Moreover, the Board/franchising authority
may periodically review and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's
being taken to resolve the situation, the franchised MCS provider shall
present such information at the hearing.
H. If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing and
has not requested a continuance of the hearing, such franchised MCS
provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further
continuation of the matter and may be declared in default of the
franchise agreement.
I. After the public hearing, the Board/franchising authority may
determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss
the matter or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any
noncompliance and thereby dismiss the matter. However, the Board/
franchising authority may determine that a local law violation exists
and remains uncured. Upon a finding that the MCS provider has
violated an integral local law provision or has failed to cure an
outstanding local law violation, the Board/franchising authority may
direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action
within a specified period of time or may declare such franchised MCS
provider in default of the franchise agreement and thereafter may
revoke, terminate or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS
provider presents sufficient mitigating circumstances.
J. If the Board/franchising authority directs corrective action to take place
within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in
default of the franchise agreement, that declaration shall be reduced to
writing and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to
such franchised MCS provider and its surety within 21 days of the
Board/franchising authority's action.
K. If the Board/franchising authority directs corrective action to take place
within a specified time and if within 60 days the affected franchised
MCS provider or its surety does not take significant action to rectify the
breach or submit a plan detailing how the affected MCS provider will
eliminate the breach, the Board/franchising authority shall revoke such
MCS provider's franchise and shall notify the affected franchised MCS
provider and its surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating
circumstances.
L. The Board/franchising authority reserves the right to assess any
charges incurred (including costs for consultants, witnesses and
hearing preparation) in a default and/or revocation proceeding to the
franchised MCS provider.
§ 186-109 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-110
186:186
financial, technical, legal and character qualifications and its record of
meeting community and subscriber needs as particularly relate to matters
of customer service practices and consumer protection issues, continue to
meet required operational, maintenance and performance levels in order
to ensure the uninterrupted and acceptable provision of multichannel
services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three
years during the franchise term and may be done as part of any annual
independent survey that may be required or conducted by the Board/
franchising authority.
§ 186-111. Reserved.
§ 186-112. Reserved.
§ 186-113. Reserved.
§ 186-114. Reserved.
§ 186-115. Specific additional rules for MCS providers classified as
cable operators or SMATV operators.
A. In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all MCS
providers that are classified as cable operators shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Cable Act, as amended from time to time.
B. The specific provisions of the Cable Act include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) Cable channels for public, educational or governmental use
(Section 611 Cable Act — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 531);
(2) Cable channels for commercial use (Section 612 — codified at 47
U.S.C. § 532);
(3) General franchise requirements (Section 621 — codified at 47
U.S.C. § 541);
(4) Franchise fees (Section 622 — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 542);
(5) Regulation of rates (Section 623 — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 543);
(6) Regulation of services, facilities and equipment (Section
624 — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 544);
(7) Modification of franchise obligations (Section 625 — codified at 47
U.S.C. § 545);
(8) Franchise renewal (Section 626 — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 546);
(9) Conditions of sale of a franchise (Section 627 — codified at 47
U.S.C. § 547);
(10) Subscriber privacy (Section 631 — codified at 47 U.S.C. § 551); and
§ 186-110 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-115
186:187
§ 186-116. Specific additional public, educational and governmental
rules for MCS providers classified as cable operators.
(11) Equal employment opportunity (Section 634 — codified at 47
U.S.C. § 554).
C. Before the third anniversary of the effective date of this chapter, any
MCS provider classified as a cable operator and providing cable service
within the village shall design and activate a multichannel system with
a minimum capability of providing 77 full-time video programming
services.
D. Further, the Board/franchising authority is committed that the goal of
the Cable Act, as set forth in Section 601(4) of the Act [codified at 47
U.S.C. § 521 (4)], is met at all times. As a result, the Board/franchising
authority expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation and
transmission of high definition television (HDTV), its functional
equivalent or any subsequently developed technological advancement
affecting channel capacity or needed bandwidth for any video
programming source or service, the MCS provider classified as a cable
operator shall not lessen, dilute or decrease the mix, level, quality or
quantity of programming services carried on the multichannel system
for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity, except to the extent
permitted pursuant to the applicable provisions of federal law.
E. Notwithstanding the above subsections of this section and where
specifically included or referenced in the Cable Act or by FCC
interpretation of the Cable Act, all MCS providers classified as SMATV
operators shall comply with such included or referenced sections of the
Cable Act, as amended from time to time.
A. The Board/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 611 of
the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 531) the Board/franchising
authority has certain power with respect to certain aspects of public,
educational or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS
providers classified as cable operators.
B. To the extent permitted by law and in order to fulfill the Board/
franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational and
governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range
needs of the village, the Board/franchising authority adopts the
following:
(1) At the time of an initial or renewal application for an MCS franchise
for a cable system, an MCS provider classified as a cable operator
shall provide for the village, at its own expense:
(a) A dedicated public access channel;
(b) A dedicated educational access channel that is available to
provide coverage of Board of Education meetings; and
§ 186-115 BRONXVILLE CODE § 186-116
186:188
§ 186-117. The Board/franchising authority's goals as related to
provision of broad categories of video programming.
Pursuant to Section 624 of the Cable Act, the Board/franchising authority
recognizes that it should strive to ensure that its citizens receive the widest
and most diverse selection of video programming possible. Consequently,
the Board/franchising authority encourages those MCS providers that
maintain a franchise to include in the provision of video programming the
following broad categories:
(c) A dedicated governmental channel.
(2) Both the Board/franchising authority and the franchisee shall
review the use, including the percentage of use, of each PEG
channel every 24 months. If, after any twenty-four-month period,
the percentage of use for any required PEG channel drops below
25% of the total time allocated, the required number of hours may
be reduced to a number that most closely approximates the
average hours of use per day.
(3) If, at any time, 75% of the total time allocated for any required PEG
channel is consistently used five days a week for a period of three
months, the cable operator shall provide an additional PEG
channel.
(4) A franchisee may be required, pursuant to the provisions of a
negotiated franchise agreement, to provide company owned or
financed mobile, portable,and stationary equipment dedicated for
PEG access, together with technical and production assistance
provided by the franchisee. The provisions of such a franchise
agreement, to the extent consistent with applicable federal law,
may also provide that a franchisee shall provide equipment that can
store programs for delayed cable casting; that there shall be no
cost for technical production assistance for Bronxville PEG access
users; and that the cost of maintenance of such PEG access studio
and the equipment required to run the studio and other PEG access
facilities shall be borne by franchisee.
(5) Consistent with applicable provisions of federal law, the franchisee
shall be permitted to use the PEG channel capacity required by this
chapter for the provision of other services if such channel capacity
is not being used for the purposes designated, on condition that
such use by the franchisee shall cease upon 30 days' written notice
from the Board/franchising authority, in the event the Board/
franchising authority determines to use such channel capacity for
PEG purposes.
A. Local broadcast stations;
B. Two distant carriage signals or satellite-fed broadcast stations;
C. PEG programming on the lowest offered and/or available tier;
§ 186-116 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 186-117
186:189
§ 186-118. Reserved.
§ 186-119. Reserved.
§ 186-120. Reserved.
§ 186-121. Reserved.
§ 186-122. Reserved.
§ 186-123. Reserved.
§ 186-124. Reserved.
§ 186-125. Effective Date.
This chapter, as hereby amended, shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 192
MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbers and electricians — See Ch. 222.
§ 192-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Multiple Dwelling
Maintenance Code of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 192-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall be in addition to all other applicable laws of the State
of New York, County of Westchester, and other provisions of the Village of
Bronxville Code.
D. Sports programming services (regional and/or national);
E. News, information or public affairs/interest programming services;
F. Financial/consumer-oriented programming services;
G. Scientific and/or cultural programming services;
H. Children's programming services; and
I. Ethnically sensitive programming services.
§ 186-117 BRONXVILLE CODE § 192-3
192:190
§ 192-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A dwelling with three or more dwelling units.
§ 192-4. Hot water.
Every dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling shall be supplied with water
heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly
maintained, and connected to a kitchen sink, a lavatory basin and a bathtub
or shower. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of providing and
shall provide at any time needed hot water so as to permit an adequate
amount of water at a temperature of not less than 120º F. to be drawn at
every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower, or at any
laundry facility.
§ 192-5. Leaks.
§ 192-6. Managing agent.
The owner of a multiple dwelling shall designate a managing agent
responsible for the maintenance of the dwelling, and such managing agent
shall reside within the County of Westchester.
§ 192-7. Identification and maintenance requirement signs.
[Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
It shall be the duty of the owner and managing agent of a multiple dwelling
to display conspicuously and maintain at all times in such dwelling a sign,
A. General. Every roof and exterior wall shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight and damp-free and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair. Floors, interior walls, doors and ceilings shall be sound and in
good repair. All exterior surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods and
other surfaces not designed to be painted, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment.
B. Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door, skylight,
roof hatchway and basement hatchway, or similar device, shall be kept
rodent-proof, reasonably weathertight, watertight, in sound working
condition and in good repair.
C. Plumbing fixtures and water and waste pipes. Every plumbing fixture
and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in
sanitary, nonleaking and good working condition.
§ 192-3 MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE § 192-7
192:191
on a form to be provided by the Superintendent of Buildings of the Village of
Bronxville, stating the name, address and telephone number of the owner,
such managing agent and an individual or, in the case of a corporate owner,
a corporate officer authorized to accept service of notices and process on
behalf of the corporation. Such sign shall state that the text of the Multiple
Dwelling Maintenance Code applicable to such dwelling is available on
request by a tenant from the owner or managing agent and may also be
obtained from the Superintendent of Buildings at Bronxville Village Hall.
A copy of such sign shall be filed by the owner or managing agent with
the Superintendent of Buildings, together with a fee as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, and any change in ownership, managing
agent or person designated shall be similarly filed (subject to such fee) and
displayed within 10 days of such change. The owner shall cause a copy of
the Multiple Dwelling Maintenance Code to be attached to each new tenant
lease. The copy of such code to be used for such purpose shall be supplied
by the Superintendent of Buildings to the owner free of charge.
§ 192-8. Claimed violation.
If a tenant of a multiple dwelling notifies the owner or managing agent
of any claimed violation of the Multiple Dwelling Maintenance Code, the
Superintendent of Buildings or his or her designated qualified deputy shall
upon receipt of written notification from the tenant that within a reasonable
time after such notification by the tenant to the owner or managing agent
the condition complained of has not been corrected, or in the absence of
such written notification by the tenant to the Superintendent of Buildings,
he or she may at his or her discretion inspect the property and determine
whether a violation exists. If the Superintendent of Buildings determines
that a violation exists, he or she shall in writing with copy to the tenant
notify the owner or managing agent of such violation and prescribe a
reasonable time for its correction (such time not to exceed 30 days in the
absence of compelling circumstances). Failure of the owner or managing
agent to correct the violation within the time limit prescribed shall
constitute a violation subject to the penalties referred to in § 192-10 of this
chapter.
§ 192-9. Discrimination.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove any
tenant from a multiple dwelling or to refuse to renew the lease or
agreement for the use of such accommodations on terms similar to those
available to other tenants, because such tenant has asserted a right or has
taken or proposes to take any action authorized by the Multiple Dwelling
Maintenance Code.
§ 192-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 192-10
192:192
§ 192-10. Penalties for offenses.19
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 194
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 194-1. Findings; purpose; constitutional protection.
A. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville hereby finds
that:
(1) The uncontrolled placement, lack of maintenance, and the
attachment of newsracks to municipal property in public rights-ofway
present a danger to the safety and welfare of persons using
such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and
leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential
utility, traffic control and emergency services.
(2) Newsracks located so as to obstruct walkways or crosswalks or to
endanger persons using public rights-of-way constitute public
nuisances.
(3) The existence of these factors constitutes an unreasonable
interference with and obstruction of the use of public rights-of-way;
a potentially dangerous condition; and an obstruction of the free
use of property as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property by the entire community.
(4) The Village Board of Trustees recognizes, however, that the use of
such rights-of-way is historically associated with the sale and
distribution of newspapers and publications and that access to
those areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The
Village Board of Trustees further finds that these strong and
competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which
can be achieved satisfactorily only through the means of this
chapter, which is designed to accommodate such interests
regulating the place and manner of using such newsracks.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 192-10 MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE § 194-1
192:193
§ 194-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK — One side of the street between two consecutive intersecting
streets.
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack in a public right-of-way.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale
or distribution of newspapers, advertising materials, or other written
materials.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area between property lines which may be
unimproved or surfaced and which may include public highways, streets,
roadways and sidewalks.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
B. Purpose. The provisions and prohibitions of this chapter have the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare of persons in the Village in their use of public rights-ofway
through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and
servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way so as to:
(1) Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.
(2) Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including ingress to, or egress from, any place of
business or from the street to the sidewalk, or access to drop curb
cuts.
(3) Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of
sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs, hydrants and similar
appurtenances.
(4) Protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties.
(5) Reduce exposure of the Village to personal injury or property
damage claims and litigation.
(6) Protect the right to distribute information protected by the United
States and New York State constitutions through the use of
newsracks.
C. Preservation of constitutional rights. It is not the intent of this chapter
to, in any way, discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the
publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any printed
material that is constitutionally protected.
§ 194-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § 194-2
192:194
STREET — All the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, highways, alleys,
sidewalks and unimproved areas.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — Refers to the Village Engineer of the Village of
Bronxville or the designee of the Village Engineer.
§ 194-3. Permit required.20
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, place,
maintain or operate on any public street or sidewalk or in any other public
way or place in the Village any newsrack without first having obtained
a permit from the Village Engineer specifying the exact location of such
newsrack. One permit may be issued to include up to five newsracks,
provided that all newsrack locations are indicated on the permit.
§ 194-4. Application for permit.
§ 194-5. Conditions and duration of permit.
A. Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Village
Engineer upon such form as shall be provided by him or her and shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, the contact person's
name, title, telephone and facsimile number and e-mail address, and
the proposed specific location of each newsrack. In addition, the
applicant must provide the physical dimensions of the newsrack and a
description of how each newsrack will be secured and said application
shall be signed by the applicant.
B. From the above information, the Village Engineer shall approve or
disapprove the locations in accordance with the standards and criteria
set forth in this chapter within 15 days of filing a complete application
for such permit. In any case where the Village Engineer disapproves of
a particular location, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the
applicant designating a different location.
C. The Village Engineer shall grant a permit if the location and installation
of the newsrack complies with all of the standards and criteria set forth
in this chapter and if all other requirements of this chapter are met.
A. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
without prior inspection of the location, but such newsrack or
newsracks and their installation, use or maintenance shall be
conditioned upon continued observance of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Such permits shall be valid for one year and shall be renewable
pursuant to the criteria and standards for original applications and
upon payment of the permit fee.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. A321, Fees Schedule, § A321-8, Chapter 194, Newsracks, for
newsrack permit fee.
§ 194-2 MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE § 194-5
192:195
§ 194-6. Statement to defend, indemnify and hold Village harmless
required.
As a condition of approval of any newsrack permit, the distributor shall file
a written statement with the Village Engineer, in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney, by which the owner agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the Village, its officers and employees against any loss, liability or
damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for
property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use
and/or maintenance of a newsrack within the Village.
§ 194-7. Certificate of insurance required.
As a condition of approval of any newsrack permit, the distributor shall
file with the Village Engineer a certificate of insurance from an AM Best
A-rated insurance company authorized to conduct business in New York,
demonstrating that the distributor has general liability insurance with the
limits of at least $1,000,000 each occurrence and $2,000,000 general
aggregate. The insurance policy must name the Village of Bronxville as an
additional insured. The insurance shall be maintained during the permit
period of any newsrack and provide for not less than 30 days' notice of
cancellation to the Village Engineer.
§ 194-8. Location, placement and number of newsracks.
Any newsrack that rests, in whole or in part, on any portion of a public rightof-
way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way
shall be located in accordance with the following provisions:
C. Newsrack permits shall not be assignable.
D. The Village Engineer must be notified, in writing, of a proposed
newsrack replacement with a new or different newsrack or the
relocation of a newsrack to a different location, which location shall be
specified in such notice. The Village Engineer shall approve or
disapprove such replacement or relocation in accordance with the
criteria and standards set forth in this chapter for a permit within 15
days of receipt of such written notification. If the replacement is
approved by the Village Engineer, the existing permit shall be amended
to reflect the change approved.
A. No newsrack shall project onto, into or over any part of the roadway of
any public street, nor shall it rest, wholly or in part, upon, along or over
any portion of the roadway of any public street or be affixed to anyone
else's property, public or private.
B. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no more
than three newsracks may be grouped, which group of newsracks shall
not extend for a distance of more than eight feet. All newsracks in a
group of newsracks shall abut the adjacent newsrack in such group
§ 194-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 194-8
192:196
§ 194-9. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any newsrack that, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or street shall comply with the following standards:
unless safety considerations require otherwise. There shall be a space
of not less than three feet between each group of newsracks.
C. No newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained:
(1) Within five feet of a marked crosswalk.
(2) Within 10 feet of a street corner without a marked crosswalk.
(3) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(4) Within five feet of a fire call box or police call box.
(5) Within five feet of a driveway or alley.
(6) In a place that reduces the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians to less than four feet.
(7) On any access ramp for disabled persons.
(8) Where such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including parked or stopped
vehicles, or the ingress to or egress from any residence or place of
business.
(9) Where such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety
of persons or property.
(10)Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting
the sidewalk in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window for display purposes.
(11)Within 250 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street in the same block containing the same issue or the same
publication.
(12)Within 50 feet of any fire or police station
D. Except as provided in § 194-8B of this chapter, no more than one
newsrack shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of
100 feet in any direction within the same block of the same street;
provided, however, that no more than eight newsracks shall be allowed
on any one block except the area adjacent to the Metro-North railroad
station.
A. No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width, or two
feet in thickness.
B. Newsracks must be secured in a safe manner. No newsrack, however,
shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any municipal fixture,
§ 194-8 MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE § 194-9
192:197
such as a parking meter, stop sign, street sign, or other traffic sign or
control device, located in the public right-of-way, or to any tree or tree
support.
C. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale, purchase or distribution
of the newspaper or periodical sold or distributed in the newsrack.
D. Each coin-operated newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that the person is unable to receive the
publication. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good
working order.
E. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack, the permit number, together
with a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and
the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a
malfunction or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the
coin-return mechanism or to give any notice provided for in this
chapter.
F. Any newsrack installed shall be of rigid and secure construction to
prevent the newsrack from swiveling, turning or otherwise moving from
the location of placement by the distributor. In addition, each newsrack
shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at
all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It shall not be permitted to remain empty for a period exceeding 30
consecutive days.
(2) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
(3) It is reasonably free of chipped, peeling and cracked paint in the
visible painted areas.
(4) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas.
(5) The clear plastic or glass parts, if any, through which the
publications are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks
and dents.
(6) The structural parts are not dented or broken.
(7) It is free of graffiti.
G. No newsrack shall be illuminated or connected to a power source.
H. No newsrack shall be placed or allowed to remain in any location so
that it interferes with the removal of snow or ice or the removal of
leaves or debris, whether the removal is a public or private duty.
§ 194-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 194-10
192:198
§ 194-10. Violations; removal; impound and inspection fees.
Upon determination by the Village Engineer that a newsrack has been
installed, used or maintained in violation of this chapter, the Village
Engineer shall issue an order to the distributor of the newsrack to correct
the violation. Such order shall be sent by mailing a copy of the order
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically
describe the violation, suggest actions necessary to correct the condition,
and inform the distributor of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct
the offending condition within 10 business days after the mailing date of
the order, or to appeal the order as provided in § 194-12 within five days
after its receipt, shall result in the offending newsrack being summarily
removed and possessed as unclaimed property. If the offending newsrack
is not properly identified as to owner under the provisions of this chapter,
it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. An
impound fee, which shall be measured by the Village's cost and expense of
impounding, shall be assessed against each newsrack summarily removed.
The Village Engineer shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected
condition or of a newsrack reinstalled after removal under this section. The
distributor of said newsrack shall be charged an inspection fee for each
newsrack so inspected in an amount established by the Village Board. This
fee shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required under this
chapter.
§ 194-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who places in operation a newsrack without first obtaining a
permit or who places in operation or maintains in place a newsrack which
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter. Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 194-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action
taken under this chapter may appeal to the Village Administrator or the
Village Administrator's designee. An appeal must be perfected within five
days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing
with the Village Administrator a letter of appeal briefly stating the basis for
the appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date not more than 15 days after
receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five days'
notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Village Administrator or
the Village Administrator's designee shall give the appellant, and any other
interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show
cause why the determination of the Village Engineer should not be upheld.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village Administrator shall make a
final decision. The decision shall be immediately appealable to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 194-10 MULTIPLE DWELLING MAINTENANCE § 194-13
192:199
§ 194-13. Existing newsracks.
Any newsrack in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter and
which does not have a newsrack permit shall be removed or brought into
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, including the issuance of
a permit for such newsrack, within 45 days after the effective date of this
chapter. If the distributor fails to comply with this provision, the Village
Engineer shall issue an order to the distributor of the newsrack to correct
such violation in accordance § 194-10.
§ 194-14. Emergencies.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit or impair the
exercise by the Village of its police power in the event of an emergency, as
determined by the Village Engineer, to remove any newsrack that presents
a danger of imminent personal injury or property damage to users of the
Village rights-of-way or would otherwise hamper or impair the fulfillment
by the Village of its governmental obligations, including, but not limited to,
snow removal and street cleaning.
Chapter 200
OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 150.
Plumbers and electricians — See Ch. 222.
§ 200-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Oil Burner Code of
the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 200-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Applied to equipment, accessories, etc., means approved
by or in compliance with the requirements of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters and the Underwriters' Laboratories.
OIL BURNER EQUIPMENT — Comprehending oil burners and equipment
connected thereto for heating buildings or water or for generating power in
the village and to the use thereof.
§ 194-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 200-3
200:200
§ 200-3. Permit required.
No person shall install, remodel or cause to permit to be installed or
remodeled any oil burning equipment, or any tank for the storage of fuel
oil, in the village without having first obtained a permit to do so from the
Superintendent of Buildings.
§ 200-4. Application for permit.
The application for the permit required by the preceding section shall
contain complete information as the Superintendent of Buildings shall
require and shall be filed in triplicate with the required fee. Upon the
issuance of the permit by the Superintendent of Buildings, a copy thereof
shall be transmitted to the Eastchester Fire Department.
§ 200-5. Fees for permit. [Amended 6-13-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988;
3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
The fee for the permit for each burner equipment required by § 200-3 shall
be as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees and shall not be
refunded if the permit is refused.
§ 200-6. Burners.
§ 200-7. Oil burner control.
A. All oil burner equipment installed in the village shall be of approved
type and shall be installed and used subject to the limitations of the
approval, and of this chapter.
B. Semiautomatic and manually operated burners shall be used only
where a paid attendant is continuously in attendance during the entire
period of operation.
A. Electric supply for any burner shall be through an approved safety
switch located at the entrance to the room where the burner is located.
In the case of all buildings, other than single family dwellings, one
means for completely shutting off the electric supply shall be located at
an exterior door designated by the Eastchester Fire Department.
B. Automatically operated oil burners shall be equipped with approved
automatic devices to shut down the burner in the event of undue
pressure in a steam boiler or overheating within a hot water boiler or
warm air furnace, and in any event on failure of ignition. Oil burners
used in connection with steam, water or vapor heating systems shall be
equipped with an approved automatic device for shutting down the
burner in the event of low water in the boiler.
C. Limiting controls and low water shutoffs intended to disconnect the
burner from the electric power supply shall be connected into the
burner supply circuit on the supply side of all other burner circuits.
§ 200-3 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 200-7
200:201
§ 200-8. Installation of burners.
§ 200-9. Installation of tanks.
D. In systems where either steam or air pressure is used for atomizing the
oil, the oil and atomizing supply shall be interlocked in an approved
manner so that in case of interruption of the atomizing supply, the oil
supply will be immediately shutoff.
A. Oil burner equipment shall be securely installed in a workmanlike
manner, in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer, by
qualified mechanics experienced in making such installations.
B. Where oil burners are installed in furnaces originally designed for solid
fuel, the ash door of the furnace shall be removed or bottom ventilation
otherwise provided to prevent the accumulation of vapors in the ash pit
unless the burner is of a type which mechanically purges the ash pit.
The sides of the fire box shall be lined with refractory brick set in fire
clay. The water and steam carrying portions of the furnace shall be
capable of withstanding a minimum hydrostatic pressure of 50 pounds
per square inch, the crown plate shall be in serviceable condition and
the feed door shall be securely closed. Where the conversion is made in
a gravity hot air furnace, the furnace shall first be disassembled and
reassembled in order to make all joints gastight.
C. Boilers and furnaces in which oil burners are installed shall be
connected to flues having sufficient draft at all times to assure safe
operation of the burner. No smoke pipe dampers shall be used but
where desirable a draft balancing device may be installed.
D. Complete instructions for the care and operation of the oil burning
equipment shall be conspicuously posted by the owner near the oil
burner and maintained in readable condition.
E. At least one approved foam-type fire extinguisher shall be mounted and
maintained in operating condition, in a position adjacent to the
entrance to the room or space in which the burner is located.
A. All tanks, either within a building or outside of a building, for the supply
of fuel to oil burner equipment shall be buried as provided in
Subdivision B in the ground except as permitted in Subdivision C.
B. Inside tanks shall be considered to be sufficiently buried if completely
surrounded by sand or well-tamped earth for a distance of one foot in all
directions, retained by masonry walls at least eight inches thick and
covered over with concrete not less than four inches thick and so
constructed as to make it impossible for any tank leakage to escape
through such surrounding medium into the compartment containing
the burner.
C. Where unburied inside tanks are permitted, one unburied tank not
exceeding 275 gallons capacity may be located in the lowest story of a
§ 200-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 200-9
200:202
§ 200-10. Tank capacities and restrictions.
§ 200-11. Construction of tanks.
All tanks shall be constructed of steel or wrought iron of a minimum gauge
(U.S. Standard) in accordance with the following table:
Capacity
(gallons) Minimum Thickness Wgt. Lb. per sq. ft.
7 to 560 14 gauge 3.125
561 to 1,100 12 gauge 4.375
1,101 to 4,000 7 gauge 7.50
4,001 to 10,000 1/4
inch
(nominal) 10.00
§ 200-12. Tank vents.
All tanks shall be equipped with an open vent entirely separate from any
other tank connected and visible from the fill point, and the vent shall be not
less than 1 1/4 inches pipe size, extending to the open air without a trap,
and terminating in a flame, excluding the hood which shall be located not
less than two feet above the ground, and not more than 12 feet above the
tank. The vent pipe connection shall not extend more than one inch inside
the tank.
§ 200-13. Tank fill.
All tanks shall be filled only through fill pipes terminating at least five feet
from the building and closed tight, when not in use, by a metal cover.
building if not within seven feet of any flame or five feet when shielded
by a masonry wall at least eight inches in thickness or by an equivalent
barrier, and provided that any tank leakage is effectively prevented
from approaching the burner or flame.
D. No tank whether exposed or buried or enclosed shall be installed within
the walls of any frame building housing three or more families.
A. In frame buildings housing not more than two families, an inside tank
shall not be of greater capacity than 550 gallons and not more than one
such tank shall be installed.
B. In fire resistive buildings, an inside tank shall be of not more than
10,000 gallons capacity and in other buildings shall not exceed 5,000
gallons.
C. Every tank shall bear the Underwriters' Laboratories label, and no tank
greater than 275 gallons shall have a gravity outlet.
D. Pressure tanks are prohibited.
§ 200-9 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 200-14
200:203
§ 200-14. Auxiliary tanks.
Auxiliary tanks inside the building shall be filled only by an enclosed pump
from a storage tank, shall have an overflow pipe one size larger than
supply pipe returning to the storage tank with no valves or obstructions. No
auxiliary tank or other device shall have any opening by which oil or vapors
can enter the burner room or compartment except to the burner itself.
§ 200-15. Underground tank.
Where tanks are required to be buried, they shall be covered by at least one
foot of earth, and where unusual external pressures are likely in the opinion
of the Superintendent of Buildings, they shall be more deeply buried or else
be further protected by a reinforced concrete slab of dimensions in his or
her opinion adequate for the situation.
§ 200-16. Gravity tanks.
Any fuel oil tank buried or installed at such level that the liquid level
therein may at any time be or rise above the burner oil nozzle, or any other
oil outlet inside the building, shall be equipped with approved means for
automatically preventing flow of oil in the vent of failure of the normal
functioning of the burner, and shall be further equipped with a heat
operated valve for shutting off the flow of oil to the burner, or with a manual
valve for shutting off the flow of oil to the burner which is accessible for
operation without entering the room or compartment in which the burner
is located. No tank-installed at the level herein referred to shall exceed a
capacity of 275 gallons unless both the heat operated and manual valves
are supplied and the latter is located outside the building and conspicuously
marked "Fuel oil shutoff."
§ 200-17. Oil pumps.
§ 200-18. Oil gauging.
A. Oil pumps shall be of an approved type, secure against leaks and shall
be rigidly fastened in place.
B. Automatic pumps not an integral part of the burner shall be arranged to
stop the flow of oil automatically in case of breakage of the supply line
to the burner.
A. Test wells shall not be installed or permitted inside buildings and where
permitted for outside service shall be closed tight, when not in use, by a
metal cover. The gauging of inside tanks by means of measuring sticks
is prohibited.
B. Liquid level indicators or signals shall be so constructed that neither oil
nor vapor can be discharged from the tank into the building while filling
or in any other circumstance.
§ 200-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 200-19
200:204
§ 200-19. Piping.
All piping shall be standard full weight wrought iron or steel pipe or
equivalent copper tubing with standard fittings, not smaller than one-halfinch
iron pipe size, rigidly secured in place and adequately protected from
heat and from mechanical injury by burying underground or in another
approved manner. It shall be made up with shellacked or equivalent joints
and ground joint unions with due allowance for expansion and settlement
and so far as possible shall pitch toward the tank. Oil supply lines to burners
shall be provided with approved strainers unless a strainer is incorporated
in the burner.
§ 200-20. Valves.
All valves shall be of an approved type. Where any valve is installed in the
discharge line of an oil pump, an approved pressure relief passage shall
be connected into the discharge line between the pump and the valve and
arranged to return surplus oil to the storage tank or to by pass it around the
pump.
§ 200-21. Tests.
After installation and before being covered, the contractor shall test, in the
presence of a representative of the Eastchester Fire Department, the tanks
and piping hydrostatically or pneumatically at a pressure not less than 1 1/
2 times the maximum working pressure but not less than 10 pounds per
square inch at the highest point of the system. In order to be acceptable,
the test shall continue for a period of 30 minutes without noticeable drop in
pressure. The system shall not be placed in operation until after such test
and the filing of the certificate of completion required by § 200-25.
§ 200-22. Type fuel oil to be used.
No fuel oil shall be used other than the grade and type for which the burner
has been approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories.
§ 200-23. Electrical equipment.
No electric wiring or equipment in connection with oil burning equipment
shall be installed except in accordance with the requirements of the New
York Board of Fire Underwriters.
§ 200-24. Additional regulations authorized.
As to any pertinent matter or situation connected with the subject matter
of this chapter and upon which the chapter is silent, the Superintendent
of Buildings shall have the power to promulgate and file in the Building
Department such rules and regulations consistent with the regulations
of the National Board of Fire Underwriters as are in his or her opinion
advisable, and thereupon and thereafter and on approval by the Board of
Trustees, such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
§ 200-19 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 200-24
200:205
as if herein set forth in full. When the circumstances or conditions of any
particular installation are so unusual as to render the strict application of
this chapter impracticable and where the circumstances and conditions are
stated in the application for permit, the Superintendent of Buildings and the
Eastchester Fire Department, acting jointly, may permit such modifications
as will provide a substantially equivalent degree of safety, subject to
approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 200-25. Certificate of compliance.
§ 200-26. Applicability of chapter to existing equipment.
All of the provisions and requirements of this chapter and the prohibitions
therein contained shall apply to oil burning equipment installed before July
11, 1949, and the use thereof, except the provisions for permits and the
issuance of certificates of completion.
§ 200-27. Enforcement.
§ 200-28. Penalties for offenses.21
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. As soon as any installation has passed the inspection of the Eastchester
Fire Department, the Superintendent of Buildings shall immediately
issue a certificate of approval to the permit holder or owner, as the case
may be.
B. No installation shall be placed in serve until such certificate has been
issued, nor continued in service unless such certificate or a duplicate
copy thereof is fastened to the wall of the room in which the oil burner
is located.
A. The Superintendent of Buildings or the representative of the
Eastchester Fire Department shall have the right to inspect any oil
burner equipment in any premises for the purpose of ascertaining that
the installation and maintenance and operation thereof comply with the
requirements of this chapter. In the event of noncompliance, tending in
his or her opinion to make a fire hazard, the Superintendent of
Buildings shall have the right to revoke any certificate of occupancy
outstanding with respect to such premises, and in the event that no
such certificate is outstanding, he or she shall have the right to stop the
operation of the equipment.
B. The provisions of § 112-17 of Chapter 112, Building Construction, of
this Code shall be followed in making inspections.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-24 BRONXVILLE CODE § 200-28
200:206
Chapter 210
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 7.
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 200-28 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 200-28
200:207

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Conduct Law
of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 210-2. Damaging public property; tearing down lawful posters.
No person, unless duly authorized, shall damage, interfere with, remove
or deface any public property or tear down any notice or placard lawfully
posted.
§ 210-3. Posting notices in public places.
No person shall hang or place, or cause to be hung or placed, any
advertisement, placard or other notice, except legal notices, or paint, or
cause to be painted, any advertisement or notice on any post, utility pole,
tree, fence or other object in a public street or sidewalk or other public
place, except in accordance with a permit theretofore issued by the
licensing officer.22
§ 210-4. Explosives. [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
The use and storage of explosives shall be regulated as provided in Article
16, Explosives, of the Labor Law, and § 482 of the General Business Law.
§ 210-5. Discharge of firearms, air guns or spring guns.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
FIREARM — As defined under § 265.00, Subsection (3), of the Penal
Law.
B. No person shall discharge any firearm, air gun, spring gun, dart gun,
slingshot or other instrument or weapon within the Village except in
self defense or in the discharge of official duty or during a memorial
service or veteran's funeral or at an indoor rifle range operated under
the supervision, guidance and instruction of a duly commissioned
officer of one of the Armed Forces, including the National Guard and
Reserve forces, or a duly qualified adult citizen of the United States who
has been granted a certificate as an instructor of small arms practice
issued by one of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Adjutant
General of the State or by the National Rifle Association of America.
22.Editor's Note: Original §§ 65.4, Dynamite; permit required for use or storage, and 65.5,
Restrictions on use of explosives, which immediately followed this section, were deleted
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000.
§ 210-1 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 210-6
200:209
§ 210-6. Fireworks; public display permit.
The Mayor is designated as the licensing officer for the granting of permits
for a public display of fireworks pursuant to § 405.00 of the New York Penal
Law.
§ 210-7. Loud or unusual noises prohibited.
No person shall make or cause to be made an unreasonably loud or unusual
noise which annoys, disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others.
§ 210-8. Specific noises prohibited.
In addition to the acts prohibited by § 210-7, no person shall engage in any
of the following acts:
A. The sounding of any horn or other signal device on any motorcycle,
automobile, bus or other vehicle except to give reasonable warning
which, in any case, shall not be unnecessarily loud or harsh.
B. The operation of any radio, phonograph, television set or other device
for amplification of sound or use of any musical instrument or operation
of any air-conditioning unit in such a manner or with such volume,
particularly between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb
the comfort or repose of others.
C. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle so
constructed, equipped, loaded or out of repair or in such manner as to
create unreasonably loud or unusual noise.
D. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle engine except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
E. The erection (including excavation) or demolition or major alteration or
repair of any building other than between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, but not on any such
day which is a state or national holiday, except in the case of urgent
necessity and then only with a permit from the Superintendent of
Buildings, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or
less while the emergency continues.
F. The excavation with power machinery of any plot of land within a
residence district, as defined in the Village Zoning Law, as amended,23
except in accordance with an excavation permit theretofore issued for
that plot of land by the Superintendent of Buildings, in addition to the
usual building permit for the construction of a building or buildings on
that plot of land. Such excavation permit may specify a limited number
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
§ 210-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 210-8
200:210
§ 210-9. Exemptions from applicability of §§ 210-7 and 210-8.
Sections 210-7 and 210-8 shall not apply to the operation or use of any
organ, bell, chimes or similar instrument, apparatus or device by any
church, synagogue, school or fire station.
§ 210-10. Restrictions on use of public parks and fields; violations
and penalties. [Added 6-9-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
of consecutive working days for the use of power machinery, according
to the circumstances on the particular case, and such permit may be
renewed on satisfactory proof that the excavation has been delayed by
conditions beyond the control of the applicant to which such excavation
permit was first issued; but any such renewal or renewals shall limit the
total number of working days for the actual use of power machinery to
the number originally specified.
G. The creation of noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning or church while the same is in session, or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the operations of such
institution, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or church street.
H. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other noise-creating instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show
or sale of display of merchandise, except in accordance with a permit
theretofore issued by the Village Administrator.
I. The use of gasoline-powered blowers shall be unlawful in the Village
during the period from June 1 through September 30 of each year.
[Added 6-11-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; amended 3-11-2002 by L.L.
No. 1-2002]
J. The making of deliveries of supplies or merchandise or collection and
pickup of nonmunicipal garbage or refuse at any property, regardless of
zoning district, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added
9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
A. The Village Administrator is authorized to establish rules and
regulations for the use of public parks and fields owned or administered
by the Village of Bronxville.
B. Violations of these rules and regulations may be subject to a fine not to
exceed $250 per violation or to imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 210-8 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 210-10
200:211

ARTICLE II
Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places
§ 210-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — All such beverages as defined in § 3 of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, cup or similar receptacle suitable for
or used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Drinking from the container, with alcohol on the
breath of the possessor, and/or any circumstances evidencing an intent to
ultimately consume on any public lands.[Added 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
OPEN CONTAINER — A container, as defined herein, with the contents
exposed to the atmosphere or the seal thereof broken.[Amended
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
PUBLIC PLACE — Any school, highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground,
parking lot, shopping center, mall or any other place to which the public or
a substantial group of persons has access, but excluding those public places
wherein the use and consumption of alcoholic beverages is authorized
pursuant to a license or permit issued under the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law or hereunder.
§ 210-12. Prohibition on consumption or possession. [Amended
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
No person shall consume or ingest any alcoholic beverage in any public
place within the Village. Carrying on the person or in a vehicle, holding or
possessing any open, unsealed, resealed or partially full container which
contains an alcoholic beverage in a public place, with intent to consume the
same, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 210-13. Vehicles. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
See § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law for regulations regarding drinking
in vehicles.
§ 210-14. Special permits.
The foregoing prohibition against drinking alcoholic beverages in public
places shall not apply to a gathering which has been granted a special
permit by an official of the Village designated by the Board of Trustees.
§ 210-11 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 210-14
200:213

ARTICLE III
Idling of Motor Vehicles
[Added 7-13-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
§ 210-15. Operation of motor vehicle; idling of engine restricted.
§ 210-16. Enforcement.
Any parking enforcement officer or member of the Village of Bronxville
Police Department is hereby authorized to issue and serve an appearance
ticket as provided in Chapter 7, § 7-4, of this Code.
A. No person shall cause or permit the engine of a motor vehicle, other
than a legally authorized emergency motor vehicle, to idle for longer
than three minutes while parking as defined in § 129 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, standing as defined in § 145 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
or stopping as defined in § 147 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless the
engine is used to operate a loading or unloading or processing device.
B. When the ambient temperature is in excess of 40º F., no person shall
cause or permit the engine of a bus, as defined in § 104 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, to idle while parking, standing or stopping.
§ 210-15 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 210-16
200:215

ARTICLE IV
Penalties
[Added 7-13-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
§ 210-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000; 7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
A. Any person who violates § 210-8I concerning the seasonal prohibition of
the use of gasoline-powered blowers shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a violation punishable by a mandatory fine of $250 for the first
offense; for conviction of a second offense committed within 365 days of
the first offense, punishable by a mandatory fine of $500; and upon
conviction of a third or subsequent offense committed within 365 days
of the first offense, punishable by a mandatory fine of $1,000.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 210 other than
§ 210-8I shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 210-17 OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 210-17
200:217
Chapter 216
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
§ 210-17 BRONXVILLE CODE § 210-17
216:218
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 216-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddling and
Solicitation Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 216-2. Private residential peddling and solicitation prohibited
without invitation.
No person shall enter upon any private residential property within the
village, for the purpose of peddling or solicitation, without the consent of
the owner or occupant of any such private residential property except as
provided in § 216-3.
§ 216-3. Peddling and hawking farm produce*.
No license shall be required and no person shall be prohibited from hawking
and peddling farm produce except hay or straw if such farm produce is
hawked or peddled by the producers thereof, or his or her servants or
employees.
*See General Municipal Law § 81.
§ 216-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 216-3
216:219

ARTICLE II
Public Peddling
§ 216-4. Peddler's license required.
No person shall peddle or offer any goods, wares or merchandise for sale
or solicit orders therefor or for services in any public place in the village
without a license therefor granted by the licensing officer. However, no
such license shall be required of a wounded war veteran licensed under the
provisions of §§ 32 and 35 of the General Business Law.
§ 216-5. Application for peddler's license.
Applications for licenses by peddlers shall be made to the licensing officer,
shall be sworn to and in writing and shall contain the following information:
§ 216-6. Records to be kept by Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued pursuant to
§ 216-4 hereof and of the amount of fees paid therefor.
§ 216-7. Restrictions on issuance of license.
No license required by § 216-4 shall be issued to a person under 18 years
of age or to any person the licensing of whom would, in the judgment of the
licensing officer, adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the citizens
of the village.
A. Name and physical description of applicant;
B. Address;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the
goods to be sold;
D. If applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer,
together with credentials establishing exact relationship;
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
F. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
vehicle license number or other means of identification;
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime or misdemeanor, or violation of any provision of this chapter,
and if so, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor; and
H. Such other information as the Village Administrator may reasonably
require.
§ 216-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 216-8
216:221
§ 216-8. License fees. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
Fees for the licenses required by § 216-4 shall be as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 216-9. Term of licenses.
Licenses issued pursuant to § 216-4 hereof shall expire on the next
succeeding 31st day of May following the date of issuance unless suspended
or revoked prior to such date, but any such license may specifically state an
earlier expiration date.
§ 216-10. Display of license.
Every licensee, while exercising a license issued pursuant to § 216-4 hereof,
shall carry such license and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
§ 216-11. Revocation of license.
A license issued pursuant to § 216-4 hereof may be suspended or revoked by
the licensing officer if the holder thereof has failed to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or other village laws if reasonably related hereto.
The holder of such license shall be notified in writing of such suspension or
revocation, the grounds therefor and shall immediately surrender his or her
license without rebate of the fee paid therefor.
§ 216-12. Appeal to Board of Trustees upon refusal to issue,
suspension or revocation of license.
Upon refusal to grant a license pursuant to § 216-4 or upon suspension or
revocation thereof pursuant to § 216-11, an appeal may be taken to the
Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk.
The Board of Trustees shall hear such appeal at its next regular meeting.
The licensee shall be entitled to representation by counsel and shall be
given the opportunity to present witnesses and rebut any proof submitted.
The decision of the Board of Trustees on appeal shall be final.
§ 216-13. General regulations.
No person shall:
A. Shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device
or musical instrument, including any loudspeaker, radio or sound
amplifying system, in any public place in the village for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
person proposes to sell; or
B. Have any exclusive right to any location in the village streets, shall not
be permitted to remain in a stationary location for more than one hour
at any one time and shall not be permitted to operate in any congested
area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the
public for the purpose of selling goods, wares or merchandise. For the
§ 216-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 216-13
216:222
purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised
in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 216-13 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 216-13
216:223

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 216-14. Violations and penalties.24
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-14 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 216-14
216:225
Chapter 222
PLUMBERS AND ELECTRICIANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 80. Building construction — See Ch. 112.
§ 222-1. Title
This chapter shall be known as may be cited as the "Plumbers and
Electricians Licensing Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 222-2. License required; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 240
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 240-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Shopping Cart Law of
the Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 240-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to eliminate danger and inconvenience to
the public caused by the abandonment of shopping carts in public places,
such as streets and sidewalks, within the Village of Bronxville, where the
A. Plumbing. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business
of plumbing in the Village of Bronxville unless he, she or it shall have
obtained and have in force and effect a Westchester County Master
Plumber's License.
B. Electrical installations. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in
the business of installing or repairing electrical wiring or equipment in
the Village of Bronxville unless he, she or it shall have in force and
effect a Westchester County Electrician's License.25
C. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation as defined in the Penal Law of the State of
New York and punished accordingly and, in addition, shall be subject to
a civil penalty not exceeding $250.26
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: Original Sections 28.2, License application; 28.3, Issuance of license; 28.4,
Term of license; 28.5, Renewal; 28.6, Fees; 28.7, Registry of electrician's licenses to be
kept; and 28.9, Suspension and revocation of licenses, which immediately followed this
section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 240-2
222:226
abandoned carts may become an obstacle and hazard to pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
§ 240-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be included
in the words or phrases used:
ABANDON — Includes leaving, discarding, dumping, throwing or placing of
personal property in public places.
CART or SHOPPING CART — Includes any rolling or nonrolling basket or
container, and any part or parts thereof, commonly used in supermarkets or
self-service stores as a conveyer of goods, wares and merchandise.
OWNER — The merchant, purveyor of foods or other goods, establishment
or corporation, who or which provides patrons or customers with shopping
carts and, as a result thereof, has the responsibility under this chapter of
placing the prescribed identification upon such carts.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, thoroughfare, off-street
parking area, parking field, commercial parking lot, park, parking place,
sidewalk, vacant lot, plot, parcel of land and other spaces or places available
to or used by the general public.
§ 240-4. Cart identification of owner required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide carts for the use of patrons
or in any store or business premises within the Village of Bronxville, unless
the cart has permanently affixed to it a sign, metallic tag or other means
for clearly identifying the owner of such a cart, and the specific store
location at which said cart is used. In addition to the foregoing, the cart
tag or other identification medium must bear a serial or other individual
identification number sufficient to identify and distinguish it from other like
carts belonging to the same owner.
§ 240-5. Owner's responsibility for removal or abandonment of cart.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any owner to suffer
or permit any person to take any cart from the owner's premises or parking
area and thereafter to abandon, discard, leave, place or suffer any cart to
be left or placed in a public place.
§ 240-6. Responsibility of person for removing or abandoning cart.
It shall be also unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person or
customer to take any cart from an owner's store, mercantile establishment
or any place and thereafter to abandon, discard, leave, place or suffer or
permit such cart to be left or placed on a public place as above defined.
§ 240-7. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
§ 240-2 SHOPPING CARTS § 240-7
240:227
§ 240-8. Impoundment.
When any shopping cart is found abandoned in a public place, such
shopping cart may be removed by the Police Department and stored in a
suitable place at the expense of the owner, as specified below.
§ 240-9. Redemption. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
§ 240-10. Disposal.
In accordance with Article 13-A of the General Municipal Law and Article
7-B of the Personal Property Law, the Village Clerk may dispose of shopping
carts held by the Village of Bronxville for a period of 15 days or more at a
public auction held pursuant to notice.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.27
B. The members of the Village of Bronxville Police Department shall be
authorized and instructed to enforce compliance with this chapter by
affixing summonses to any abandoned shopping carts found in any
public places within the Village of Bronxville and in addition may issue a
summons to any person seen abandoning a cart in violation of this
chapter.
A. Any shopping carts removed from public places within the Village of
Bronxville may be redeemed by the owner thereof any time prior to
disposal by the village by tendering to the Village Clerk the fee as
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. The Village Clerk shall require satisfactory proof of ownership or lawful
right to possession of the property sought prior to release. Any return of
property by the Village Clerk to an owner claiming the same, pursuant
to this chapter, shall be an absolute defense to the village against any
other person claiming same.
A. Public notice. Public notice of the auction shall be given by publication
once in the official newspaper or a newspaper designated by the Village
Board for village notices, at least five days prior to the auction, and
shall contain the time and place of the auction together with a brief
description of the articles to be sold.
B. Proceeds. All proceeds received from the redemption of or sale of
shopping carts at auction as herein provided shall be collected, applied
and disbursed as damages to the Village of Bronxville for the costs of
administration of this chapter; and any such sales or other dispositions
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 240-10
240:228
Chapter 252
SOLID WASTE
§ 252-1. Title. [Amended 5-16-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Garbage and
Maintenance of Private Property Law of the Village of Bronxville, New
York."
§ 252-2. Maintenance of private property. [Amended 5-16-1995 by
L.L. No. 2-1995]
shall be without liability on the part of the village to the owner of the
carts or other persons having an interest therein.
A. Every owner of vacant property and every owner, tenant, occupant or
leaseholder of occupied property shall cut, trim or remove brush, grass,
weeds, debris, rubbish or other materials upon the property owned or
occupied by such owner, tenant, occupant or leaseholder.
B. Every owner of vacant retail property shall keep the inside premises
broom clean and all windows shall be kept free of garbage bags, paper
or other material used as window covering.
C. No material shall be placed at the street for collection prior to 9:00 p.m.
the day preceding the scheduled collection.
D. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including signs,
fences and awnings, shall be maintained in good repair, free of any
condition that would present a safety or fire hazard or adversely affect
adjoining properties in the neighborhood, to that end all surfaces
thereof shall be kept painted or otherwise provided with a protective
coating sufficient to prevent structural deterioration and to maintain a
reasonably good appearance. The same shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive
peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance.
E. In the event of such person's failure to comply with the requirements of
Subsections A through D, the Village Administrator shall give notice to
such person requiring compliance within seven days. If the owner of
such property is a nonresident, such notice shall be addressed to his or
her last known address.
F. After seven days from the date of mailing of such notice, compliance
lacking, the Village Administrator is authorized and directed to cut,
trim and remove brush, grass, weeds, debris, rubbish or other materials
from any property upon which the same shall be, and the cost thereof
shall be assessed against such real property and shall constitute a lien
against such property and shall be collected by the Village Treasurer, in
§ 240-10 SOLID WASTE § 252-2
252:229
§ 252-3. Garbage containers.
Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant and superintendent or person in
charge of occupied property within the village shall maintain containers
of galvanized metal or other durable and nonflammable material for the
storage of garbage. The placing of garbage in pasteboard or wooden boxes
or in barrels or in cartons or bags is prohibited. Each such container shall
be equipped with adequate handles and shall be provided with a tight-fitting
cover of galvanized metal or other durable and nonflammable material.
Garbage will not be collected from any container which exceeds 20 gallons
or 75 liters in capacity.
§ 252-4. Separation of waste material other than garbage.
Upon the publication of a notice by the village that the following provisions
are effective, it shall be required that:
§ 252-5. Garbage and other waste material for collection.
Garbage and other waste materials shall be kept in containers which shall
be tightly covered at all times. The space about the containers shall be at all
times kept clear of debris or spillage and maintained in a sanitary manner.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall prohibit the use of containers
and related accessory devices which in his or her judgment may be a clear
hazard to public safety.
§ 252-6. Violators not entitled to collection.
Persons violating all or any part of §§ 252-3 through 252-5 shall not be
entitled to the removal by the village collectors of garbage or other waste
material until the conditions constituting the violation are fully corrected by
such person. Accumulation of garbage or other waste material as a result of
the manner provided by law for the collection of delinquent taxes. Such
costs shall be in addition to any penalty assessed under § 252-7.
A. Unburnable materials such as ashes, metal cans, bottles or other
similar materials shall not be placed in containers with garbage, but
shall be kept in covered containers which shall not exceed 20 gallons or
75 liters.
B. Combustible materials other than garbage such as paper, cardboard,
wrappings and other similar material shall not be placed in containers
with garbage but shall be consolidated in bundles or kept in containers
not exceeding five cubic feet in bulk.
C. Source Separation Law. The Village of Bronxville adopts the
Westchester County Source Separation Law, Chapter 825, as its own for
compliance with Title One of Article 27 of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law. [Added 7-13-1992 by L.L. No.
3-1992]
§ 252-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 252-6
252:230
any violations shall be removed at the expense of the person concerned by
the village.
§ 252-7. Penalties for offenses.28
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 256
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 257.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-6 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 252-7
256:231

ARTICLE I
Illegal Discharge and Illicit Connections
[Adopted 4-9-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 256-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 256-2. Definitions.
When used in this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
Superintendent of Buildings and Superintendent of Public Works.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Bronxville through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system
to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.
This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
article are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharge to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Illegal Discharge
and Illicit Connections Law of the Village of Bronxville."
§ 256-1 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 256-2
256:233
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 256-7 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR § 122.26 (b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA (or by
New York State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b))
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drainage
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
may include, but are not limited to paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnance, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute
to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved
and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system,
including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections
to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 256-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 256-2
256:234
PREMISES or PROPERTY — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of
land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and
parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document that
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Surface watercourses and water bodies, including all
natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that
may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during
rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and
seasons.
§ 256-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands and entering the storm drainage system unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 256-4. Responsibility for administration.
The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. The authorized enforcement agency
may delegate any powers granted or duties imposed herein.
§ 256-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 256-2 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 256-6
256:235
§ 256-6. Limitation on standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 256-7. Prohibitions on illegal discharge and illicit connections.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharge.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or wastewaters containing
any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited, except as
described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground
water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps,
air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial
washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated; typically less than one PPM
chlorine), fire-fighting activities, and any other water source
not containing pollutants.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the
time of the test.
(d) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drainage system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
§ 256-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 256-7
256:236
§ 256-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 256-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 256-10. Monitoring of discharges.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past and now illicit under the provisions of
this article, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illegal discharge in emergency situations. The
authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illegal discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his/her MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illegal
discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition
the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval
of the authorized enforcement agency.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
§ 256-7 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 256-10
256:237
(1) The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must
be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(3) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up
on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement
agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of
a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
(7) If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and
he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
§ 256-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 256-10
256:238
§ 256-11. Use of best management practices to prevent, control and
reduce stormwater pollutants.
The authorized enforcement agency will promulgate requirements
identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility
that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater,
the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may
be, the source of an illegal discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 256-12. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 256-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials that is resulting or may result in illegal
discharge or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 256-10 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 256-13
256:239
Notifications in person, by phone or electronic messaging shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Village Building
Inspector and Village Administrator within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years and shall be made available to the authorized enforcement
agency upon request at any time.
§ 256-14. Enforcement.
§ 256-15. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The notice of appeal must be received by the
Village Administrator within 10 days from the date of the notice of violation.
Hearing on the appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement
of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharge;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 256-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 256-16
256:240
§ 256-16. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10 days
of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 256-17. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation by or on behalf of the
authorized enforcement agency, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner
may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within
10 days of receipt of said notice. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the Village of Bronxville or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a
lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Village by
reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal
payments. Interest at the rate of 8% per annum shall be assessed on the
balance beginning on the 40th day following discovery of the violation.
§ 256-18. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 256-19. Additional remedies.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 256-20. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
§ 256-16 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 256-20
256:241
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 256-21. Criminal prosecution.
§ 256-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
A. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by
law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first
offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However,
for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 256-20 BRONXVILLE CODE § 256-22
256:242
Chapter 257
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Storm drainage system — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 257-1. General provisions; exemptions.
A. Findings of fact. It is hereby determined that:
(1) Land development activities and associated increases in site
impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and
deposition;
(2) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish
and other desirable species;
(3) Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil
erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat;
(4) Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
(5) Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil,
thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
(6) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts
on the waters of the municipality;
(7) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can
be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater
runoff from land development activities;
(8) The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land
development activities in order to control and minimize increases
in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with
stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats
to public health and safety; and
§ 256-22 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-1
256:243
(9) Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the environment and the general health, safety and welfare
of the Village of Bronxville, its residents and their property, and to
address the findings of fact in § 257-1A hereof. This chapter seeks to
meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives: [Amended
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Stormwater Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-0-10-002, or
as amended, revised, or superseded;
(2) Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities GP-0-10-001, or
as amended, revised or superseded;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land development activities that would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff that flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable;
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices, and to ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety; and
(7) Encourage the use of green infrastructure practices to control
stormwater runoff, such as protecting natural areas, reducing
impervious cover, and using runoff reduction techniques to the
maximum extent practicable.
C. Statutory authority. In accordance with Article 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law of the State of New York, the Village Board of Trustees
of the Village of Bronxville has the authority to enact local laws and
§ 257-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-1
256:244
amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or
general welfare of the Village of Bronxville and for the protection and
enhancement of its physical environment. The Village Board of Trustees
of the Village of Bronxville may include in any such local law provisions
for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or independent
contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
D. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities
as defined herein.
(2) The Village Board of Trustees shall designate a Stormwater
Management Officer who shall accept and review all stormwater
pollution prevention plans and forward such plans to the applicable
municipal board. The Stormwater Management Officer may review
the plans, and/or engage the services of a registered professional
engineer to review the plans, specifications and related documents
at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by said the Board
of Trustees.
(3) All land development activities subject to review and approval by
the Village of Bronxville Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
and/or Board of Trustees shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this chapter.
(4) All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
§ 257-1D(3) shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer
who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements
of this chapter.
E. Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review under
this chapter:
(1) Agricultural activity as defined herein.
(2) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this chapter.
(3) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(4) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(5) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been
approved by the Village of Bronxville on or before the effective date
of this chapter.
(6) Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
§ 257-1 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-1
256:245
§ 257-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context requires, the
following terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed
under this chapter shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The "New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual," most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the "New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control" manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
(7) Cemetery graves.
(8) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles.
(9) Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property
or natural resources.
(10) Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that
person and his or her family.
(11) Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an
existing structure.
§ 257-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-2
256:246
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Green infrastructure approaches infiltrate,
evapotranspire or reuse stormwater, using soils and vegetation, rather than
hardscape collection, conveyance and storage structures. Common green
infrastructure approaches include green roofs, tress and tree boxes, rain
gardens, vegetated swales, pocket wetlands, infiltration planters, vegetated
median strips, reforestation, and protection and enhancement of riparian
buffers and floodplains.[Added 3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include
but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
§ 257-2 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-2
256:247
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
QUALIFIED INSPECTOR — A person that is knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control, such as a licensed
professional engineer, certified professional in erosion and sediment control
(CPESC), or a registered landscape architect, or someone working under
the direct supervision of, and in the same company as, the licensed
professional engineer or registered landscape architect, provided that
person has training in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment
control.[Added 3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.[Amended 3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit under the New
York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers
for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards and/or to
specify stormwater control standards.[Amended 3-14-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011]
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued that requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
§ 257-2 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-2
256:248
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Village Board of Trustees to accept and review
stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable
municipal board(s), and inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only to
man-made bodies of water that neither were originally created in waters
of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
TRAINED CONTRACTOR — An employee from the contracting or
construction company who has received four hours of Department-endorsed
training in proper erosion and sediment control principles. After receiving
the initial training, the trained contractor shall receive four hours of
training every three years. "Trained contractor" may also mean an employee
from the contracting or construction company that meets the qualified
inspector qualifications.[Added 3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, that gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 257-3. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
§ 257-2 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-3
256:249
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five (5) acres shall be
disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved
SWPPP.
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
§ 257-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-3
256:250
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined herein and meeting
Condition A, B, C or D below shall also include water quantity and
water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff
controls) as set forth in § 257-4C as applicable: [Amended
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(a) Condition A: Stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: Stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of a singlefamily
home not located in one of the relevant watersheds
identified in the SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities and not directly discharging to one of the waters
identified on the Department’s 303(d) list of impaired waters,
and construction activities at agricultural properties.
(d) Condition D: Stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing between one and five acres of land for a
single-family residential subdivision that will result in greater
than 25% impervious cover at total build out.
§ 257-3 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-3
256:251
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B, C and D: [Amended
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(a) All information in § 257-3B;
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice, including documentation of the five-step planning
process for stormwater management using green
infrastructure as outlined in the Design Manual;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 257-5D.
C. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified
professional or professional engineer and must be signed by the
professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all
stormwater management practices meet the requirements in this
chapter.
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall ensure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
§ 257-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-3
256:252
§ 257-4. Performance and design criteria.
§ 257-5. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and
agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm, the address (or other identifying description) of
the site and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. On-site SWPPP retention. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the
site of the land development activity during construction from the date
of initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. All land development activities shall be subject to the performance and
design criteria set forth in this section.
B. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the Design
Manual).
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the Erosion Control Manual).
C. Water quality standards. No land development activity shall cause an
increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction. [Amended
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 257-3 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-5
256:253
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their
representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) that are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined herein and meeting
Condition A, B, C, or D in § 257-3, the applicant shall have a
qualified inspector conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within twenty four hours of any storm event
producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site log book.
(3) Construction activities disturbing five acres or more at any one
time shall be inspected by a qualified inspector twice every seven
days.
(4) The applicant or developer or their representative, one of which
must be a trained contractor, shall be on site at all times when
construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Bronxville to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the counsel
for the Village of Bronxville.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes
as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
§ 257-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-5
256:254
§ 257-6. Administration and enforcement.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 257-4.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Bronxville shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of § 257-8, entitled "Sample Stormwater Control
Facility Maintenance Agreement." In lieu of a maintenance agreement,
the Village of Bronxville, at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of
any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such
facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes
adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The Stormwater Management Officer may require such
inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), as approved.
The Stormwater Management Officer may conduct the
inspection and engage the services of a registered engineer to
conduct the inspection at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule
established by the Board of Trustees. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the Stormwater Management Officer at
least 48 hours before any of the following, as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
[1] Start of construction;
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
[3] Completion of site clearing;
[4] Completion of rough grading;
[5] Completion of final grading;
[6] Close of the construction season;
[7] Completion of final landscaping;
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
§ 257-5 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-6
256:255
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the
required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections. The Stormwater
Management Officer or his designee is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All
applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on-site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for
all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a
professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries
of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The Stormwater Management Officer may
require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this
chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
(5) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when any
new connection is made between private property and the public
storm water system, the landowner shall grant to the Village of
Bronxville the right to enter the property at reasonable times and
in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
§ 257-6A(3).
B. Performance guarantee.
§ 257-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-6
256:256
(1) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Bronxville
in its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the
Village of Bronxville may require the applicant or developer to
provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety
institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project
and names the Village of Bronxville as the beneficiary. The security
shall be in an amount to be determined by the Village of Bronxville
based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual
construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee
shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the
Village of Bronxville, provided that such period shall not be less
than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a
one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have
been found to be acceptable to the Village of Bronxville. Per-annum
interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account
until the surety is released from liability.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to
construction, may be required to provide the Village of Bronxville
with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial
institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of
all stormwater management and erosion control facilities both
during and after construction, and until the facilities are removed
from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly
operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities, the Village of Bronxville may draw upon
the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Village of Bronxville may require entities
subject to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this chapter.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Village of Bronxville determines that
a land development activity is not being carried out in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice
of violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant;
§ 257-6 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-6
256:257
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
land development activity into compliance with this chapter
and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Village of Bronxville may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work
order shall be required to halt all land development activities,
except those activities that address the violations leading to the
stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
Village of Bronxville confirms that the land development activity is
in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed.
Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result
in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction
or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than
$700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the
purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors,
and for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
§ 257-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-6
256:258
§ 257-7. Conflict; severability. [Amended 3-14-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011]
§ 257-8. Sample stormwater control facility maintenance
agreement.
A sample stormwater control facility maintenance agreement follows:
Whereas, the Municipality of Village of Bronxville ("the Village") and the
_______________ ("Facility Owner") want to enter into an agreement to
provide for the long term maintenance and continuation of stormwater
control measures approved by the Municipality for the below named
project, and
Whereas, the Municipality and the Facility Owner desire that the
stormwater control measures be built in accordance with the approved
project plans and thereafter be maintained, cleaned, repaired, replaced
and continued in perpetuity in order to ensure optimum performance of the
components. Therefore, the Municipality and the Facility Owner agree as
follows:
1. This agreement binds the Municipality and the Facility Owner, its
successors and assigns, to the maintenance provisions depicted in the
approved project plans which are attached as Schedule A29 of this
agreement.
chapter, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of
Bronxville may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which
shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
D. Fees for services. The Village of Bronxville may require any person
undertaking land development activities regulated by this chapter to
reimburse the Village for reasonable and necessary costs at prevailing
rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village of Bronxville or performed by a third party for
the Village of Bronxville.
A. In the event of any conflict between a provision of this Chapter 257 and
a provision of applicable federal or state laws or regulations, the more
restrictive provision shall control.
B. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter.
§ 257-6 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-8
256:259
2. The Facility Owner shall maintain, clean, repair, replace and continue
the stormwater control measures depicted in Schedule A as necessary to
ensure optimum performance of the measures to design specifications. The
stormwater control measures shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following: drainage ditches, swales, dry wells, infiltrators, drop inlets,
pipes, culverts, soil absorption devices, stormwater ponds and wetlands,
bioretention and rain gardens, tree boxes, green roofs, stormwater
planters, rain tanks and cisterns, and porous pavement. [Amended
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
3. The Facility Owner shall be responsible for all expenses related to the
maintenance of the stormwater control measures and shall establish a
means for the collection and distribution of expenses among parties for any
commonly owned facilities.
4. The Facility Owner shall provide for the periodic inspection of the
stormwater control measures, at the frequency recommended in the
Design Manual, to determine the condition and integrity of the measures.
Such inspection shall be performed by a Professional Engineer licensed by
the State of New York. The inspecting engineer shall prepare and submit
to the Municipality within 30 days of the inspection, a written report of
the findings including recommendations for those actions necessary for the
continuation of the stormwater control measures. [Amended 3-14-2011
by L.L. No. 2-2011]
5. The Facility Owner shall not authorize, undertake or permit alteration,
abandonment, modification or discontinuation of the stormwater control
measures except in accordance with written approval of the Municipality.
6. The Facility Owner shall undertake necessary repairs and replacement
of the stormwater control measures at the direction of the Municipality or
in accordance with the recommendations of the inspecting engineer.
7. The Facility Owner shall provide to the Municipality within 30 days of
the date of this agreement, a security for the maintenance and continuation
of the stormwater control measures in the form of (a Bond, letter of credit
or escrow account).
8. This agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk,
County of Westchester together with the deed for the common property
and shall be included in the offering plan and/or prospectus approved
pursuant to ______________.
9. If ever the Municipality determines that the Facility Owner has failed
to construct or maintain the stormwater control measures in accordance
with the project plan or has failed to undertake corrective action specified
by the Municipality or by the inspecting engineer, the Municipality is
authorized to undertake such steps as reasonably necessary for the
preservation, continuation or maintenance of the stormwater control
measures and to affix the expenses thereof as a lien against the property.
10. This agreement is effective ____________.
29.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 257-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 257-8
256:260
Chapter 260
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 92.
§ 257-8 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 257-8
256:261

Part 1
[Adopted 2-9S-1t9re8e1t sA sA nCdh .S 4id4e Owfa lTkhse 1981 Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 260-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Streets and Sidewalks
Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York".
§ 260-2. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires:
SIDEWALK — That portion of any street within the Village between the
curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way in the
Village publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
§ 260-3. Obstructions and encroachments. [Amended 7-13-2015 by
L.L. No. 5-2015]
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, on any public street, sidewalk
or other public place any obstruction or encumbrance of any kind, or
cause anything to encroach upon or project into, or over, any public street,
sidewalk or other public place, or make or cause to be made any excavation
adjacent to any public street, sidewalk or other public place, if such
obstruction, encumbrance, encroachment, projection or excavation
endangers public safety or occasions public inconvenience. Building
materials or equipment shall be permitted to occupy a part of a public
street or sidewalk for such period, not exceeding two hours, as may be
requisite for the transfer thereof between a vehicle and a plot abutting
on the street, but only if continuously attended by a responsible person
and properly guarded against the collision of vehicles or persons therewith.
Such material or equipment shall in all cases be placed close to the curbline
and directly in front of the plot from or to which the same is being
transferred and so as to leave a clear passageway on the sidewalk as well as
on the roadway of the street and shall in no event extend more than 10 feet
from the curbline. Facilities for outdoor eating areas, which have a validly
issued permit, may be placed on a public sidewalk in accordance with the
terms of the permit.
§ 260-4. Special permit authorized.
On application, the Superintendent of Public Works may grant permission
to use for a limited period of time a portion of a public street, sidewalk or
§ 260-1 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-4
256:263
other public place for the storage of building materials or other articles or
for other purposes, but only under appropriate restrictions and guarantees
having regard to the convenience and safety of the public and the liability
of the Village in the event of an accident occurring from such use.
§ 260-5. Lighting required for obstructions.
Every encumbrance on a public street or sidewalk, which is permitted
under this article and which may obstruct traffic or cause injury, shall be
continuously marked by an appropriate signal or signals, which shall be
conspicuously visible day and night from a distance of 200 feet in every
direction of traffic.
§ 260-6. Littering. [Amended 11-14-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
§ 260-7. Permit required for erection of poles and wires.
No poles for electric or other wires shall be erected on any public street,
sidewalk or other public place, and no wires or other lines shall be strung
over, under or upon any public street, sidewalk or other public place except
by permission granted by the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Generally. No garbage, trash, rubbish, waste or other substance or
material shall be thrown, dropped or placed in or upon any street,
sidewalk, gutter, catch basin or other public place, or swept into such
place.
B. Merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. Every person owning or
occupying a place of business within the Village shall keep the sidewalk
in front of his or her business premises free of litter. Without limitation
on the foregoing, every such person shall sweep or cause to be swept
any litter on the sidewalk in front of his or her premises at the close of
business on each day his or her premises are open for business.
§ 260-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-7
256:264
ARTICLE II
Bicycling and Other Sports
§ 260-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BICYCLE — Every one-, two- or three-wheeled device upon which a person
or persons may ride, propelled by human power through pedals, a belt, a
chain or gears, or such a device, friction driven, designed to be propelled
by a motor of one horsepower or less with a maximum attainable speed of
not more than 17 miles per hour, with a single wheel, wheels in tandem or
tricycle.[Amended 11-8-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
BUSINESS DISTRICT STREETS and BUSINESS DISTRICT SIDEWALKS
— Respectively, the following streets and the sidewalks on either side
thereof: Cedar Street, Park Place, Kraft Avenue between Cedar Street and
Pondfield Road, Pondfield Road between Cedar Street and the westerly
side of the railroad underpass, Parkway Road between Milburn Street and
Palmer Avenue, and Palmer Avenue between Paxton Avenue and the railroad
underpass.
IN-LINE SKATES — Manufactured or assembled devices each consisting
of a shoe boot with a blade-like metal runner approximately three to four
inches in thickness mounted or permanently attached thereto in a frame
across the length of such shoe boot, with such blade-like metal runner
containing three, four or five metal ball bearing wheels designed to
minimize friction with any surface with which they come in contact and
which are aligned along the length of the runner in more or less a straight
line, and used to skate or glide, by means of human foot and leg
power.[Added 10-14-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
ROLLER SKATES — Manufactured or assembled devices each consisting
of a frame or shoe having clamps or straps, or both, for fastening, with a
pair of small wheels near the toe and another pair at the heel mounted or
permanently attached thereto, for skating or gliding by means of human
power.[Added 10-14-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
§ 260-9. (Reserved)30
§ 260-10. Coasting, ball playing, skateboarding, skating and
bicycling. [Amended 10-14-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996; 11-14-2016 by
L.L. No. 5-2016]
A. Coasting. Coasting on sleds is prohibited on all public streets, sidewalks
and other public places, except on such places, other than business
district streets and business district sidewalks, and for such times as
may be permitted by the Police Department.
30.Editor’s Note: Former § 260-9, Operation of bicycles, was repealed in its entirety
11-14-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016.
§ 260-8 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-10
256:265
§ 260-11. Parental responsibility.
A parent or guardian of a child shall not authorize or knowingly permit such
person to violate any of the provisions of this article.
B. Ball playing, skateboarding and skating. Ball playing, skateboarding,
skating or gliding on in-line skates or roller skates, and other acts,
amusements or practices on public streets, sidewalks or other public
places are prohibited if they either endanger public safety or occasion
public inconvenience. In addition, ball playing and skateboarding are
prohibited on all public sidewalks, business district streets and the
following streets: Avon Road, Pondfield Road, Sagamore Road, Midland
Avenue, White Plains Road, and Meadow Avenue between Pondfield
Road and Tanglewylde Avenue.
C. No person shall ride a bicycle on any business district sidewalk.
§ 260-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-11
256:266
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice
§ 260-12. Clearing required.
Every owner of vacant property and every owner, tenant, occupant or
leaseholder of occupied property is required to keep the sidewalk adjoining
such property, if paved, clear of snow and ice. All paved sidewalks in the
district known as Business A and Business B, according to the Zoning Map
referred to in Chapter 310 entitled "Zoning" of this Code, shall be cleared
of snow and ice by 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. of each day, whether or not
snow is still falling; all paved sidewalks in other districts shall be cleared of
snow within 12 hours of the cessation of snow falling. Ice remaining on the
sidewalk after it has been cleared or forming thereafter shall, if not easily
removable, be kept covered with clean ashes, sand or the like, so as to be
safe for pedestrians.
§ 260-13. Owners not to permit snow and ice to fall from buildings
onto streets and sidewalks.
Every owner and leaseholder of a building, and every builder of a building
in construction, which is adjacent to a public street, is required to prevent
the falling of snow, ice, water or other things from such building upon the
streets or sidewalks.
§ 260-12 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-13
256:267

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
[Added 7-14-1986 by L.L. No. 10-1986; amended 7-14-2003 by L.L.
No. 3-2003; 9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
§ 260-14. Responsibility for maintenance and repair of sidewalk.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK — Any area, whether paved or otherwise improved,
unpaved or unimproved, designated on a filed subdivision plat as a
sidewalk, or as a pathway or trail intended for pedestrian use, or which,
even if not so designated in a filed subdivision plat, is built and/or
constructed as a pedestrian way.
B. Sidewalk maintenance and repair.
(1) General maintenance and repair.
(a) Each owner of vacant property and each owner of occupied
property in the Village is hereby required to own and keep that
portion of any sidewalk which is on the property or between
the property and the immediately adjacent street line free of all
accumulation of garbage, rubbish, refuse, weeds, leaves,
branches, and other obstructions (collectively, "obstructions"),
and to maintain such sidewalk in good repair and in a safe and
litter-free condition.
(b) Snow and ice shall be cleared from such sidewalks in
accordance with § 260-12.
(2) Village remedial authority. The Village shall notify the owners of the
sidewalks in need of repair or maintenance that such repairs or
maintenance are to be performed within a period of 45 days from
the date of said notice.
C. Penalties. If the owner of real property fails to undertake the necessary
repair, maintenance or clearing of ice, snow or obstructions within the
time frames specified above, he/she shall be liable to the Village for a
civil penalty in the amount of $250 per day until the obstructions, ice or
snow are removed or corrected. Said civil penalty shall be in addition to
other remedies available to the Village under this section and by law.
§ 260-14 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-14
256:269

ARTICLE V
Excavations and Roll-Off Containers
[Amended 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
§ 260-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PERMITTEE — A person obtaining a permit under this article, or his or her
duly authorized representative.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER — The type of container usually associated with
a vehicle containing hydraulic or mechanical capabilities to lift a
prefabricated container from the ground onto the vehicle for transport
purposes or to lift and dump the material contained therein into the body
of said vehicle, the contents of which container is normally solid waste
consisting of refuse, rubbish and other debris.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village.
§ 260-16. Permit required.
§ 260-17. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a permit under this article shall make application
therefor to the Superintendent.
A. Excavations. No person shall open or cause to be opened by digging or
excavating the surface of any street or public place for any purpose
whatsoever without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Superintendent. A separate permit shall be required for each such
opening.
B. Roll-off containers. No person shall place or cause to be placed any rolloff
container in any Village right-of-way or public place without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Superintendent. A separate permit
shall be required for each roll-off container so placed or located.
A. Excavations. Each application shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location of the opening;
(3) The size and purpose of the opening to be made and the maximum
size of such opening;
(4) The date or dates when the work is to be performed;
(5) The type of pavement or surface to be opened; and
(6) Such additional information as the Superintendent may require to
determine compliance with this article.
§ 260-15 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-17
256:271
§ 260-18. Liability insurance.
Except as otherwise provided in § 260-23, no permit shall be issued
pursuant to this article until the applicant therefor shall have first filed
with the Superintendent, without cost to the Village, satisfactory evidence
of public liability insurance in an amount of not less than $500,000 for any
one person and not less than $1,000,000 for any one accident, and property
damage insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000 for any one
accident, to insure the Village against any loss, injury or damage arising
out of the granting of such permit or permits or from any negligence or
fault of such applicant, his or her or its agents, servants or employees,
in connection with such opening or with any work related thereto. Such
insurance shall remain in force throughout the effective period of the permit
and during the period of any authorized extensions.
§ 260-19. Fee and deposits.
§ 260-20. Permits nontransferable.
A permit issued pursuant to this article shall not be assigned or transferred
except upon the prior written consent of the Superintendent endorsed
thereon.
§ 260-21. Revocation of permit.
The Superintendent shall have the authority to revoke any permit at any
time should the permittee fail to comply with any provision of this article or
any term, agreement, covenant or condition of the permit.
B. Roll-off containers. Each application for placement of a roll-off
container shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the owner of the container if different
from the applicant;
(3) The proposed location of each roll-off container;
(4) The name and address of the customer or customers to be served;
(5) The size and description of the roll-off container; and
(6) Such other information as the Superintendent may require to
determine compliance with this article.
A. No license shall be issued by the Superintendent pursuant to this article
until the applicant therefor shall have paid a fee as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. Any deposit made pursuant to this section shall be in the form of a
certified or bank cashier's check, postal money order or certified
deposit bond. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
§ 260-17 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-22
256:272
§ 260-22. Disposition of deposits.
§ 260-23. Special provision as to public service corporations.
A. Retention of deposit for excavations; period of maintenance. The
amount of deposit required to be paid for each permit shall be retained
by the Village for the duration of the period of maintenance as
hereinafter defined. Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any
of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the
permittee's part to be done and performed, the deposit shall be
forfeited to the Village as liquidated damages.
B. Period of maintenance for excavations. The period of maintenance shall
be considered as a period of six months after the date of final
completion, as determined by the Superintendent, of the work to be
done pursuant to the terms of a permit, except that, in the event that
the termination of such six-month period shall fall within the months of
December, January, February, March or April, then and in such event,
the period of maintenance shall be considered as extending until the
first day of May next succeeding. The permittee shall be responsible for
the entire work and shall keep every portion of such work in good order
and repair during the entire period of maintenance.
C. Roll-off containers.
(1) The amount of deposit required to be paid for each permit for a rolloff
container shall be retained by the Village for so long as the
container remains on the Village street or public place and for a
period of one month thereafter.
(2) The deposit may be used by the Village for any expenses incurred in
removal of the container after expiration or cancellation of the
permit for any cause or to correct any damages to public property
caused by the use of such container and/or the vehicle servicing the
same. Any balance left after payment of such expense, as
determined and certified by the Superintendent has been paid,
shall be refunded to the permittee.
A. Unless otherwise agreed upon between a public service corporation
and the Village, a public service corporation may, in lieu of making
deposits as required by § 260-19, file and keep on file with the
Superintendent a bond in the amount and sufficiency of surety as shall
be approved by the Village Counsel, such bond to be retained by the
Village as security for the faithful performance by such public service
corporation of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of
each permit issued. Such bond shall be considered as a deposit for the
purposes of § 260-22 relating to the disposition of deposits, and such
section shall apply to a public service corporation in the same manner
and to the same extent as other permittees under this article.
§ 260-22 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-23
256:273
§ 260-24. Emergency repairs.
In case of an emergency due to breakage of pipes, mains or other facilities,
a street opening may be made by a public service corporation prior to
obtaining a permit for such opening, provided that such public service
corporation shall have theretofore filed the required bond and evidence
of insurance or an indemnity agreement as specified in this article; and
provided, further, that such public service corporation shall make
application for the necessary permit for such opening not later than 24
hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays not included, after such opening
has been commenced.
§ 260-25. Compliance with statutes.
All work relating to any opening permitted pursuant to this article shall
be performed by the permittee at the permittee's own expense and strictly
in accordance with applicable laws of the Village and state, regulations of
the Superintendent and such specifications as may be promulgated by the
Superintendent.
§ 260-26. Cleaning up; reseeding.
Each permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the
opening, upon completion of the work, all surplus excavated material and
debris and shall leave the site of such opening in a neat and orderly
condition. Where topsoil, seeded area or sod are disturbed in the course of
the work, the permittee shall restore the ground surface, including shrubs,
plants and trees, to its previous condition.
§ 260-26.1. Specifications. [Added 12-14-2015 by L.L. No. 10-2015]
B. A public service corporation may, in lieu of the insurance required by
§ 260-18 for each permit, file and keep on file with the Superintendent
an agreement, approved as to form by the Village Counsel, to indemnify
and save harmless the Village from all claims, suits, actions,
proceedings, losses, injuries, damages and costs of every name and
description arising out of or resulting from any act or omission on the
part of such public service corporation under any permit granted to it
pursuant to this article, and from any negligence or fault of such public
service corporation, or its contractors, agents, servants or employees in
connection with any opening or work relating thereto, and also to
defend, on behalf of the Village, any such suits, actions or proceedings
which may be instituted against the Village.
A. The street opening and the final restoration shall be performed in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated and approved by
the Superintendent, but shall include the following as minimum
requirements, unless otherwise waived by the Board of Trustees:
(1) All excavations shall be backfilled with materials approved by the
Superintendent.
§ 260-23 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-26.1
256:274
(2) If a new patch is to be made where there is an existing patch, the
entire pavement area shall be removed and replaced.
(3) Restoration of pavement shall be curb to curb and shall extend at
least two feet on either side of the trench. Where no curb exists, the
restoration shall extend to the existing pavement limits.
(4) If any excavation for which a permit has been issued hereunder
exceeds 25 feet in length, the permittee shall be responsible for
resurfacing the street from curb to curb over the entire area in
such manner as required by the Superintendent on a case-by-case
basis. Where no curb exists, the resurfacing shall extend to the
existing pavement limits.
(5) If there are multiple patches and the area of disturbance exceeds
20% of the length of a street block multiplied by one foot, then the
entire road in the block shall be resurfaced in a manner and with
materials required by the Superintendent.
(6) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, repaving materials
will match the materials that were removed. For example, if the
pavement removed is a brick type pavement, the restoration
pavement will be a matching brick.
B. Except in the case of an emergency, excavation and/or restoration work
shall not be done on weekends or on legal holidays.
C. All work shall be done in a good and workman-like manner, and will be
inspected by the Village Superintendent or Engineer, as follows:
(1) Standard inspection. Inspection at excavation; at compaction of
base; prior to and during backfill of utility lines; and during road
restoration.
(2) Resident inspection. As determined by the Superintendent or
Engineer on a case-by-case basis in connection with installations,
repairs or new residential connections to Village sanitary sewer or
storm drains.
D. If any restoration completed by a permittee is not satisfactory to the
Superintendent, and the permittee shall fail to correct the work to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent, the Superintendent may cause such
work to be done by Village employees or third-party contractor(s) to his
satisfaction. All expenses incurred by the Village shall be recovered
from the deposit or bond provided by the permittee under this Article. If
such deposit or bond are insufficient to cover such expenses, the
permittee shall pay the excess to the Village within 30 days of written
demand by the Village.
E. Security; traffic mitigation plan.
(1) The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and
fences around all of the work until it is completed, as well as
§ 260-26.1 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-26.1
256:275
arrange for the work to be done in such a manner so as to cause
a minimum of inconvenience and delay to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. As a condition of approval of an application for a permit,
the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may, upon the
recommendation of the Police Chief or his or her designee, require
a traffic mitigation plan from the applicant.
(2) The permittee shall provide warning flags or signs, suitably lighted
flashing lights, and watchmen in such number as deemed
necessary by the Village, in accordance with the New York State
Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(3) Where the free flow of traffic is interfered with, the permittee shall
designate competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by
means of lights or flags.
(4) Unless otherwise authorized by the Village, vehicular traffic shall
be maintained at all times during the progress of the work being
performed under the permit.
(5) The aforementioned security and protective measures shall be
performed in accordance with the New York State Department of
Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
F. The permittee shall keep the original copy of the permit and an
approved copy of the plan at all times while such work is in progress at
the location for which the permit was granted and show such permit or
plan upon demand by the Village.
§ 260-26.1 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-26.1
256:276
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalks and Curb Cuts
[Amended 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989]
§ 260-27. Curb cuts; permit required.
No person shall lay or repair or disturb any sidewalk or make or restore any
curb cut in any public street without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 260-28. Application for a permit.
Any person desiring a permit to lay or repair or disturb a sidewalk or
to cut or restore a curb cut shall make an application therefor to the
Superintendent of Public Works. Each application shall contain the name
and address of the applicant, the location of the proposed work, the size and
purpose of the work, the date or dates when the work is to be performed,
the type of improvement to be made and such additional information as the
Superintendent may require.
§ 260-29. Liability insurance. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
All the provisions of § 260-18 of this Part 1 shall be applicable to this article.
§ 260-30. Fee and deposit. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
§ 260-31. Applicability of Article V.
The provisions of §§ 260-20, 260-21, 260-22, 260-23, 260-24, 260-25 and
260-26 of Article V of this Part 1 shall, to the extent that they are pertinent,
apply to all work performed under this article.
A. No license shall be issued by the Superintendent pursuant to this article
until the applicant therefor shall have paid a fee as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees and shall have made a deposit as
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees or such lesser sum as
the Superintendent deems sufficient to protect the Village in case it is
required to restore, finish or correct the work.
B. Any deposit made pursuant to this section shall be in the form of a
certified or bank cashier's check, postal money order or certified
deposit bond.
§ 260-27 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-31
256:277

ARTICLE VII
Penalty
§ 260-32. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 1 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 260-32 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-32
256:279

Part 2
[Adopted 2-9N-1o9t8ifi1c Aatsi oCnh .O 1f 0D Oeffe Tchtse 1981 Code]
ARTICLE VIII
§ 260-33. Amendment of Section 6-628 of the Village Law.
Section 6-628 of the Village Law as enacted by Chapter 892 of the Laws
of 1972 is hereby amended in its application to the Village of Bronxville to
read as follows:
§ 6-628. Liability of Village in certain actions.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, underpass, park,
playground, square, parking area, building, structure or any other
property owned or leased by or under the jurisdiction or control of the
Village being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or
for damages or injuries to person or property sustained solely in
consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, street, highway, bridge, culvert, underpass, park, playground,
square, parking area, building, structure or any other property owned or
leased by or under the jurisdiction or control of the Village unless written
notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition, or of
the existence of the snow or ice, relating to the particular place, was
actually given to the Village Clerk and there was a failure or neglect
within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or
remove the defect, damage or obstruction complained of, or to cause the
snow or ice to be removed, or the place otherwise made reasonably safe.
§ 260-33 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM § 260-33
256:281
Chapter 268
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 98.
§ 260-33 BRONXVILLE CODE § 260-33
268:282
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 25 of the 1981 Code]
§ 268-1. Tax on the furnishing of utility services.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of June 1950 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the
Village of Bronxville, New York, which is subject to the supervision of the
State Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for twelve
months ending May thirty-first in excess of $500, except motor carriers or
brokers, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of June 1, 1950 is hereby imposed upon every other utility
doing business in the Village of Bronxville, New York, which has a gross
operating income for twelve months ending May 31 in excess of $500 which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village
of Bronxville and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees
imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits
of the Village of Bronxville notwithstanding that some acts be necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 268-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings provided in § 186-a,
Subdivision 2, of the Tax Law.
§ 268-3. Records of utility.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, or as the
Village Board may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period
of three years, except that the Village Treasurer or the Village Board may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 268-4. Filing by utility. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before March
15 of each year, a return for the year ended on the preceding December 31,
including any period preceding each return date or any portion thereof for
which the tax imposed hereby is effective. Every return shall state the gross
income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns
shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him
or her for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information
or matter as he or she may require to be included therein. The Village
Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at
any time a further or supplemental return, which contains any data that
may be specified by him or her, and he or she may require any utility doing
§ 268-1 TAXATION § 268-4
268:283
business in the Village of Bronxville to file an annual return, which shall
contain any data specified by him or her, regardless of whether the utility
is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto
an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or
of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such
business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements
contained therein are true.
§ 268-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of the filing of a return as required by this article, each utility
shall pay to the Village of Bronxville the tax imposed by this article for the
period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the
time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day
on which the return is required to be filed.
§ 268-6. Sufficiency of return.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from
him or her, or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer shall
determine the amount of tax due from such information as he or she is able
to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external
indices or otherwise. He or she shall give notice of such determination
to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall,
within 30 days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to
the Village Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the Village Treasurer, of his
or her own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village
Treasurer shall give notice of his or her decision to the person liable for
the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York if application
therefor is made within 30 days after the giving of notice of such decision.
An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if
any, shall be first deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking
filed with him or her in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice
of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding
is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and
charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at
the option of the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient
to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which
event the applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and
penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such order. Except in
the case of willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax,
no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more
than three years from the date of the filing of a return, provided, however,
that where no return has been filed as required by this article, the tax may
be assessed at any time.
§ 268-4 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-7
268:284
§ 268-7. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him or
her in the last return filed by him or her under this article or, if no return
has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of
such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by
the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined
according to the provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall
commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 268-8. Failure to file.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, but the Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return, and
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this article.
§ 268-9. Refund.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his or her own motion,
shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State
of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds
shall be made out of monies collected under this article. An application for a
refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for
the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer
may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making the
determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person
interested, and he or she shall be entitled to an order to review such
determination under said Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
of the State of New York, subject to the provision hereinbefore contained
relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 268-10. Tax not to be added to bill.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
§ 268-7 TAXATION § 268-10
268:285
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 268-11. Failure to pay tax.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Counsel shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 268-12. Rules and regulations; powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be necessary for the exercise of his or her powers and the performance
of his or her duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other
records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take
testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the
line of his or her official duty under this article, and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers
and documents.
§ 268-13. Disclosure by Village Treasurer.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided
by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer, or any agent, clerk or
employee of the Village of Bronxville, New York, to divulge or make known
in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or
any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. The
officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to
produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action
or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of Bronxville,
New York, in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article,
or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any
party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when
the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or
proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production
of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts
shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or
his or her duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by
him or her, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or
the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have
failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this
article together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the
§ 268-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-13
268:286
Village Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or
the inspection by the Village Counsel or other legal representative of the
Village of Bronxville, New York, of the return of any person who shall bring
action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an
action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year,
or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the
Village of Bronxville, New York, he or she shall be dismissed from office and
shall be incapable of holding any office or employment for the Village of
Bronxville, New York, for a period of five years thereafter. Notwithstanding
any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer may exchange with the
chief fiscal officer of any city or any other Village in the State of New York
information contained in returns filed under this article, provided that such
city or other Village grants similar privileges to the Village of Bronxville,
New York, and provided that such information is to be used for tax purposes
only, and the Village Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax
Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 268-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village of Bronxville, New York, and
shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 268-13 TAXATION § 268-14
268:287

ARTICLE II
Senior Citizen Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 81 of the 1981 Code]
§ 268-15. Partial tax exemption for certain persons over 65 years of
age.
A. Real property in the Village of Bronxville owned by one or more
persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property
owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over,
shall be exempt from taxation by the Village as hereinafter provided.
Such exemption shall be computed after all other partial exemption
allowed by law have been subtracted from the total amount assessed.
B. Extent of exemption. [Amended last 12-11-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
(1) For assessment rolls prepared on the basis of a taxable status date
occurring on or after January 1, 2007, the exemption shall be as per
schedule below:
0 to $26,000.00 50%
$26,000.00 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000.00 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 35%
$29,000.00 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900.00 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800.00 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700.00 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600.00 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500.00 to $34,399.99 5%
(2) The base income for an exemption of 50% for the taxable status
date increases to $27,000 in 2008, $28,000 in 2009, and $29,000 in
2010. The upper limit for an exemption of 5% increases to
$35,399.99 in 2008, $36,399.99 in 2009, and $37,399.99 in 2010.
C. The real property tax exemption on real property owned by husband
and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted, shall not
be rescinded by the Village solely because of the death of the older
spouse so long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
D. This partial tax exemption is extended to those tenant-stockholders who
reside in cooperative apartments and are 65 years of age and older, or if
owned by a husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over.
The exemption for these individuals shall be based on the number of
shares he or she owns in the cooperative apartment corporation in
§ 268-15 TAXATION § 268-15
268:289
§ 268-16. Limitations on exemption.
No exemption shall be granted:
accordance with § 467, Subdivision 3-a, of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law. [Added 10-14-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A. If the income of the owner or the combined incomes of the owners of
the property exceeds the sum of $34,399.99 for the taxable status date
occurring on or after January 1, 2007; $35,399.99 for the taxable status
date occurring on or after January 1, 2008; $36,399.99 for the taxable
status date occurring on or after January 1, 2009; and $37,399.99 for
the taxable status date occurring on or after January 1, 2010, for the
income tax year immediately preceding the date of making application
for exemption. "Income tax year" shall mean a twelve-month period for
which the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return
or, if no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not exceed
such sum. Such income shall include social security and retirement
benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset which may be offset by loss from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include a
return of capital, gifts or inheritances. In computing net rental income
and net income from self-employment no depreciation deduction shall
be allowed for the exhaustion of or wear and tear on real or personal
property held for the production of income. [Amended last
12-11-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006]
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
all of the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a
time of ownership by the survivor and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 24 consecutive
months, provided, further, that in the event of a transfer by either a
husband or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to the
property the time of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse
shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse and
such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 24 consecutive months, and provided further
that where property of the owner or owners has been acquired to
replace property formerly owned by such owner or owners and taken by
eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, and
further provided that where a residence is sold and replaced with
another within one year and is in the same assessment unit, the period
§ 268-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-16
268:290
§ 268-17. Notice of eligibility.
The Village shall notify or cause to be notified each person owning
residential real property in the Village of the provisions of this article. The
provisions of this section may be met by a notice or legend sent on or
with each tax bill to such persons reading "You may be eligible for senior
citizen tax exemptions. For information please call or write........," followed
by the name, telephone number and/or address of the person or department
selected by the Village to explain the provisions of this article. Failure to
notify, or cause to be notified, any person who is in fact eligible to receive
the exemption provided by this article or the failure of such person to
receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of
the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 268-18. Annual application required.
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner, or all of
the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment to be furnished by the Village Assessor's office
and shall be filed in the Assessor's office on or before January 1 of each year.
§ 268-19. Notice to applicants.
On or before November 1 of each year, the Village Assessor's shall mail
to each person who was granted exemption pursuant to this article on
the latest completed assessment roll an application form and a notice that
such application must be filed on or before the taxable status date and be
approved in order for the exemption to be granted. The assessing authority
shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the tentative
assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included with his or
her other application at least one self-addressed prepaid envelope, of the
approval or denial of the application; provided, however, that the assessing
authority shall, upon the receipt and filing of the application, send by
mail notification of receipt to any applicant who has included two of such
envelopes with the application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of
denial pursuant to this section, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by
of ownership of the former property shall be combined with the period
of ownership of the property for which application is made for
exemption and such periods of ownership shall be deemed to be
consecutive for purposes of this Section. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, where a residence is sold and replaced with another
within one year and both residences are within the state, the period of
ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for purposes
of the exemption from taxation as provided in this article. [Amended
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
D. Unless the property is the legal residence of and is occupied in whole or
in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
§ 268-16 TAXATION § 268-19
268:291
the State Board of Equalization and Assessment and shall state the reasons
for such denial and shall further state that the applicant may have such
determination reviewed in the manner provided by law. Failure to mail any
such application form and notice or the failure of such person to receive the
same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment
of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 268-20. Penalties for offenses; forfeiture.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 268-19 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-20
268:292
ARTICLE III
Senior Citizen Housing Tax Abatement
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 82 of the 1981 Code]
§ 268-21. Definitions. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings provided in § 467-b,
Subdivision 1, of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 268-22. Tax abatement.
Subject to the provisions of § 268-23 of this article, Village taxes on real
property shall be partially abated when the owner thereof has renewed the
lease for a senior citizen apartment for a period of not less than a year at a
rent less than that currently charged for similar apartments.
§ 268-23. Conditions.
§ 268-24. Effective date.
This article shall have effect as to Village taxes on real property
commencing with the Village fiscal year beginning July 1, 1976, and in
respect of leases entered into after the enactment of this article.
§ 268-25. Application for tax rebate; penalties for offenses.
A. No tax abatement shall be granted in respect of a senior citizen
apartment whose household income exceeded $8,000.
B. No tax abatement shall be granted in respect of a senior citizen
apartment any resident of which has during the previous five years
divested himself or herself by a gift of real or personal property in the
aggregate of more than $5,000 or by transfer of real or personal
property valued in the aggregate at $5,000 in excess of the value of the
consideration for transfer.
C. Any tax abatement shall be measured by the amount by which an
increase to the rent currently charged in lease renewals for similar
apartments would have resulted in a senior citizen apartment rent
greater than 1/3 the household income of the senior citizen apartment,
provided that if on the effective date of this article the senior citizen
apartment rent was greater than said 1/3, the base for calculating the
tax abatement shall be such existing senior citizen apartment rent.
D. No tax abatement in respect of a senior citizen apartment shall be
greater than that percentage of the Village tax on the entire property
which the number of rooms in said apartment bears to the total number
of rooms in the dwelling units on the property.
§ 268-21 TAXATION § 268-25
268:293
A. Applications for tax rebate pursuant to this article shall be filed with the
Village Clerk annually within six months of the close of the Village fiscal
year for which abatement is sought.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by affidavits of a tenant of the
senior citizen apartment and of the building owner, or an officer thereof
if a corporation, in form to be prescribed by the Village Clerk.
C. The Village Clerk may require any applicant to furnish such other and
further information, by affidavit or otherwise, as may be necessary for
him or her to establish the qualification for tax abatement of such
applicant. He or she may establish such rules and procedures as may be
necessary to implement the provisions of this article.
D. The making of a willful false statement in such application shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 and may, in the discretion of
the Board of Trustees, disqualify the applicant from tax abatement, in
whole or in,part, under this article.
§ 268-25 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-25
268:294
ARTICLE IV
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 83 of the 1981 Code]
§ 268-26. Reduction of percentage of exemption.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real
Property Tax Law, the percentage of exemption provided for each of the 10
years referred to in Subdivision 2(a) of said section is hereby reduced to 0%.
§ 268-26 TAXATION § 268-26
268:295

ARTICLE V
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-9-1981 as Ch. 9 of the 1981 Code]
§ 268-27. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Bronxville
Alternative Veterans Exemption Law."
§ 268-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant an alternative veterans exemption but
to reduce the maximum veterans exemption pursuant to § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law.
§ 268-29. Maximum veterans exemption in the Village of Bronxville.
[Amended 2-8-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 2(d)(ii) of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the maximum veterans
exemption from real property taxes allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law is established as follows:
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $12,000 or
the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the Village of Bronxville.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subdivision A of this section,
where the veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall
be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the lesser of $8,000 or the product of $8,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the Village of Bronxville.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subdivisions A and B of this
Section, where the veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veteran's Administration or from the United States
Department of Defense because of a service connected disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property multiplied
by 50% of the veteran's disability rate; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $40,000 or the product of
$40,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of
Bronxville.
§ 268-27 TAXATION § 268-30
268:297
§ 268-30. Extension of exemption to cooperative apartment
corporations. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
Effective January 1, 1998, the benefits of § 458, new Subdivision 8, of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law as amended by the New York State
Legislature in Chapter 171 of 1997 are hereby extended to veterans who
are resident tenant-stockholders of cooperative apartment corporations in
the Village of Bronxville.
§ 268-30 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-30
268:298
ARTICLE VI
Property Tax Collection
[Adopted 8-1-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
§ 268-31. Statutory authorization.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by
a chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A, the Village of Bronxville hereby acts by local law, not subject to
referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue
to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law,
as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 268-32. Filing of copies.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 268-33. When effective.
This article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the laws of
1994 takes effect proposed in legislative bill number S. 8560-A, except that
if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this article, this article
shall take effect immediately.
§ 268-31 TAXATION § 268-33
268:299

ARTICLE VII
Eligible Funds Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-19-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
§ 268-34. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Bronxville
Eligible Funds Veterans Exemption Law."
§ 268-35. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize a change in the amount of the
eligible funds exemption granted to veterans in the event of a material
change in the level of assessment as authorized by Subdivision 5 of § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 268-36. Exemption conditions.
A. Change in level of assessment.
(1) In the event that the total assessed value of any real property for
which an exemption prescribed in Subdivision 1 or 2 of § 458 of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law has been granted increases
or decreases as the result of a revaluation or update of
assessments, and a material change in level of assessment, as
provided in Title 2 of Article 12 of the Real Property Tax Law, is
certified for the assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the State
Board of Equalization and Assessment, the Assessor of the Village
of Bronxville shall increase or decrease the amount of such
exemption by multiplying the amount of such exemption by such
change in level of assessment.
(2) If the Assessor receives the certification after the completion,
verification and filing of the final assessment roll, the Assessor shall
certify the amount of exemption as recomputed pursuant to this
subsection to the local officers having custody and control of the
roll, and such local officers are hereby directed and authorized to
enter the recomputed exemption certified by the Assessor on the
roll.
B. Owners of real property who previously received an exemption
pursuant to § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law, but who opted instead
to receive an exemption pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law, may again receive an exemption pursuant to § 458 of the Real
Property Tax Law upon application by the owner within one year of the
adoption of this article. The Assessor shall recompute all exemptions
granted pursuant to this section by multiplying the amount of each such
exemption by the cumulative change in level of assessment certified by
the State Board of Real Property Services measured from the
assessment roll immediately preceding the assessment roll on which
exemptions were first granted pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property
§ 268-34 TAXATION § 268-36
268:301
§ 268-37. Conflict with other provisions; when effective.
Tax Law; provided, however, that if an exemption pursuant to this
section was initially granted to a parcel on a later assessment roll,
the cumulative change in level factor to be used in recomputing that
exemption shall be measured from the assessment roll immediately
preceding the assessment roll on which that exemption was initially
granted. No refunds or retroactive entitlements shall be granted.
C. In the event that a veteran who has received an exemption under this
article shall become entitled to any additional eligible funds, such
veteran shall be granted a recompute exemption in lieu of the
exemption otherwise authorized by § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law.
Such recompute exemption may be granted on any assessment roll filed
in or after calendar year 2007. For purposes of this subsection, a
"recompute exemption" means the sum of the original exemption and
any additional eligible funds received multiplied by the change in level
of assessment from the assessment roll in the year the exemption was
originally granted.
A. Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other local law, the provisions of this article shall be
controlling.
B. This article shall take effect immediately and shall be applied
commencing with the 2007 assessment roll.
§ 268-36 BRONXVILLE CODE § 268-37
268:302
Chapter 274
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
§ 268-37 TAXICABS § 268-37
274:303

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 274-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxicab Law of the
Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 274-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LIMOUSINE or PRIVATE HIRE VEHICLE — A taxicab which operates for
the purpose of carrying passengers on trips of which 90% or more each
month are to or from destinations more than four miles from the Bronxville
railroad station or are short runs of a ceremonial nature such as weddings
or funerals. 31
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the use or business of carrying
passengers for hire or for rental, not operating on a fixed route, registered
with the New York State Bureau of Motor Vehicles with taxi, livery or
limousine (Z) license plates, to an address within the village or operating
from a location or dispatcher's office within the village.
31.Editor's Note: The definition of "TAXI," as amended 12-13-1982 by L.L. No. 8-1982, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000.
§ 274-1 TAXICABS § 274-2
274:305

ARTICLE II
Taxicab Licenses
§ 274-3. Taxicab license required.
No person shall operate or drive a taxicab unless such vehicle shall have in
force and effect a taxicab license issued under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 274-4. Application for taxicab license.
Application for a taxicab license shall be made by the operator upon a form
supplied by the Chief of Police and containing such information as the Chief
of Police shall require.
§ 274-5. Capacity, color, inspection and insurance of licensed
taxicabs.
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab unless:
§ 274-6. Issuance of taxicab license.
Upon satisfactory inspection, approval of the application, and the payment
of the license fee prescribed in § 274-7, a taxicab shall be licensed by
delivering to the operator a card of such size and form as may be prescribed
by the Chief of Police. Such license card shall be signed by the licensing
officer [Note: The Mayor is the licensing officer unless he or she designates
another village official in writing as the licensing officer. In the Village of
Bronxville, the Mayor has designated the Village Clerk as the licensing
officer.] A taxicab license shall be nontransferable and the holder of a
taxicab license shall immediately surrender it without rebate of the fee paid
therefor in the event he or she shall cease to be the operator of the taxicab
to which the license relates.
§ 274-7. License fee. [Amended 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
For each taxicab license, the applicant shall pay to the Village Treasurer a
fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A. It is a four-door sedan having a comfortable seating capacity of not
fewer than five persons nor more than nine persons. [Amended
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
B. The exterior of the vehicle is painted a color approved by the licensing
officer. [Amended 5-6-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
C. The vehicle shall have been thoroughly inspected by an employee of the
village or by a qualified mechanic designated by the Chief of Police and
found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, clean and of good appearance. Any expense incurred in
connection with an inspection required by this section shall be paid by
the operator of the vehicle inspected.
§ 274-3 TAXICABS § 274-8
274:307
§ 274-8. Term of license.
A taxicab license shall expire on the next succeeding 31st day of May
following the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked prior to such
date.
§ 274-9. Display of license; state license plate.
No taxicab shall be operated unless the taxicab license is conspicuously
displayed in an illuminated holder in the interior of the taxicab clearly
visible to all passengers. The license shall not be defaced or obliterated.
Should the state license plate number of a taxicab be changed during the
life of the taxicab license, such change and number shall be immediately
reported in writing by the licensee to the Chief of Police.
§ 274-10. Determination of number to be issued and to whom.
The Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, and after a public hearing,
determine by resolution the number of taxicabs needed to provide safe
and adequate service with a reasonable rate of return to operators on
their investment and reasonable compensation to taxicab drivers. In the
event that the number of applications for taxicab licenses shall exceed
the number of taxicabs so determined, the licensing officer shall, after a
public hearing, determine which applications shall be granted and which
applications shall be denied. Such determination shall be made on the basis
of the showing made by each applicant of his or her fitness, willingness
and ability properly to perform the service proposed and to conform to the
requirements imposed by this chapter.
§ 274-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 274-10
274:308
ARTICLE III
Taxicab Drivers' Licenses
§ 274-11. Taxicab driver's license required.
No person shall drive a licensed taxicab and no operator shall permit a
person to drive a taxicab operated by him or her unless the driver shall have
first obtained and shall have in force and effect a taxicab driver's license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 274-12. Taxicab driver's qualifications.
Each applicant for an original taxicab driver's license shall:
§ 274-13. Application for taxicab driver's license.
A. Be of the age of 20 years or over and a citizen or permanent resident of
the United States.
B. Furnish a physician's certificate of recent date certifying that the
applicant is of sound physical condition and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him or her unfit for the operation of a taxicab.
C. Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
D. Be fingerprinted.
E. Not be addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
F. Produce, on forms to be provided by the Chief of Police, affidavits of his
or her good character from three persons who have known him or her
personally and observed his or her conduct during one year next
preceding the date of his or her application, and a further testimonial,
on a form provided for that purpose, from his or her last employer
unless, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, sufficient reason is given for
its omission.
G. Hold a New York State Class A, B, C or E driver's license. [Amended
6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
H. Not have a record of violations of motor vehicle laws and ordinances
demonstrating that he or she may be an unsafe driver.
I. Not have been convicted of a felony.
A. Information required. Application for a taxicab driver's license shall be
filed with the Chief of Police and shall be accompanied by the required
license fee. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Chief of
Police and must be sworn to before a notary public and must contain the
following information concerning the applicant:
§ 274-11 TAXICABS § 274-13
274:309
§ 274-14. Knowledge of taxicab requirements and Village
geography.
Each applicant shall be examined by a person designated by the Chief
of Police as to his or her knowledge of the provisions of this chapter
and the geography of the village, and if the result of the examination is
unsatisfactory, he or she shall be refused a license.
§ 274-15. Photograph to be filed with application.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his or her
application three unmounted, unretouched photographs of his or her face,
taken within the 30 days preceding the filing of his or her application.
Photographs shall be of a size which may be easily attached to the license,
one of which shall be attached to the license when issued and the others
shall be filed with the application. The photograph shall be so attached to
the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted
without detection.
§ 274-16. Issuance; reissuance of license after revocation.
Upon the report of the Chief of Police of satisfaction by an applicant of the
requirements of §§ 274-12 through 274-15, and confirmation thereof by the
licensing officer, a license shall be issued to such applicant by the licensing
officer. A driver whose license has been revoked by the village shall be again
licensed only for reasons approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) His or her name, present residence and all other residences for the
preceding five years.
(2) Age, color, height, color of eyes and hair.
(3) Place of birth.
(4) Whether a citizen or permanent resident of the United States.
(5) Employments during the preceding five years.
(6) A list of all violations of motor vehicle laws and ordinances (other
than violations involving only parking) of which the applicant has
been convicted or on account of which he or she has forfeited bond
or collateral during the preceding 24 months.
(7) Whether such violations occurred in this state or elsewhere.
(8) Whether he or she has ever been convicted of a crime, together
with such other information as the Chief of Police may require.
B. Fingerprinting of applicant. The Chief of Police or his or her designees
shall take fingerprints of the applicant and shall forward such
fingerprints to the Division of Criminal Justice Services of the State of
New York for processing and return of a criminal history record, if any.
§ 274-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 274-17
274:310
§ 274-17. Form; numbering; defacing; display of license.
The form of a taxicab driver's license shall be prescribed by the Chief of
Police and shall contain a photograph and signature of the licensee, and
blank spaces upon which a record may be made of any arrest or of serious
complaint against him or her. Each license shall be stamped with the seal
of the village upon at least a portion of the photograph. All licenses shall
be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall contain the
name of the licensee and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license.
Any official entry made upon the license shall not be defaced, removed or
obliterated. No taxicab shall be operated unless the license of the driver
is conspicuously displayed in an illuminated holder in the interior of the
taxicab clearly visible to all passengers.
§ 274-18. Term of license.
A taxicab driver's license shall expire on the next succeeding 31st day of
May following the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked prior to
such date.
§ 274-19. Renewal.
The licensing officer, upon the report of the Chief of Police of satisfaction
by an applicant of the requirements of Subdivisions B, E, G, H and I of
§ 274-12 (except that a physician's certificate shall not be required if the
last certificate is dated less than three years prior to the date of the renewal
application) and payment of the fee prescribed for renewal, may renew
a taxicab driver's license from year to year by appropriate endorsement
thereon, if the license has not been suspended or revoked and has not
expired by limitation, and if the licensee has been in continuous service in
the village. A driver, in applying for a renewal of his or her license, shall
make such application not less than 30 days next preceding its expiration,
upon a form to be supplied by the Chief of Police, and containing such
information as he or she may require, including a list of all violations of
motor vehicle laws and ordinances (other than violations involving only
parking) of which the applicant has been convicted or on account of which
he or she has forfeited bond or collateral during the preceding 12 months,
whether such violations occurred in this state or elsewhere.
§ 274-20. Taxicab driver's license fees. [Amended 6-1-1987 by L.L.
No. 4-1987; 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
A. For a taxicab driver's license issued to a driver not previously licensed
by the village, whether for one year or portion thereof, the license fee
shall be as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. For a renewal of a taxicab driver's license, the renewal fee shall be as
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. For reissuing a license lost or destroyed, the fee shall be as established
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 274-17 TAXICABS § 274-20
274:311

ARTICLE IV
Appeals; Suspension and Revocations; Specific Regulations
§ 274-21. Appeal to Board of Trustees upon refusal to issue.
Upon refusal to grant a taxicab license or a taxicab driver's license or
renewal thereof, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Trustees by filing
a written notice of the appeal with the Village Clerk. The notice shall state
the date, general nature of the decision appealed from and the grounds of
appeal. The Board of Trustees shall hear such appeal at a regular meeting
or at a special meeting called for that purpose. The decision of the Board of
Trustees on appeal shall be final.
§ 274-22. Register of licenses to be kept.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all taxicab licenses and taxicab
driver's licenses and of the amount of fees paid therefor. The Chief of Police
shall cause to be kept in the office of the Police Department a register
of all licensed taxicabs and licensed drivers, showing the names of the
licensees, the license numbers, any suspension or revocation and such other
information as he or she may require. Such register shall be open to public
inspection.
§ 274-23. Suspension and revocation of licenses; public hearing.
In addition to such other sanctions as may be provided for with respect
to violations of this Code, a taxicab license or taxicab driver's license may
be suspended or revoked if the holder has failed to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or, with respect to a taxicab driver's license,
the holder does not meet the requirements of Subdivisions E, G, H and
I of § 274-12. If after a hearing, the Chief of Police shall report to the
licensing officer that the suspension or revocation of a taxicab license or
a taxicab driver's license is warranted, the licensing officer shall suspend
the license. The licensee shall be notified in writing of any such order and
shall immediately surrender his or her license without rebate of the fee paid
therefor. At the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor
shall report such suspension and the Board may revoke or continue the
license. At such meeting the licensee whose license has been suspended
shall be entitled to be heard if, at least three days prior to the meeting,
he or she shall have filed with the Village Clerk a written request for such
hearing.
§ 274-24. Reports required.
Each operator of a licensed taxicab shall cause a trip record to be made
showing the date, time, driver and the pickup and destination points of each
trip made in the taxicab. Such records shall be maintained by the operator
for a period of not less than two years and shall be made available for
inspection by the Chief of Police upon request.
§ 274-21 TAXICABS § 274-25
274:313
§ 274-25. Fares established. [Amended 5-6-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982;
2-14-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 12-10-1984 by L.L. No. 8-1984;
2-10-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986; 6-1-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987;
10-9-1989 by L.L. No. 11-1989; 11-13-1990 by L.L. No. 16-1990]
§ 274-26. Reasonable service required. [Amended 6-11-1984 by L.L.
No. 4-1984]
It shall be the duty of taxicabs licensed hereunder to provide and furnish
taxicab service upon reasonable request therefor and to provide and furnish
such service in a manner which in all respects is safe, adequate and
reasonable. Without limitation on the foregoing requirements, the applicant
for a taxi license or for more than one license, shall submit with his
application a proposed schedule of operations setting forth the manner and
times when his vehicle or fleet of vehicles will be available for public use.
Failure to observe and conform to the schedule provided and established by
the license holder shall be cause for revocation of such license or licenses
by the licensing officer as provided in § 274-23.
§ 274-27. Taxicabs to be attended in taxicab stands and in good
condition.
No operator or driver of a taxicab licensed hereunder shall permit the
taxicab to occupy a taxicab stand in the village unless:
A. The taxi fare for a continuous trip within the village limits shall not
exceed $4.50 per person for service between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.; nor more than $5.50 for service between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.; $1 for each additional passenger in the same party;
children the age of four years or under, when accompanied by an adult,
shall be carried free; taxi fare for senior citizens between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. shall be $2.75. [Amended 12-11-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006]
B. In addition to the above there shall be a surcharge of $1 on each of the
above fares for service rendered on major holidays. For the purposes of
this subsection, major holidays is defined as New Year's Day, Easter,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas.
C. The rate schedule for taxicab fares for trips and service shall be carried
in each vehicle and provided for inspection by any passenger
requesting it for review.32
A. The driver thereof is in attendance thereon ready to accept and
transport passengers; and
32.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, which designated the increase in the fares set forth
in Subdivision A as a temporary increase, and which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000.
§ 274-25 BRONXVILLE CODE § 274-27
274:314
§ 274-28. Driver conduct.
No driver shall:
§ 274-29. Improper use of license prohibited.
No person shall display or attempt to use:
B. The taxicab is in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, and is clean and of good appearance. Failure to comply
with this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of both the
taxicab license and the taxicab driver's license.
A. Without justifiable grounds, refuse to take any passenger or
prospective passenger to any destination within the village.
B. Charge or attempt to charge a rate of fare above the approved rates
except for a trip beyond the village limits.
C. Without justifiable grounds, prefer any passenger or prospective
passenger going to a destination outside the village over a passenger or
prospective passenger going to a destination within the village.
A. A taxicab license or taxicab driver's license which has been suspended
or revoked; or
B. A taxicab license with respect to a vehicle other than the one to which
the license applies; or
C. A taxicab driver's license which was not issued to him or her.
§ 274-27 TAXICABS § 274-29
274:315

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 274-30. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 274-30 TAXICABS § 274-30
274:317
Chapter 282
TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS
§ 282-1. Damaging trees, shrubs and plants on public property
prohibited.
No person except an authorized employee of the village or contractor for
the village shall:
§ 282-2. Dutch elm disease.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 169 of the New York Agriculture and Markets
Law, the village shall exercise and enjoy, through its appropriate officers
and employees, the powers and immunities prescribed and granted in
§§ 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of the New York Agriculture and Markets
Law with respect to Dutch elm disease.
§ 282-3. Dangerous or obstructive trees, shrubs and plants.
Every owner, tenant, occupant and leaseholder shall keep all trees, shrubs
and plants on his or her land so trimmed and in such a condition as not to
interfere with or obstruct the vision (at an intersection or otherwise) or in
any way endanger the safety of persons using any public street, sidewalk or
other public place. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any tree
limb overhanging a public sidewalk shall be at least eight feet above any
part thereof and any tree limb overhanging a public street shall be at least
13 feet above any part thereof.
A. Fertilize, spray, fill a cavity in, prune, remove, cut, trim, injure (whether
to make a clear passage for utility wires or for any other purpose), climb
with aid of spurs, attach a guide wire or cable to, or scar or drive a nail
into the trunk or any limb of, or attach any sign to, or otherwise in any
like or unlike way interfere with any tree, shrub or plant on any public
street, sidewalk or other public place; or
B. Build a fire near any such tree, shrub or plant or pour or deposit on the
soil near any such tree, shrub or plant any substance injurious to
vegetation, including, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, tar, creosote or
salt; unless
(1) Prior permission therefor shall have been obtained in writing from
the Superintendent of Public Works; and
(2) Any work so permitted is performed at the cost of the person
desiring it.
§ 274-30 BRONXVILLE CODE § 282-4
282:318
§ 282-4. Trees, shrubs and plants infected with injurious insects
prohibited.
Every owner, tenant, occupant and leaseholder shall keep all trees, shrubs
and plants on his or her land free from any insects which:
§ 282-5. Authority of Superintendent of Public Works to inspect.
The Superintendent of Public Works, or a person or persons designated
by him or her, may enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
inspecting trees, shrubs and plants located thereon in order to determine
whether any violation of § 282-3 or 282-4 exists.
§ 282-6. Authority of village upon failure of owner to correct
violation.
§ 282-7. Assessment of costs.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall keep an accurate record of the
cost to the village of correcting a violation of § 282-3 or 282-4 pursuant
to § 282-6 and shall certify the amount of such cost to the Village Clerk.
Upon receipt of such certification, the Village Clerk shall cause a statement
of such cost to be mailed to the owner of the land upon which such
violation has been corrected in the same manner as is provided in § 282-6,
whereupon the amount of such cost shall be assessed upon such land.
A. Cause or tend to cause any disease, destruction or damage to such
trees, shrubs or plants, whether by devouring or injuring the bark or
foliage thereof or otherwise; and
B. May spread, directly or indirectly, by passing from such trees, shrubs or
plants to any tree, shrub or plant on any public street, sidewalk or other
public place, provided that this section shall not apply to insects which
cause the spread of Dutch elm disease.
A. In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, if any owner, tenant,
occupant or leaseholder shall fail, refuse or neglect to correct a
violation of § 282-3 or 282-4 within 15 days after receipt of a written
notice from the Superintendent of Public Works of the existence of such
violation, the Superintendent of Public Works, or a person or persons
designated by him or her, may enter upon the land of such owner,
tenant, occupant or leaseholder and take such measures as are
necessary or proper to correct such violation, including, when
appropriate, spraying, trimming or cutting down any tree, shrub or
plant located thereon.
B. Service of the written notice provided for by this section shall be
adequate and complete upon mailing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the land on which a violation of § 282-3 or
282-4 exists at his or her address as listed on the village tax roll.
§ 282-4 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 282-8
282:319
§ 282-8. Penalties for offenses.33
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 290
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
33.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 282-8
282:320
Part 1
[Adopted 9T-r9a-ffi19c9 A1n Bdy V Le.hLi.c Nleos. 15-1991]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 290-1. Title, definitions. [Amended 4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
§ 290-2. Purpose and authority.
§ 290-3. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works under the direction of the Chief of
Police shall install and maintain traffic control devices when and as required
under the provisions of this chapter and traffic orders enacted by the Board
of Trustees to make effective the provisions of this chapter and traffic
orders and shall install and maintain such additional traffic control devices
as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Traffic and
Vehicle Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York” or the “Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the Village of Bronxville, New York.”
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EXPIRED METER PARKING — The parking of a vehicle in any metered
parking space beyond the parking time limits imposed by this chapter.
METERED PARKING SPACE — Any parking space for which payment
to a parking meter, multispace parking machine, or mobile payment
system is required pursuant to this chapter.[Amended 4-11-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
OVERTIME PARKING — The parking of a vehicle in any non-metered
parking space beyond the parking time limits imposed by § 290-29 of
this chapter.
PARKING METER — Any device for which payment to park in a metered
parking space is allowed pursuant to this chapter, including but not
limited to traditional parking meters, multispace parking machines, or
mobile payment systems.[Added 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Board of
Trustees to enact traffic regulations by resolution, thereby simplifying
the procedure to enact such regulations.
B. Authorization to enact traffic regulations by resolution. Pursuant to
Article 39, §§ 1640, 1640-a, 1641, 1643 and 1644 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, the Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to enact traffic
regulations by resolution for any and all of the purposes enumerated in
said sections of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 290-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-3
282:321
traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to
provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 290-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-3
282:322
ARTICLE II
Traffic Violations Bureau
§ 290-4. Bureau established.
Pursuant to Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law, the Village Court,
hereinafter referred to as "the Court," is authorized to establish a Traffic
Violations Bureau, hereinafter referred to as "the Bureau," to assist the
Court in the disposition of traffic violations specified in § 290-5. The Court
is further authorized to designate the person or persons to be in charge of
such Bureau and to designate the hours during which the Bureau will be
opened for the disposition of offenses.
§ 290-5. Bureau authorized to dispose of certain violations without
Court appearance.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is authorized to dispose of violations of those
traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations not constituting:
§ 290-6. Records; additional duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of which
each person has been found guilty, whether such guilt was established in
Court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected and the
disposition thereof. The Bureau shall also perform such other additional
duties and keep such other or additional records as shall be prescribed by
the Court.
§ 290-7. Procedure for disposing of minor traffic violations.
Any person charged with a traffic violation, other than those exempted
in § 290-5, may answer within the time specified either in person or by
written power of attorney, either by pleading not guilty in which case a
date for a hearing in the Court will be set by the Bureau, by paying a fine
designated by the Village Court and, in writing, waiving a hearing in Court,
pleading guilty to the charges and authorizing the person in charge of the
Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in Court. Acceptance of
the power of attorney and fine by the Bureau shall be deemed complete
satisfaction for the violation and a receipt so stating shall be given to the
violator. If a person charged with such a traffic violation does not answer as
hereinbefore prescribed within a designated time, the Bureau shall cause
a complaint to be entered against him or her forthwith and a warrant to
be issued for his or her arrest and his or her appearance before the Court.
Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of such number as may be
A. The traffic infraction known as speeding.
B. A misdemeanor.
C. A felony.
§ 290-4 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-7
282:323
designated by the Court, or of three or more violations other than parking
violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent
violation at the Bureau, but shall appear in Court at a time specified by
the Bureau. The Bureau is not authorized to deprive a person of his or her
right to counsel, or to prevent him or her from exercising his or her right
to appear in Court to answer, explain or defend any charge of a violation of
any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 290-8. Designation of fines.
The Village Court is authorized to designate the fines to be paid for the
traffic violations set forth in § 290-5, which fines may be satisfied at the
Traffic Violations Bureau in the manner hereinbefore stated, provided that
such fines shall not exceed the limits established as penalties for such
offenses. The Court is authorized to designate the period or periods of time
within which a person charged with any offense may appear.
§ 290-7 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-8
282:324
ARTICLE III
Parades and Motor Vehicle Noise Levels
§ 290-9. Parades and assemblies.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARADE — Any march, procession or other similar activity consisting
of persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a
common purpose, design, destination or goal, upon any public street,
sidewalk, park, alley or other public place, which does not comply with
normal and usual traffic regulation or control.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A gathering of persons in one place which is
reasonably anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of traffic upon a
village street.
SIDEWALK — Any area or way set aside or open to the general public
for pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
STREET — Any public street, roadway or highway within the Village of
Bronxville.
B. Permit.
(1) No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade or public assembly, unless a permit shall have first been
obtained from the Village Administrator, or other village official
designated by him to act in his stead under the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or
public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been
granted.
(3) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
(a) Funeral processions.
(b) Wedding processions.
(c) Students going to and from classes or students participating in
educational activities, provided that such educational activities
are under the immediate direction and supervision of the
proper school authorities.
(d) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
C. Application.
(1) A person seeking the issuance of a permit under this chapter shall
file with the Village Administrator an application during the normal
business hours of the village. An application for a permit shall be
filed with the Village Administrator not less than seven business
§ 290-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-9
282:325
days nor more than six months before the date upon which the
parade and/or public assembly is proposed to be conducted.
(2) The Village Administrator, where good cause is shown therefor,
may consider any application which is filed less than seven
business days before such parade or public assembly is proposed to
be conducted. Good cause may include, but not be limited to,
spontaneous parades or public assemblies in response to recent
events, without consideration given to the message to be
disseminated by any parade or public assembly.
D. Contents. The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall
set forth the following information, which must be updated by the
applicant as circumstances change:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade or public assembly.
(2) If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone
number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the
authorized and responsible heads of the organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade or public assembly chairperson and who will be
responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade or public assembly is to be conducted;
(5) The proposed route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and the animals and
vehicles which, will constitute the parade or public assembly; the
type of animals, and the description of the vehicles, including a
description of any sound amplification equipment to be used.
(7) The starting and ending times for the parade or public assembly.
(8) The location of any assembly and disbanding areas for the parade
or public assembly.
(9) The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin
to assemble at the assembly areas.
(10) If the parade or public assembly is to be conducted by, and on
behalf of or for, any person or organization other than the
applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the Village
Administrator a communication in writing from such person or
organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit.
§ 290-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-9
282:326
(11) Whether or not there will be marshals or other persons, however
designated, charged with arrangement or regulation of the parade
or public assembly and, if so, their duties and identification.
(12) What portions of the streets to be traversed are proposed to be
occupied by the parade or public assembly.
(13) The approximate number of spectators.
(14) A description of any public facilities to be utilized.
E. Action on application. The village shall act upon the application for a
permit within three business days after the filing thereof.
F. Issuance of permit.
(1) The Village Administrator shall issue a permit as provided for
under this section when, from a consideration of the application
and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he
finds that:
(a) Either the conduct of the parade or public assembly will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, contiguous to its route
or areas of assembly, or, if the activity will substantially
interfere with such traffic, there are available at the time of the
proposed activity sufficient Village resources to mitigate the
disruption.
(b) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require
the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the
Village to properly police the areas affected thereby as to
prevent normal police protection to the rest of the village.
(c) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require
the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent
normal ambulance service to portions of the village other than
areas affected thereby.
(d) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to the assembly areas.
(e) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not unduly
interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route
to a fire.
(f) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route.
§ 290-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-9
282:327
(g) The manner in which the parade or public assembly will be
conducted is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property.
(h) The route of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property.
(i) The location of the proposed public assembly is not reasonably
likely to cause injury to persons or property.
(j) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not interfere
or conflict with any other parade or public assembly for which
a permit has been issued.
(k) No other parade or public assembly permit has been granted,
or is under consideration, for any portion of the time sought by
the applicant.
(l) The parade or public assembly will not commence and/or
terminate after sunset.
(m) The parade or public assembly is not to be held for the sole
purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not
designed to be held purely for private profit.
(n) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or
will be available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas.
(o) There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade
or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles
reasonably expected.
(2) No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or
placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a
village street, property, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance
approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained
from the Village Board.
(3) The Village Administrator shall uniformly consider each application
on the merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying
permits under this section based on political, religious, ethnic,
race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds.
G. Contents of the parade or public assembly permit. Each parade or
public assembly permit shall state the following information:
(1) The starting and ending times for the parade or public assembly.
(2) What portions of the streets to be traversed may be occupied by the
parade or public assembly.
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds of vehicles participating
therein.
§ 290-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-9
282:328
(4) The assembly areas and the disbanding areas, and the times for
each.
(5) That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from
amplification equipment be fixed and not variable.
(6) That the permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or
public assembly, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and
conditions of the permit, prior to the commencement of the parade
or public assembly.
(7) The maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade
units.
(8) Any other information that the Chief of Police shall find reasonably
necessary for the protection of persons or property.
H. Alternate permit.
(1) The Village Administrator, upon denying an application for a
parade or public assembly permit, shall notify the applicant of the
Village Administrator's willingness to issue a permit for the
conduct of a parade or public assembly as the case may be on a
date, at a time, or over a route different from that requested by the
applicant. Such an alternative permit shall, to the extent
practicable, authorize a parade or public assembly, as the case may
be, that will have comparable public visibility and a similar route
and location to those proposed in such application. An applicant
desiring to accept such an alternative permit shall, within three
business days after the giving of such notice by the Village
Administrator, file a written notice of acceptance with the Village
Administrator. Such an alternative parade or public assembly
permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the
effect of, a parade or public assembly permit under this section.
(2) The Village Administrator is empowered to limit a parade or public
assembly to a sidewalk or sidewalks or to one or more traffic lanes
of a street or streets where it is determined that such limited area
is capable of accommodating the number of people anticipated
based upon the information submitted by the applicant and the
experience of comparable events. In the event that the number of
persons in attendance exceeds the anticipated number, the Chief of
Police is authorized to make reasonable accommodation to increase
the portion of the street or streets made available in order to
preserve public health and safety.
I. Compliance by permittee. A permittee shall comply with all permit
directions and conditions, all application commitments and with all
applicable laws and local laws. The parade or public assembly
chairperson or the chairperson's designee shall carry the parade or
public assembly permit on his person during such event.
§ 290-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-9
282:329
J. Appeal procedure.
(1) Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of a parade or public
assembly application, including the denial of a late application
under § 290-9C, or of a condition that the applicant deems
unreasonable, shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board.
Notice of appeal shall be filed by the applicant in writing with the
Village Administrator within two business days of the notice of
denial. The Village Board shall act upon the appeal at the next
regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of
appeal.
(2) In the event that the Village Board rejects an applicant's appeal,
the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court
of competent jurisdiction.
K. Revocation of permit. The village shall have the authority to revoke a
parade or public assembly permit issued pursuant to this section upon
violation of the standards for issuance of the permit as herein set forth,
or when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency,
the Village Administrator determines that the safety of the public or
property requires revocation. Notice of the revocation shall be
delivered in writing to the permittee in person or by certified mail.
L. Public conduct during authorized parades and public assemblies.
(1) Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or
impede, or interfere with any authorized parade or public assembly
or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such
parade or public assembly.
(2) Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising an authorized parade when the
vehicles or persons are in motion and are clearly participating in
the parade, unless specifically authorized to do so by a law
enforcement officer.
(3) Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the
parking of vehicles along a village street or part thereof. The Chief
of Police shall post "no parking" signs, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.
M. Obstructing streets by assembling. Any person or organization violating
any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment of not more than one year, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 290-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-9
282:330
§ 290-10. Motor vehicle noise levels.
N. Police protection. The Chief of Police shall determine whether and to
what extent additional police protection is reasonably necessary for an
authorized parade or public assembly for traffic control and public
safety. The Chief of Police shall base this decision on the size, location,
duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale or service of
alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked,
and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets
and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in
determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible,
without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public
safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If
additional police protection for the parade or public assembly is
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, he shall so inform the
applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the obligation to
pay in advance the cost of the additional police protection deemed
necessary by the Chief of Police.
O. Indemnification/insurance. Each applicant shall execute a hold
harmless/indemnification agreement, in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney, indemnifying and holding harmless the Village, its
trustees, officers and employees from any and all liability arising or
resulting from the issuance of a permit hereunder or any actions, active
or passive, taken by the applicant or any participants in the parade or
public assembly. If an applicant or the person or organization for or on
behalf of or by whom the authorized parade or public assembly is to be
held maintains an insurance policy in its customary and usual course of
business, it shall obtain and submit proof of insurance in the form of a
certificate of insurance showing that the Village is a named insured.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY MOTOR VEHICLE — Every ambulance,
police vehicle, fire vehicle, civil defense emergency vehicle, and
emergency ambulance service vehicle.
A-WEIGHTED DECIBEL (dba) — The sound pressure level measured
by the use of an instrument with the metering characteristics and Aweighting
frequency response prescribed for sound level meters.
DECIBEL — The sound pressure level which is twenty times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the root mean squared pressure
of a sound to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals.
LEQ NOISE LEVEL — The level of a constant noise source measured
in A-weighted decibels (dba) at a distance of 50 feet from the center
of the lane in which a motor vehicle is traveling which has an amount
of acoustic energy equivalent to that contained in the measured time
varying noise for a given time interval.
§ 290-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-10
282:331
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated or driven upon a public
highway which is propelled by any power other than muscular power,
except electrically driven invalid chairs being operated or driven by an
invalid, vehicles which run only upon rails or tracks, snowmobiles and
vehicles owned or operated by the Village of Bronxville.
PEAK NOISE LEVEL — The maximum instantaneous sound pressure
level measured in A-weighted decibels (dba) generated by a motor
vehicle.
PERSON — Includes not only human beings but, where appropriate,
public or private corporations, unincorporated associations or
partnerships.
VILLAGE — The area located within the boundaries of the Incorporated
Village of Bronxville.
B. Noise generated by more than one motor vehicle. It shall be unlawful
for any person or persons to operate or cause to be operated on a public
highway within the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. (prevailing time) two or more motor vehicles owned or leased by
that person or those persons under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration or deceleration in such a manner so as to increase the LEQ
noise level of the section of the village through which those vehicles
pass by 10 or more A-weighted decibels (dba) over the LEQ noise level
that existed in that section of the village during the ten-minute period
immediately prior to their passage.
C. Noise generated by one motor vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to operate or cause to be operated on a public
highway within the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. (prevailing time) a motor vehicle under any condition of grade,
load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner so that the peak
noise level of the section of the village through which that vehicle
passes exceeds the LEQ noise level that existed in that section of the
village during the ten-minute period immediately prior to its passage by
20 or more A-weighted decibels (dba).
D. Liability for entities other than individuals. A public or private
corporation, an unincorporated association or a partnership shall be
guilty of violating Subdivisions B or C hereof where the conduct
constituting the offense is engaged in by an agent or an employee of
that entity while acting within the scope of the agency or employment
and in behalf of the entity.
E. Individual liability. Individuals shall be guilty of violating Subdivisions B
or C hereof even though the conduct constituting the offense was
performed by them in the name of a public or private corporation, an
unincorporated association or a partnership for which they act as
agents or by which they are employed to the same extent as if such
conduct was performed by them for their own behalf. In any
prosecution hereunder, it shall not be a defense that an individual's
§ 290-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-10
282:332
principal or employer was or could have been charged with the same
offense with which the individual is charged.
F. Exceptions. This article shall not apply to authorized emergency motor
vehicles or to omnibuses which either make scheduled stops within the
village for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or are
transporting passengers.
G. Penalties. A person found guilty of violating any section of this article
shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of § 290-11 of the
Village of Bronxville Code of 1981.
§ 290-10 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-10
282:333

ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 290-11. Penalties for violation of Chapter and traffic orders.
[Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter or traffic orders of the Board of Trustees which is not a
violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200
or by imprisonment of not more than 45 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months after
the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 290-11 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-11
282:335

Part 2
[TArdaoffipct eRde 9g-u9l-a1t9io9n1s]
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 290-12. Title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Traffic
Regulations of the Village of Bronxville, New York".
§ 290-13. Definitions of words and phrases.
A. The words and phrases used in these regulations shall for the purpose
of these regulations have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
by Article I of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article I of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them for purposes of these
regulations.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — Includes the first day of January, known as "New Year's
Day"; the last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"; the fourth day
of July, known as "Independence Day"; the first Monday in September,
known as "Labor Day"; the fourth Thursday in November, known as
"Thanksgiving Day"; and the 25th day of December, known as
"Christmas Day." If any of these holidays falls on a Sunday and is
celebrated on the following Monday, then such substitute day shall be
treated as a designated holiday.[Amended 3-3-1993]
MOBILE PAYMENT SYSTEM — A system through which customers
may use a mobile device to electronically pay to park their vehicles in
parking spaces designated by the Village.[Added 4-11-2016 by L.L.
No. 2-2016]
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PARKING METER ZONE — A designated location upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by parking meters, multispace
parking machines, mobile payment systems, or other devices as
authorized by the Village.[Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this village, not including highways, upon or within
which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking
meters or other devices.
§ 290-12 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-13
282:337

ARTICLE VI
Speed Limits
§ 290-14. Maximum speed limits within the village.
A. Thirty miles per hour. Except as provided in Subdivision B hereof, 30
miles per hour is hereby designated as the maximum speed limit at
which vehicles may proceed on highways within the village.
B. School speed limits. Twenty miles per hour is hereby designated as the
maximum school speed limit at which vehicles may proceed along
highways within the village within 300 feet of the school building lines
as follows:
(1) Pondfield Road from Meadow Avenue to Midland Avenue.
(2) Midland Avenue from Willow Circle to Pondfield Road.
(3) Meadow Avenue from Tanglewylde Avenue to Kraft Avenue.
(4) Kraft Avenue from Cedar Street to Midland Avenue.
(5) Midland Avenue north side from Pondfield Avenue to Kraft Avenue.
(6) Sagamore Road, north and south from Christ Episcopal Church
building. [Added 3-9-1992]
C. Twenty-five miles per hour. Twenty-five miles per hour is hereby
designated as the maximum speed limit at which vehicles may proceed
on Sagamore Road between Avon Road and Pondfield Road, except as
noted in Subsection B(6). [Added 4-20-1998]
§ 290-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-14
282:339

ARTICLE VII
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 290-15. Stop intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and
stop signs shall be maintained at entrances thereto as indicated:
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Archer Place Dusenberry Road Center of road
Argyle Place Pondfield Road On west corner
Argyle Place Pondfield Road On west corner
Avon Road Kensington Road On north corner
Avon Road Midland Avenue On northeast corner
Avon Road Midland Avenue On southwest corner
Avon Road Park Avenue On northeast corner
Avon Road Park Avenue On southwest corner
Beechwood Road
[Added
6-14-1993]
Masterton Road On northwest corner
Cedar Street
[Repealed
12-12-2011 by
L.L. No. 9-2011]
Cedar Street
[Repealed
12-12-2011 by
L.L. No. 9-2011]
Concordia Place White Plains Road On southwest corner
Concordia Place Tanglewylde Avenue On west corner
Courseview Road Fordal Road On northwest corner
Courseview Road Fordal Road On southeast corner
Courseview Road Pondfield Road On northwest corner
Crows Nest Road Midland Avenue On north corner
Crows Nest Road
[Added
12-13-1993]
Pondfield Road On southwest corner
DeWitt Avenue Parkway Road On north corner
DeWitt Avenue
[Added
10-9-2000]
Paxton Avenue On northwest corner
§ 290-15 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-15
282:341
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
DeWitt Avenue
[Added
10-9-2000]
Paxton Avenue On southeast corner
Dusenberry Road White Plains Road On north corner
Eastway [Added
2-10-2003]
Northway On southeast corner
Edgewood Lane Middle Road On southeast corner
Edgewood Lane Middle Road On northwest corner
Edgewood Lane North Road On southeast corner
Edgewood Lane North Road On northwest corner
Edgewood Lane
[Added
12-11-1995]
South Road On northwest corner
Elm Lane North Road On northwest corner
Elm Lane Middle Road On southeast corner
Elm Lane Middle Road On northwest corner
Elm Lane [Added
12-11-1995]
South Road On northwest corner
Elm Rock Road
[Added
6-14-1993]
Lee Place On southeast corner
Elm Rock Road Masterton Road On northeast corner
Elm Rock Road Masterton Road On southwest corner
Elm Rock Road
[Added
6-14-1993]
Oriole Avenue On northwest corner
Elm Rock Road White Plains Road On south corner
Fordal Road Courseview Road On southwest corner
Fordal Road Manor Road On northwestcorner
Fordal Road Manor Road On southwest corner
Forest Lane North Road On southeast corner
Forest Lane Middle Road On southeast corner
Forest Lane Middle Road On northwest corner
Fulling Avenue
[Added
6-8-1998]
McKinly Street On northwest corner
Fulling Avenue
[Added
6-8-1998]
McKinly Street On southeast corner
§ 290-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-15
282:342
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Garden Avenue Meadow Avenue On west corner
Garden Avenue Pondfield Road On north corner
Garden Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On northwest corner
Garden Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On southeast corner
Gladwin Place Prescott Avenue On south corner
Governors Road
[Added
9-8-2003]
Avon Road On northwest corner
Greenfield
Avenue
Tanglewylde Avenue On east corner
Greenfield
Avenue
Woodland Avenue On northwest corner
Greenfield
Avenue
Woodland Avenue On southeast corner
Greenfield
Avenue
Elm Rock Road On northwest corner
Hamilton Avenue Pondfield Road On west corner
Hamilton Avenue Sussex Avenue On northwest corner
Hamilton Avenue Sussex Avenue On southeast corner
Hawthorne Road Midland Avenue On north corner
Hawthorne Road
[Added
7-13-2009 by
L.L. No. 3-2009]
Studio Lane On south corner
Hemlock Road Midland Avenue On north corner
Hemlock Road
[Added
7-13-2009 by
L.L. No. 3-2009]
Studio Lane On south corner
Hobart Street Fulling Avenue On northeast corner
Hobart Street Summit Avenue On northeast corner
Hobart Street White Plains Road On south corner
Homesdale Road Locust Lane On northeast corner
Homesdale Road
[Added
1-14-2002]
Pine Terrace On north side
Homesdale Road
[Added
1-14-2002]
Pine Terrace On southeast corner
Homesdale Road Pondfield Road On east corner
§ 290-15 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-15
282:343
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Homesdale Road Sturgis Road On northwest corner
Homesdale Road Sturgis Road On southeast corner
Kensington Road Avon Road On southeast corner
Kensington Road Avon Road On northwest corner
Kraft Avenue Pondfield Road On southeast corner
Kraft Avenue Kraft Avenue On southwest corner
Parking Lot
(opposite Park
Place)
Legget Road
[Added
6-14-1993]
Pondfield Road On southeast corner
Leonard Morange
Square
Parkway Road On southeast corner
Library Lane
[Added
10-11-2004]
Midland Avenue On northwest corner
Locust Lane Homesdale Road On northwest corner
Locust Lane Homesdale Road On southeast corner
Locust Lane Sturgis Road On northwest corner
Locust Lane Sturgis Road On southeast corner
Manor Road Fordal Road On southeast corner
Manor Road Pondfield Road On west corner
Masterton Road Elm Rock Road On southeast corner
Masterton Road Midland Avenue On north corner
Masterton Road Pondfield Road On west corner
Masterton Road Pondfield Road On northeast corner
Meadow Avenue Pondfield Road On northwest corner
Meadow Avenue Pondfield Road On southeast corner
Meadow Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On southeast corner
Meadow Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On southwest corner
Meadow Avenue Pondfield Road On southwest corner
Meadow Avenue Garden Avenue On southwest corner
Middle Road
[Added
11-14-2005]
Elm Lane On northeast corner
§ 290-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-15
282:344
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Middle Road
[Added
11-14-2005]
Elm Lane On southwest corner
Middle Road White Plains Road On north corner
Milburn Street
[Added
5-10-1993]
Parkway Road On southeast corner
Milburn Street
[Added
5-10-1993]
Paxton Avenue On northeast corner
North Road Elm Lane On southwest corner
North Road Elm Lane On northeast corner
North Road Edgewood Lane On southwest corner
North Road Edgewood Lane On northeast corner
North Road Forest Lane On southwest corner
North Road Forest Lane On northeast corner
Northway
[Added
9-12-1994]
Eastway On northwest corner
Northway Eastway On southwest corner
Northway New Rochelle Road On southwest corner
Northway Northwest Way On southwest corner
Oakledge Road Pondfield Road On southeast corner
Orchard Place Oriole Avenue Southwest corner
Orchard Street Studio Lane On northeast corner
Oriole Avenue Elm Rock Road On northwest corner
Oriole Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On east corner
Oriole Avenue Woodland Avenue On northwest corner
Oriole Avenue Woodland Avenue On southeast corner
Paddington Road White Plains Road On north corner
Palmer Avenue Parkway Road Southeast corner of
intersection of Palmer Avenue
and Parkway Road
Palumbo Place Midland Avenue On east corner
Park Avenue Avon Road On northwest corner
Park Avenue Avon Road On southeast corner
Park Avenue Sycamore Street On northwest corner
Park Avenue Sycamore Street On southeast corner
§ 290-15 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-15
282:345
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Park Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On northwest corner
Park Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On southwest corner
Park Avenue Wellington Circle On southeast corner
Park Place Kraft Avenue On northeast corner
Parkway Road Palmer Avenue For southbound traffic on
Island at northwest corner of
intersection
Parkway Road
[Added
10-9-2000]
Paxton Avenue On northwest corner
Parkway Road
[Added
10-9-2000]
Paxton Avenue On southeast side in front of
60 Parkway Road
Parkway Road Pondfield Road At island just west of railroad
underpass on Pondfield Road
Parkway Road Pondfield Road Southbound at island opposite
Pondfield Road and south of
Pondfield Road West
Paxton Avenue DeWitt Avenue On southwest corner
Paxton Avenue DeWitt Avenue On northeast corner
Paxton Avenue Parkway Road On southwest corner
Pine Terrace Homesdale Road On east corner
Plateau Circle
East [Added
4-11-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
Avon Road On southeast corner
Plateau Circle
West [Added
4-11-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
Avon Road On southeast corner
Pondfield Road Sagamore Road On northeast corner
Pondfield Road
West
Parkway Road On southwest corner,
intersection of Pondfield Road
West and Parkway Road
Pondfield Road
West
Stoneleigh Plaza On southwest side, opposite
Stoneleigh Plaza
Prescott Avenue Avon Road On south corner
Prescott Avenue Sagamore Road On north corner
Prescott Avenue Gladwin Place On southeast corner
Prescott Avenue Gladwin Place On northwest corner
§ 290-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-15
282:346
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Sagamore Road Pondfield Road On northwest corner
Sherman Avenue White Plains Road On south corner
Siwanoy
Boulevard
New Rochelle Road On the north corner
South Road White Plains Road On south corner
Stone Place
[Added
5-10-1993]
Milburn Street On northeast corner
Stone Place
[Added
5-10-1993]
Paxton Avenue On northeast corner
Stoneleigh Plaza Pondfield Road West On northwest corner
Studio Lane Orchard Street On southwest corner
Studio Lane
[Added
11-8-1999]
Woodland Avenue On southeast corner
Sturgis Road Homesdale Road On northeast corner
Sturgis Road Homesdale Road On southwest corner
Sturgis Road Locust Lane On northeast corner
Sturgis Road Sunnybrae Place On northeast corner
Sturgis Road Sunnybrae Place On southwest corner
Sturgis Road White Plains Road On southwest corner
Summit Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On northwest corner
Summit Avenue Tanglewylde Avenue On southeast corner
Summit Avenue Woodland Avenue On northwest corner
Summit Avenue Woodland Avenue On southeast corner
Sunnybrae Place Pine Terrace On northeast corner
Sunnybrae Place Pondfield Road On east corner
Sunnybrae Place Sturgis Road On northwest corner
Sunnybrae Place Sturgis Road On southeast corner
Sussex Avenue Hamilton Avenue On northeast corner
Sussex Avenue Hamilton Avenue On southwest corner
Sussex Avenue White Plains Road On south corner
Sycamore Street Midland Avenue On northeast corner
Sycamore Street Midland Avenue On south corner
Sycamore Street Park Avenue On northeast corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Garden Avenue On northeast corner
§ 290-15 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-15
282:347
Stop Street Through Street Location of sign
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Garden Avenue On southwest corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Park Avenue On northeast corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Park Avenue On southeast corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
White Plains Road On south corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Willow Road On southeast corner
Tanglewylde
Avenue
Willow Road On northwest corner
The By Way Masterton Road On southeast corner
The High Road The By Way On north corner
Valley Road Prescott Avenue On northeast corner
Valley Road Prescott Avenue On southeast corner
Valley Road Prescott Avenue On northwest corner
Village Lane Pondfield Road On west corner
Vine Street Midland Avenue On south corner
Vine Street Tanglewylde Avenue On north corner
Westway White Plains Road On north corner
Willow Road Midland Avenue On south corner
Willow Road Tanglewylde Avenue On north corner
Woodland Avenue White Plains Road On south corner
Garden Avenue off street parking area exit on to Garden Avenue opposite
17 Garden Avenue and at both exits from the parking area at the northerly
end of the parking area.
§ 290-16. Yield intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections and
yield signs shall be maintained at the entrances thereto as indicated:
Yield Street Through Street Location of Sign
Railroad Overpass Pondfield Road On the south corner
Sycamore Street Tanglewylde Avenue On the west corner
Tanglewylde Avenue
[Added 2-14-2005 by
Res. No. 1-2005]
Woodland Avenue Southwest corner of
triangle
§ 290-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-16
282:348
Yield Street Through Street Location of Sign
Woodland Avenue
[Added 2-14-2005 by
Res. No. 1-2005]
Tanglewylde Avenue Northeast corner of
triangle
§ 290-16 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-16
282:349

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 290-17. One-way streets and parking lot drive aisles. [Amended
3-8-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010; 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011;
4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
The following streets and parking lot drive aisles, or portions thereof, are
hereby designated as one-way streets and drive aisles in the directions
indicated by this section, and signs forbidding entry and indicating the
direction of travel shall be maintained at every intersection where
movement in the opposite direction is prohibited:
A. Archer Place, west, from the Town of Eastchester line to Dusenberry
Road.
B. Cedar Street, west.
C. Intentionally omitted.
D. Hobart Street, west, from Fulling Avenue to Summit Avenue.
E. Leonard Morange Square, east, toward the railroad station, except on
the portion situated between the underpass and the oval grass plot, on
which traffic shall move westerly.
F. Lookout Avenue, southwest, from Wellington Circle to Park Avenue.
G. Meadow Avenue, northeast, from Garden Avenue to Tanglewylde
Avenue.
H. Palumbo Place (also known as "Poplar Street"), northwest, from
Gramatan Avenue to Midland Avenue.
I. Park Avenue, northeast, from Lookout Avenue to Wellington Circle.
J. Park Avenue, northeast, from Wellington Circle to Tanglewylde Avenue.
K. Preston Avenue, southeast, from Valley Road to Wellington Circle.
L. Valley Road, northeast, from Pondfield Road to Prescott Avenue.
M. Valley Road, southwest, from Sunset Avenue to Prescott Avenue.
N. North on the street running in between the northbound platform of the
railroad station and the west side of the building at 111 Kraft Avenue.
O. In the Kraft Avenue parking lot: The entrance from Kraft Avenue
located at the north end of the lot shall be one-way in (west) only. The
exit to Kraft Avenue located near the south end of the lot shall be oneway
out (east) only. The drive aisle running from the north end of the lot
to the above-referenced exit shall be one-way in a southerly direction
only.
§ 290-17 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-18
282:351
§ 290-18. Traffic control signals.
§ 290-19. Truck exclusions.
Except for the purposes of delivering or picking up merchandise or other
property along the highways from which they are otherwise excluded,
trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors or tractor-trailer combinations having
a gross weight in excess of 4,000 pounds, are hereby excluded from the
following streets:
A. Pretimed fully automatic traffic control signals consisting of double
three-section, 4-face signal heads shall be installed, maintained and
operated at the following intersections:
(1) Midland Avenue at Kraft Avenue.
(2) Midland Avenue at Library Lane.
(3) Midland Avenue at Masterton Road.
(4) Midland Avenue at Tanglewylde Avenue.
(5) Pondfield Road at Cedar Street and Tanglewylde Avenue.
(6) Pondfield Road at Gramatan Avenue.
(7) Pondfield Road at Locust Lane.
(8) Pondfield Road at Locust Lane and High Road.
(9) Pondfield Road at Midland Avenue.
(10) Pondfield Road at Park Place.
(11) Sagamore Road at Avon Road.
(12) Kraft Avenue at Meadow Avenue.
(13) Kraft Avenue at Cedar Street. [Added 12-12-2011 by L.L. No.
9-2011]
B. No right turn on red shall be permitted at the above-named locations,
and signs prohibiting such turns shall be maintained at such locations.
C. There shall be a left-turn-only lane and a right turn through lane on
Pondfield Road at both approaches to Midland Avenue. Signs permitting
such turns shall be maintained at such locations. [Added 3-10-2008
by L.L. No. 4-2008]
D. There shall be a left-turn-only lane and right turn through lane on
Midland Avenue northbound at the approach to the Pondfield Road
intersection. Signs permitting such turns shall be maintained at such
locations. [Added 3-10-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
A. Avon Road, from Summit Avenue to Midland Avenue.
§ 290-18 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-19
282:352
§ 290-20. Limitation of omnibus traffic.
No omnibus shall travel or operate on the same street in the village within
15 minutes of the operation of another omnibus owned or operated by the
same person, firm or corporation.
§ 290-21. Prohibition of U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is hereby
prohibited at the following locations, including all intersections therewith,
and signs and double yellow lines prohibiting such turning shall be
maintained at such locations:
§ 290-22. Prohibition of left turns.
The left turning of vehicles is hereby prohibited as follows:
B. Dusenberry Road.
C. Elm Road Road.
D. Locust Lane, from Pondfield Road to Homesdale Road.
E. Midland Avenue.
F. North Road, from White Plains Road to Alder Lane.
G. Northway.
H. Pondfield Road, between Gramatan Avenue and White Plains Road.
I. Summit Avenue, from Tanglewylde Avenue to Avon Road.
J. Tanglewylde Avenue, from White Plains Road to Midland Avenue.
A. Kraft Avenue.
B. Palmer Avenue.
C. Park Place.
D. Parkway Road.
E. Pondfield Road between the railroad underpass and the Gramatan
Avenue intersection.
F. Sagamore Road south of Avon Road.
G. West Pondfield Road.
A. From Garden Avenue into Pondfield Road.
B. From Pondfield Road into Park Place, Monday through Saturday, 9:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
§ 290-19 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-22
282:353
§ 290-23. Immobilization and impounding of vehicles. [Amended
5-9-1994; 2-13-1995]
C. From Kensington Garage into Kensington Road. [Amended
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
D. From Kensington Garage into Sagamore Road. [Added 10-10-2017 by
L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. Definitions. The following words shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them for purposes of these traffic regulations:
IMMOBILIZING — Making a vehicle incapable of moving.
IMPOUNDING — Seizing and retaining a vehicle in custody of the
Police Department.
TOWING — The act of hauling a vehicle from one location to another.
B. Provisions. Any vehicle may be removed or cause to be removed by or
under the direction of a member of the Police Department by towing. In
addition to or in lieu of towing, any such vehicle may be immobilized in
such manner as to prevent its operation, except that no such vehicle
shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or
other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it
is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. In any case
involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this subsection, such
member of the Police Department shall cause to be placed on such
vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any
individual of the effect that any attempt to move such vehicle might
result in damage to such vehicle.
(1) When any vehicle which has $200 or more in outstanding or unpaid
parking violations issued against it and which is found operating or
parked on any highway within this village or any way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of parking or vehicular travel, or on any property
leased by or in the possession and control of the Village of
Bronxville.
(2) When any vehicle is found parked in a village public parking lot
without a currently valid parking permit obtained and displayed
pursuant to § 290-47.
(3) Any vehicle that has been immobilized and not lawfully released or
lawfully removed by the owner of the vehicle for 48 hours from the
time of such initial immobilization, may be impounded by the Chief
of Police, the removal and storage charges shall be at the expense
of the owner of the vehicle.
C. Storage of vehicles; release to owner. After removal of any vehicle as
provided in this article, the Chief of Police may cause such vehicle to be
stored in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Before the owner
§ 290-22 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-23
282:354
or person in charge of any vehicle taken into custody or immobilized as
provided in this section shall be allowed to repossess or to secure the
release of said vehicle, the owner or his agent shall pay the following:
(1) An administrative fee to the Village of Bronxville as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(2) All sums legally due the Village of Bronxville for parking violations
issued and outstanding against such vehicle. No vehicle shall be
released by an officer or employee of the village until such sums are
paid in full. In lieu of payment, the owner or person in charge of
such vehicle may post a bond in an amount sufficient to provide
security for the payment of all fines and fees listed in this
subsection.
(3) To the Village of Bronxville, the towing service and/or to the person
with whom the vehicle is stored, all expenses actually and
necessarily incurred in effecting such removal and storage.
D. No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has
established his identity and right to possession and has signed a
property receipt therefore. Any person who, having had his vehicle
removed or immobilized, shall remove such vehicle without complying
with this section shall, in addition to the charges provided for in this
section, be liable for any damage done to the immobilization device or
mechanism and be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
E. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the persons having same in his
charge and to notify him of the immobilization, removal and disposition
of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to redeem the
same.
F. Disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
(1) Whenever a vehicle, other than an abandoned vehicle, that has
been removed from a street or impounded pursuant to this chapter
is not claimed within 10 days, it shall be the responsibility of the
Chief of Police or his designee to mail a notice of removal or
impound, via certified mail, to the last registered owner, if such can
be ascertained with reasonable diligence. Such notice shall state:
(a) The date of towing or impound and the place of storage.
(b) What must be done by the registered owner to secure release
of the vehicle.
(c) That if the vehicle is not claimed within 10 days of the receipt
of the notice, it will be sold at a public auction by the Village of
Bronxville.
(d) That if personal property within the vehicle is unclaimed within
10 days of the receipt of the notice, said property will become
§ 290-23 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-23
282:355
§ 290-24. Control of traffic in emergencies.
The Police Department and the Fire Department shall have the power
and authority, pursuant to § 1602(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, to
temporarily close any street or part thereof to vehicular traffic or to vehicles
of a certain description or to divert the traffic thereof or to divert or break
a course of pedestrian traffic in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or property and for such period
of time only as is necessitated thereby for the public safety or convenience.
the property of the Village of Bronxville and be disposed of
according to law and according to procedures established by
the Treasurer.
(2) If the vehicle is not claimed within 10 days of the date the owner
receives the notice or of the date the postal service reports the
notice was undeliverable to the owner, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall notify the Village Treasurer, who shall arrange for
the vehicle to be sold at public auction. Further, if personal
property within the vehicle is unclaimed within 10 days of the
notice sent in accordance with Subsection D(1) above, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall be responsible to secure the property
and turn the same over to the Treasurer for disposition.
(3) Abandoned vehicles, as described in § 1224 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of such § 1224.
(4) Pursuant to the provisions of § 1224, entitled "Abandoned
vehicles," of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, the Village
of Bronxville hereby authorizes the Chief of Police to convert in any
one calendar year up to 1% of its unclaimed abandoned vehicles or
two such vehicles, whichever is greater, for its own use.
G. Proceeds from sale of unclaimed vehicles. The proceeds from the sale of
any vehicle sold as provided in this chapter shall be applied first to the
costs of sale; second against the towing charges; third against any
storage charges; and fourth to any and all unpaid delinquent parking
summonses issued in the Village of Bronxville against said vehicle and
against any other vehicles registered to the owner thereof. In the event
that the sale proceeds exceed the above cost and charges, the excess
shall be held without interest by the Village Treasurer for the benefit of
the owner for a period not to exceed five years. If the proceeds remain
unclaimed after the five-year period, the proceeds shall be paid into the
general fund of the Village.
§ 290-23 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-24
282:356
ARTICLE IX
Stopping, Standing and Parking Restrictions
§ 290-25. Applicability; exception. [Added 10-11-1993]
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 290-26. Stopping prohibited in designated locations. [Amended
5-10-1993; 10-11-1993]
A. Bus stops. The stopping of vehicles except buses is hereby prohibited at
bus stops in any of the following locations. Signs and markings
designating such bus stops shall be maintained at such locations:
(1) Kraft Avenue.
(a) On the west side, alongside the Bank of New York.
(b) On the east side, from the north curbline of Meadow Avenue
for a distance of 94 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Leonard Morange Square, on the north side of the westbound lane.
(3) Midland Avenue, on the south side, between Palumbo Place and
Pondfield Road.
(4) Pondfield Road.
(a) On the east side, at the southeast corner of Pondfield Road and
Tanglewylde Avenue, from the south curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue to a point 55 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) On the east side, from the north curbline of Garden Avenue, to
the south curbline of Valley Road.
(c) In front of #1 Pondfield Road, from a point 27 feet south of the
north curbline of Pondfield Road, to a point 71 feet south of the
same curbline.
B. Taxicab stands. The stopping of vehicles, except taxicabs, is hereby
prohibited at taxi stands in any of the following locations. Signs and
marking designating such taxicab stands shall be maintained at such
locations:
(1) Railroad platform, northbound.
(2) Leonard Morange Square, east end, at railroad platform.
§ 290-25 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-27
282:357
§ 290-27. All-night parking prohibited. [Amended 2-17-2015 by L.L.
No. 1-2015]
Except where otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, the parking
of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all public highways and in parking
meter zones within the Village between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and signs
prohibiting such parking shall be maintained at appropriate locations within
the Village.
§ 290-28. Parking prohibited in designated locations. [Amended
5-10-1993]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations. Signs prohibiting such parking shall be maintained at such
locations:
(1) Avon Road. [Amended 6-12-1995]
(a) On the northeast side, from the southern curbline of
Kensington Road to a point 40 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) On the north and northeast side, from the east curbline of
Governors Road to a point 718 feet east of the east curbline of
Governors Road. [Amended 10-14-2014 by L.L. No.
6-2014]
(c) On the south side, from the west curbline of the driveway of 44
Avon Road for a distance of 96 feet westerly to the north
curbline of 60 Prescott Avenue. [Added 10-11-2004]
(d) On the north and northeast side, from its intersection with
Sagamore Road to Governor's Road. [Added 10-10-2017 by
L.L. No. 3-2017]
(e) On the south and southeast side, from its intersection with
Sagamore Road to Plateau Circle East. [Added 10-10-2017
by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(f) On the north side, from a point 115 feet west of the
intersection with Sagamore Road east to Sagamore Road.
[Added 2-12-2018 by L.L. No. 6-2018]
(g) On the south side, from the intersection of Beverly Road east to
Sagamore Road. [Added 2-12-2018 by L.L. No. 6-2018]
(2) Cedar Street. [Amended 10-11-1993]
(a) On the south side, between Pondfield Road and Kraft Avenue.
(b) On the north side from a point 28 feet west of the McGrath
Funeral Home driveway west curbline east to the A parking lot
driveway east curbline.
§ 290-27 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:358
(c) On the north side, from a point 28 feet west of the McGrath
Funeral Home driveway west curbline, east, to a point 20 feet
east of the Funeral Home driveway east curbline; and, from the
west side of the A parking lot driveway west curbline to the
parking lot driveway east curbline; the parking, standing or
stopping of vehicles is prohibited.
(3) DeWitt Avenue.
(a) On the west side, from the north curbline of Paxton Avenue to
the south curbline of the driveway at #55 DeWitt Avenue.
(b) On the west side, from the south curbline of Paxton Avenue,
south, to the Bronxville-Yonkers boundary line.
(c) On the east side, from the south curbline of Parkway Road,
south, to the Bronxville-Yonkers boundary line.
(4) Garden Avenue.
(a) On the east and north side, between Meadow Avenue and
Pondfield Road.
(b) On the west and south side, between Tanglewylde Avenue and
Pondfield Road.
(5) Gramatan Avenue, on the west side, between Pondfield Road and
Palumbo Place.
(6) Greenfield Avenue.
(a) On the east side, from the north curbline of the driveway at
#50 Greenfield Avenue to the south curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue for a distance of 120 feet.
(b) On the west side, from the north curbline of the driveway at
#49 Greenfield Avenue to the south curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue for a distance of 100 feet.
(6.1) (Reserved)34
(7) Hobart Street.
(a) On the north side, from the west curbline of White Plains Road
to the driveway at #5 Hobart Street.
(b) On the south side, from the west curbline of White Plains Road
to the driveway at #8 Hobart Street.
(8) Kensington Road. [Amended 6-12-1995; 12-8-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014; 6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
34.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6.1), regarding Hemlock Road, added 5-14-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007, was repealed 6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:359
(a) On the east side, between the entrance and exit driveways to
Gramatan Court Apartments.
(b) On the east side, between the south curbline of the driveway at
1 Kensington Terrace and the Bronxville-Tuckahoe boundary
lines, except where the curbs are cut and spaces are
designated for off street parking.
(c) On west side, between the north end of the crosswalk at the
corner of Pondfield and Kensington Road and a point 1,030 feet
northerly therefrom, except where the curbs are cut and
spaces are designated for on-street parking. [Added
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(d) (Reserved)
(e) On the west side, between the property line of 73 and 73A
Kensington Road and a point 298 feet south southerly
therefrom, except where the curbs are cut and spaces are
designated for off-street parking.
(9) Kraft Avenue.
(a) On the west side, from the west curbline of Pondfield Road, for
a distance of 85 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) On the east side, from the north curbline of Park Place, for a
distance of 33 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) On the east side, between Park Place and Cedar Street.
(d) On the east side, from the south curbline of Cedar Street (in
front of St. Joseph's Church), for a distance of 114 feet
southerly therefrom.
(e) On the east side, from the south curbline of Meadow Avenue
for a distance of 37 feet southerly therefrom.
(f) On the east side, from the north curbline of Midland Avenue for
a distance of 48 feet northerly therefrom.
(g) On the west side, between Cedar Street and Midland Avenue.
(h) On the east side, from the north side of the driveway of No.
20-22 Kraft Avenue and heading north to the south corner of
Meadow Avenue. [Added 7-12-2004]
(10) Leonard Morange Square.
(a) On the north side of the eastbound lane.
(b) On the east and west side of the northbound lane.
(c) On the south side of the westbound lane.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:360
(11) Library Lane.
(a) On the south side, from the southern edge of the steps leading
to the back entrance to the library, easterly, to the utility pole
on the property line located east of the eastern edge of the
driveway at #11 Library Lane.
(b) On the south island on all sides.
(c) On the north island on the east and south side.
(d) On the north island, on the west side, from the north curbline
of Midland Avenue for a distance of 20 feet southerly
therefrom. [Added 4-14-200335]
(e) On the east side of the northbound lane within two feet of the
outer edges of:
[1] The entrance walk at #1 Library Lane.
[2] The driveway at #5 Library Lane.
[3] The driveway at #7 Library Lane.
(12) McKinley Street, on the south side, from the east curbline of
Fulling Avenue to the eastern end of the property line at #18
McKinley Street.
(13) Meadow Avenue.
(a) On the north side, from the east curbline of Kraft Avenue for a
distance of 25 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) On the north side, from the west curbline of Pondfield Road for
a distance of 20 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) On the north side, between Pondfield Road and Tanglewylde
Avenue.
(d) On the south side, between Kraft Avenue and Pondfield Road.
(e) On the south side, from the east curbline of Pondfield Road for
a distance of 20 feet easterly therefrom.
(f) On the south side, between Pondfield Road and Tanglewylde
Avenue:
[1] At the driveway entrance to the auditorium parking lot.
[2] Between the two crosswalks at Garden Avenue.
[3] From the eastern Garden Avenue crosswalk for a distance
of 20 feet easterly therefrom.
35.Editor's Note: This resolution also redesignated former Subsection A(11)(d) as A(11)(e).
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:361
[4] At the driveway entrance behind the Bronxville School.
(g) On the south side, from the westerly curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue for a distance of 20 feet westerly therefrom.
(h) The Chief of Police of the Village of Bronxville, pursuant to
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1602 is hereby delegated the power
to authorize parking on the north side of Meadow Avenue
between Pondfield Road and Tanglewylde Avenue, whenever
traffic conditions warrant, notwithstanding the permanent "No
Parking" prohibitions provided in Subsection A(13)(c).
(14) Midland Avenue. [Amended 4-12-1999; 11-11-2002;
12-12-2005; 3-14-3022 by L.L. No. 1-2011; 6-13-2016 by L.L.
No. 3-2016]
(a) On the west side, from the intersection of Parkway Road,
northerly therefrom, to the driveway for #11 Midland Avenue.
(b) On the west side, from the intersection of Kraft Avenue,
northerly therefrom, to the intersection of Tanglewylde
Avenue.
(c) On the east side, from a point 10 feet south of the Alden Place
driveway, to the intersection of Tanglewylde Avenue.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) (Reserved)
(f) (Reserved)
(g) (Reserved)
(h) (Reserved)
(15) Oriole Avenue, on the west side, from the south curbline of
Tanglewylde Avenue for a distance of 75 feet southerly thereon.
(16) Palmer Avenue.
(a) On the south side, from the east curbline of Paxton Avenue for
a distance of 20 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) On the south side, from the west curbline of Parkway Road for
a distance of 48 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) On the north side, from the east curbline of Lawrence
Hospital's western driveway for a distance of 66 feet easterly
therefrom.
(d) On the north side, from the east curbline of Lawrence
Hospital's eastern driveway for a distance of 18 feet easterly
therefrom.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:362
(e) On the north side, from the west curbline of Parkway Road for
a distance of 60 feet westerly therefrom.
(f) On the south side, in the parking maneuver areas located from
the west curbline of Parkway Road, as follows:
[1] From a point 84 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet westerly therefrom.
[2] From a point 134 feet west of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet westerly therefrom.
[3] From a point 184 feet west of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet westerly therefrom.
(g) On the south side, in the parking maneuver areas located from
the east curbline of Paxton Avenue, as follows:
[1] From a point 88 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet easterly therefrom.
[2] From a point 138 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet easterly therefrom.
[3] From a point 188 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet easterly therefrom.
(h) On the north side, in the parking maneuver areas located from
the east curbline of Lawrence Hospital's western driveway, as
follows:
[1] From a point 206 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet easterly therefrom.
[2] From a point 258 feet east of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet easterly therefrom.
(i) On the north side, in the parking maneuver areas located from
the west curbline of Parkway Road, as follows:
[1] From a point 96 feet west of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet westerly therefrom.
[2] From a point 148 feet west of the curbline for a distance of
14 feet westerly therefrom.
(17) Palumbo Place.
(a) On the east side, between Gramatan Avenue and Midland
Avenue.
(b) On the west side, from the south curbline of Midland Avenue
for a distance of 38 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:363
(c) On the west side, from a point 130 feet south of the south
curbline of Midland Avenue, to the south end of the
Department of Public Works storage area.
(18) Park Place, on the south side, from the west curbline of the A
driveway for a distance of 25 feet westerly therefrom.
(19) Parkway Road.
(a) On the west side, from the south end of the property line at
#111 Parkway Road to the north end of the driveway at #81
Parkway Road.
(b) On the west side, between Paxton Avenue and the Bronxville-
Yonkers boundary line.
(c) On the east side, from the south curbline of the westbound lane
of Leonard Morange Square for a distance of 78 feet southerly
therefrom.
(d) On the east side, from the north end of the property line at
#100 Parkway Road to the south curbline of the eastbound
lane of Leonard Morange Square.
(e) On the east side, from the south end property line at 62
Parkway Road south for a distance of 55 feet. [Added
10-9-2000]
(20) Paxton Avenue.
(a) On the west and south side, between the Bronx River Parkway
entrance-exit ramp and Parkway Road.
(b) On the east side, between Lower Milburn Street and Palmer
Avenue, except for two parking meter spaces in front of the
premises at #32 Paxton Avenue.
(c) On the east side, between Stone Place and Parkway Road.
(21) Pondfield Road.
(a) On the east side, from the south curbline of Sagamore Road for
a distance of 40 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) On the east side, from the north curbline of Valley Road for a
distance of 37 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) On the east side, between Valley Road and Garden Avenue.
(d) On the east side, from the south curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue to the north curbline of the Post Office driveway.
(e) On the east side, from the south curbline of Meadow Avenue
for a distance of 37 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:364
(f) On the east side, from a point 255 feet south of the south
curbline of Meadow Avenue for a distance of 89 feet southerly
therefrom. (This section encompasses the two Pondfield Road
crosswalks at the Bronxville School flagpole entrance, the
space between the two crosswalks, and a safety zone of 20 feet
north and 20 feet south of the crosswalks.)
(g) On the east side, from the north curbline of Midland Avenue for
a distance of 52 feet northerly therefrom.
(h) On the east side, from the south curbline of Midland Avenue for
a distance of 45 feet southerly therefrom.
(i) On the west side, from the north curbline of Gramatan Avenue
to the south curbline of the Village Hall driveway.
(j) On the west side, from the north curbline of the Village Hall
driveway for a distance of 38 feet northerly therefrom.
(k) On the west side, from the south curbline of Midland Avenue
for a distance of 39 feet southerly therefrom.
(l) On the west side, from the north curbline of Midland Avenue
for a distance of 110 feet northerly therefrom.
(m) (Reserved)36
(n) On the west side, from the south curbline of Meadow Avenue
for a distance of 67 feet southerly therefrom.
(o) On the west side, from the north curbline of Meadow Avenue
for a distance of 35 feet northerly therefrom.
(p) On the west side, from the south curbline of Cedar Street for a
distance of 35 feet southerly therefrom.
(q) On the west side, from the north curbline of Cedar Street for a
distance of 30 feet northerly therefrom.
(r) On the west side, from the south curbline of Park Place for a
distance of 36 feet southerly therefrom.
(s) On the west side, from the north curbline of Park Place for a
distance of 19 feet northerly therefrom.
(t) On the west side, from a point 141 feet north of the north
curbline of Park Place for a distance of 40 feet northerly
therefrom.
36.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(21(m)), regarding a location on the west side of
Pondfield Road, as amended, was repealed 6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:365
(u) On the west side, from a point 126 feet southerly from the
south curbline of Kraft Avenue for a distance of 35 feet
southerly therefrom.
(v) On the west side, from the south curbline of Kraft Avenue for a
distance of 62 feet southerly therefrom.
(w) On the west side, from the southern curbline of Gramatan
Avenue to the northern curbline of Normandy Road. [Added
11-14-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
(22) Pondfield Road West.
(a) On the north side, between Lake Avenue and the Bronxville-
Yonkers boundary line.
(b) On the south side, between Lake Avenue and the Bronxville-
Yonkers boundary line.
(c) On the west side, between Studio Arcade and Palmer Avenue.
(d) On the east side, between Studio Arcade and Palmer Avenue.
(23) Prescott Avenue.
(a) On the north side, from the west curbline of Valley Road for a
distance of 50 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) On the north side, between the western edge of Merestone
Terrace and Sagamore Road.
(c) On the south side, between Sagamore Road and Valley Road.
(d) On the south side, between Valley Road and Lookout Avenue.
(24) Sagamore Road.
(a) On the southerly side, from the northeasterly curbline of
Pondfield Road for a distance of 44 feet northeasterly
therefrom.
(b) On the southerly side, from the southwesterly curbline of
Prescott Avenue for a distance of 50 feet southwesterly
therefrom.
(c) On the south side, from the northeasterly curbline of Prescott
Avenue for a distance of 34 feet northeasterly therefrom.
(d) On the south side, from the southwesterly curbline of the
driveway to #36-52 Sagamore Road for a distance of 54 feet
southwesterly therefrom.
(e) On the south side, from the northeasterly curbline of the
driveway to #36-52 Sagamore Road for a distance of 24 feet
northeasterly therefrom.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:366
(f) On the south side, from the southwesterly curbline of the
driveway to #54-56 Sagamore Road for a distance of 129 feet
northeasterly therefrom.
(g) On the south side, from a point 532 feet southwest of the west
curbline of Avon Road for a distance of 80 feet northeasterly
therefrom.
(h) On the south side, from the west curbline of Avon Road for a
distance of 231 feet southwesterly therefrom.
(i) On the south side, from the east curbline of Avon Road for a
distance of 123 feet northeasterly therefrom.
(j) On the north side, from the west curbline of Minturn Road for a
distance of 48 feet southwesterly therefrom.
(k) On the north side, from the east curbline of Avon Road for a
distance of 155 feet northeasterly therefrom.
(l) On the north side, from the west curbline of Avon Road for a
distance of 52 feet southwesterly therefrom.
(m) On the north side, from a point 439 feet southwest of the west
curbline of Avon Road for a distance of 125 feet southwesterly
therefrom.
(n) On the north side, from a point 607 feet southwest of the west
curbline of Avon Road, to a point 182 feet northeast of the
northeast curbline of Beechtree Lane.
(o) On the north side, from the northeast curbline of Beechtree
Lane for a distance of 87 feet northeasterly therefrom.
(p) On the north side, from the southwest curbline of Beechtree
Lane for a distance of 42 feet southwesterly therefrom.
(q) On the north side, from a point 20 feet northeast of the
northeast curbline of the Episcopal Church entrance driveway
for a distance of 155 feet southwesterly therefrom.
(25) Stone Place, on the east side, from the south curbline of Lower
Milburn Street for a distance of 50 feet southerly therefrom.
(26) Station Plaza, on the east side of the northbound lane, parallel to
the railroad tracks.
(27) Studio Arcade.
(a) On the south side, from the west curbline of Studio Arcade
southbound for a distance of 41 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) On the west side, between Studio Arcade eastbound and
Leonard Morange Square.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:367
(c) On the east side, between Studio Arcade eastbound and
Leonard Morange Square.
(28) Tanglewylde Avenue.
(a) On the north side, from the west curbline of Garden Avenue to
the east curbline of the Towers Apartment driveway.
(b) On the north side, between Midland Avenue and Woodland
Avenue.
(c) On the north side, between Sycamore Street and Summit
Avenue.
(d) On the south side, between Midland Avenue and Park Avenue.
(e) On the west and north side, between Park Avenue, at #55
Tanglewylde Avenue and Garden Avenue.
(f) On the east side, from the northeasterly curbline of Meadow
Avenue for a distance of 130 feet, to the westerly curbline of
the driveway at #26 Tanglewylde Avenue.
(g) On the east side, from the northeasterly curbline of Willow
Road for a distance of 25 feet northeasterly therefrom.
(h) On the east side, from the south curbline of Vine Street for a
distance of 29 feet southwesterly therefrom. [Added
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
(29) Valley Road.
(a) On the south side, between Pondfield Road and Prescott
Avenue.
(b) On the north side, from the west curbline of Prescott Avenue to
the stone entrance arch located 75 feet east of the east
curbline of Pondfield Road.
(30)West Alley, on the east and west side, from the north curbline of
Park Place, northerly, to the end.
(31)Willow Road.
(a) On the south side, between Tanglewylde Avenue and Midland
Avenue.
(b) On the north side, from the easterly curbline of Tanglewylde
Avenue to a point 40 feet east of the east curbline of the
driveway at #1 Willow Circle.
(c) On the north side, from the west curbline of Midland Avenue to
the west curbline of the driveway at #15 Willow Circle.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:368
B. Loading and unloading zones. The parking of vehicles, other than
vehicles engaged in loading and unloading, is hereby prohibited in the
loading zones set forth below. Parking by vehicles in such zones shall
not exceed 15 minutes. Signs restricting such parking, as set forth
above, shall be maintained at such locations. [Amended 12-8-2014 by
L.L. No. 7-2014]
(1) Cedar Street, on the north side, from the west curbline of Pondfield
Road for a distance of 52 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Palmer Avenue.
(a) On the south side, from a point 20 feet easterly of the east
curbline of Paxton Avenue for a distance of 32 feet easterly
therefrom.
(b) On the south side, from the Palmer Avenue Garage entrance
driveway west curbline for a distance of 48 feet westerly
therefrom.
(c) On the north side, from a point 121 feet easterly from the east
curbline of Lawrence Hospital's western driveway for a
distance of 48 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Park Place.
(a) On the south side, from the west curbline of Pondfield Road for
a distance of 83 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Pondfield Road, on the east side, from the north curbline of Garden
Avenue to the south curbline of Valley Road. [Amended
12-8-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014]
(5) Sagamore Road, on the south side, from a point 44 feet easterly
from the north curbline of Pondfield Road for a distance of 67 feet
easterly therefrom.
(6) Upper Milburn Street, on the north side, from the west curbline of
Parkway Road for a distance of 65 feet westerly therefrom.
(7) Kraft Avenue, on the east side, from a point 177 feet northerly from
the north curbline of Park Place for a distance of 32 feet northerly
therefrom. [Added 4-14-2003]
C. Meadow Avenue. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Meadow Avenue, on the south
side, between Garden Avenue and Tanglewylde Avenue.
D. (Reserved)37
E. (Reserved)38
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Parkway Road, was repealed 4-11-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:369
F. Station Plaza East. The parking of vehicles is hereby restricted to thirtyminute
parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., at Station
Plaza East, at the metered parking spaces in front of the Bank of New
York. Signs so restricting such parking shall be maintained at that
location.
G. Leonard Morange Square. The parking of vehicles is hereby restricted
to thirty-minute parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
at metered parking spaces at the south end of Leonard Morange
Square. Signs so restricting such parking shall be maintained at that
location.
H. Kraft Avenue. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 P.M,, on Kraft Avenue, on the east side, from
a point 48 feet north of the north curbline of Midland Avenue for a
distance of 258 feet northerly therefrom.
I. Resident Parking Lots. The parking of vehicles, other than those
displaying resident parking permits obtained pursuant to § 290-47, is
hereby prohibited for the hours enumerated, in the following locations.
Signs prohibiting such parking shall be maintained at such locations:
(1) Cedar Street Parking Lot, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., at meters restricted to vehicles displaying resident parking
permits.
(2) Kraft Avenue Parking Lot, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, at meters restricted to vehicles
displaying resident parking permits.
(3) Kensington Garage, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
at meters restricted to vehicles displaying Kensington Garage
resident special parking permits. [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L.
No. 3-2017]
(4) Maltby Parking Lot, for 24 hours, at parking spaces restricted to
vehicles displaying resident parking permits. [Amended
1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
(5) Avalon Parking Lot, for 24 hours. [Added 5-13-2013 by L.L. No.
4-2013]
J. Merchant parking lots. The parking of vehicles, other than those
displaying merchant parking permits obtained pursuant to § 290-47, is
hereby prohibited for the hours enumerated, in the following locations.
Signs prohibiting such parking shall be maintained at such locations:
[Amended 1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013; 9-14-2015 by L.L. No.
8-2015]
38.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Studio Arcade, was repealed 4-11-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-28
282:370
(1) Cedar Street Parking Lot, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, at meters restricted to vehicles
displaying merchant parking permits.
(2) Garden Avenue Parking Lot, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at meters restricted to vehicles
displaying merchant parking permits.
(3) Kensington Garage, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
at meters restricted to vehicles displaying merchant parking
permits and/or Kensington Garage merchant special parking
permits. [Added 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Kraft Avenue Parking Lot, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, at meters restricted to vehicles
displaying merchant parking permits.
(6) Maltby Parking Lot, for 24 hours, at parking spaces restricted to
vehicles displaying merchant parking permits.
K. Pondfield Road - U.S. Post Office. The parking of vehicles is hereby
restricted to thirty-minute parking, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., at metered parking spaces in front of the U.S. Post Office, on
the east side of Pondfield Road, from the north curbline of Meadow
Avenue, northerly, to the south curbline of the Post Office driveway.
L. Pondfield Road - Reformed Church/Bolton Gardens. The parking of
vehicles is hereby prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on the west side of Pondfield Road between the north curbline of
the entrance driveway to the Reformed Church and the south curbline
of the exit driveway from Bolton Gardens.
M. Meadow Avenue. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited during
school hours on the north side of Meadow Avenue from a point 32 feet
east of the east curbline of Kraft Avenue, for a distance of 172 feet
easterly therefrom.
N. Tanglewylde Avenue. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on Tanglewylde Avenue:
(1) On the north side, between White Plains Road and Concordia Place.
(2) On the south side, between White Plains Road and Greenfield
Avenue.
O. Crows Nest Road. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., school days, on Crows Nest Road:
[Added 7-12-2004]
(1) On the north side, between Midland Avenue and Village Lane.
§ 290-28 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-28
282:371
§ 290-29. Limited parking permitted in designated locations.
[Amended 7-12-1993; 10-11-1993; 7-13-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009;
3-14-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011; 11-4-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013;
6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
Parking, for the time limits hereinafter specified, is permitted in the
following locations:
(2) On the south side, from the east curbline of Midland Avenue, for a
distance of 264 feet easterly therefrom.
P. (Reserved)39
A. DeWitt Avenue, on the west side, from the driveway at 55 DeWitt
Avenue, north, to the driveway at 57 DeWitt Avenue, for a period not to
exceed two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
B. Garden Avenue, on the west side, between Tanglewylde Avenue and
Meadow Avenue, for a period not to exceed two hours.
C. Gramatan Avenue, on the south side, between Pondfield Road and the
Bronxville - Mt. Vernon boundary line, for a period not to exceed three
hours.
D. Hemlock Road.
(1) On the south side, from the east curbline of Midland Avenue to a
point 61 feet easterly therefrom, for a period not to exceed three
hours.
(2) On the north side, from the east curbline of Midland Avenue to a
point 62 feet easterly therefrom, for a period not to exceed three
hours.
E. Kensington Road. On the west side, from the north property line of 73
and 73A Kensington Road to the Tuckahoe border, except where
parking is otherwise prohibited, for a period not to exceed three hours.
F. Kraft Avenue.
(1) On the east side, from a point 37 feet south of the south curbline of
Meadow Avenue, southerly therefrom, to the north end of the
property line of the Dutch Reformed Church, for a period not to
exceed two hours.
(2) On the east side, from a point 114 feet south of the south curbline
of Cedar Street, southerly therefrom, for a distance of 116 feet, for
a period not to exceed one hour.
G. Library Lane. On the east side of the northbound lane, except where
parking is otherwise prohibited; on the west side of the north island;
39.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection P, regarding Pondfield Road, added 3-10-2008 by L.L.
No. 3-2008, was repealed 6-13-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016.
§ 290-28 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-29
282:372
and on the west side in the angle parking area, excepting the first
seven parking spaces, beginning at the entrance from Midland Avenue,
which are restricted to the use of library staff during library hours, for
a period not to exceed 90 minutes from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
H. Meadow Avenue.
(1) On the north side, from a point 32 feet east of the east curbline of
Kraft Avenue to a point 20 feet west of the west curbline of
Pondfield Road, for a period not to exceed two hours.
(2) On the north side, from a point 32 feet east of the east curbline of
Kraft Avenue, for a distance of 172 feet easterly therefrom, the
parking of vehicles is prohibited during school hours.
I. Midland Avenue, on the north side, from the west curbline of Kraft
Avenue, westerly, to the driveway for the Midland Gardens Garage, for
a period not to exceed three hours.
J. Palumbo Place, on the south side, from a point 38 feet east of the
curbline of Midland Avenue for a distance of 92 feet easterly therefrom,
for a period not to exceed four hours.
K. Parkway Road, on the east side, from the south end of the property line
at #8 Parkway Road, northerly, to the north end of the property line at
#100 Parkway Road, for a period not to exceed two hours, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
L. Pondfield Road.
(1) On the north side, from a point 37 feet east of the curbline of
Meadow Avenue, to a point 255 feet easterly therefrom, and from a
point 52 feet west of the curbline of Midland Avenue, to a point 291
feet westerly therefrom, for a period not to exceed two hours. On
days when school is in session, the parking of vehicles in this
location is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.,
and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(2) On the north side, from a point 45 feet east of the curbline of
Midland Avenue, to the intersection of Gramatan Avenue, for a
period not to exceed two hours.
(3) On the south side, from a point 38 feet west of the Village Hall
driveway, to a point 39 feet east of the curbline of Midland Avenue,
for a period not to exceed two hours.
(4) On the south side, from a point 110 feet west of the curbline of
Midland Avenue, to the Reformed Church entrance driveway
curbline, and from a point 67 feet east of the curbline of Meadow
Avenue, to the Bolton Gardens entrance driveway curbline, for a
period not to exceed two hours.
§ 290-29 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-29
282:373
M. Prescott Avenue, on the north side, from a point 50 feet west of the west
curbline of Valley Road, for a distance of 100 feet westerly to the east
end of the private parking area owned by the Merestone Terrace
Association, for a period not to exceed two hours.
N. Sagamore Road, for a period not to exceed two hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(1) On the south side, from a point 34 feet northeasterly of the
northeast curbline of Prescott Avenue, northeasterly, to a point 54
feet southwesterly from the southwesterly curbline of the driveway
to 36 to 52 Sagamore Road.
(2) On the south side, from a point 24 feet northeasterly from the
northeasterly curbline of the driveway to 36 to 52 Sagamore Road,
northeasterly, to the southeasterly curbline of the driveway to 54 to
56 Sagamore Road.
(3) On the south side, from a point 129 feet northeasterly from the
southeasterly curbline of the driveway to 54 to 56 Sagamore Road,
northeasterly therefrom, to a point 532 feet southwesterly from the
west curbline of Avon Road.
(4) On the south side, from a point 452 feet southwesterly from the
west curbline of Avon Road for a distance of 221 feet northeasterly
therefrom.
(5) On the south side, from a point 123 feet northeast of the east
curbline of Avon Road, to the Bronxville-Tuckahoe boundary line
northeasterly therefrom.
(6) On the north side, from a point 48 feet southwest of the west
curbline of Minturn Road, to a point 155 feet northeast of the east
curbline of Avon Road.
(7) On the north side, from a point 52 feet southwesterly from the west
curbline of Avon Road, for a distance of 387 feet southwesterly
therefrom.
(8) On the north side, from a point 564 feet southwest of the west
curbline of Avon Road, for a distance of 43 feet southwesterly
therefrom.
(9) On the north side, from a point 182 feet northeasterly of the
northeast curbline of Beechtree Lane, for a distance of 95 feet
northeasterly therefrom.
(10)On the north side, from a point 42 feet southwesterly from the
southwest curbline of Beechtree Lane, to a point two feet northeast
of the northeast curbline of the Episcopal Church entrance
driveway.
O. Tanglewylde Avenue.
§ 290-29 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-29
282:374
§ 290-30. Limited standing permitted in designated locations.
[Added 10-11-1993]
Standing, for the time limits herein specified, is permitted in the following
locations for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
passengers or merchandise or discharging passengers:
§ 290-31. Special permit parking.
The Board of Trustees is authorized to issue a special permit to allow
exclusive use of a parking space in a village-owned lot without payment of
fee. The space to be designated and the person to whom the permit will be
issued will be made by Board resolution. The Board, at its discretion, may
review the need to issue this permit on an annual basis. The permit will
be issued to a person named by the Senior Citizen Coordinating Council.
Use by an unauthorized vehicle will be subject to issuance of summons for
prohibited parking. A sign stating the restricted use is to be placed at the
space selected and designated.
(1) On the east side, from the south curbline of Willow Road, for a
distance of 150 feet; southwesterly therefrom, to the edge of the
driveway at 26 Tanglewylde Avenue for a period not to exceed one
hour.
(2) On the east side, from the north curbline of Willow Road,
northeasterly therefrom to a point 29 feet southwesterly from the
south curbline of Vine Street, for a period not to exceed three
hours, Monday through Friday.
(3) On the east side, from the north curbline of Vine Street,
northeasterly therefrom to the southern edge of the driveway at 61
Tanglewylde Avenue, for a period not to exceed three hours,
Monday through Friday.
(4) On the north side, between Park Avenue and Midland Avenue, for a
period not to exceed three hours, Monday through Friday.
P. Vine Street, on both sides, between Tanglewylde Avenue and Midland
Avenue, for a period not to exceed three hours, Monday through Friday.
Q. Willow Road, on the north side, from a point 40 feet east of the east
curbline of the driveway at 1 Willow Circle, to the west curbline of the
driveway at 15 Willow Circle, for a period not to exceed three hours,
Monday through Friday.
R. Park Avenue, on the east side, between Tanglewylde Avenue and
Sycamore Street, for a period not to exceed three hours, from 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
A. Cedar Street, on the north side, from a point 20 feet east of the eastern
edge of the McGrath Funeral Home driveway easterly to the A driveway
western edge, for a period not to exceed three minutes.
§ 290-29 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-32
282:375
§ 290-32. Angle parking.
§ 290-33. Handicapped parking.
A. Authorized. Angle parking is hereby authorized in areas marked by
parallel lines at an angle to the curbline in the following locations:
(1) Cedar Street, metered parking spaces in front of the Hawkins
Building.
(2) Kraft Avenue, metered parking spaces on the west side of the street
between Cedar Street and The Bank of New York.
(3) Leonard Morange Square, on the south end at the metered parking
spaces.
(4) Library Lane, on the west side from the entrance at Midland
Avenue to the southern edge of the steps leading to the back
entrance to the Library.
(5) Meadow Avenue, on the south side, between Pondfield Road and
Tanglewylde Avenue, excepting the locations where parking is
prohibited.
(6) Parkway Road, metered parking spaces.
(7) Paxton Avenue, metered parking spaces.
(8) Pondfield Road, metered parking spaces between Cedar Street/
Tanglewylde Avenue and Garden Avenue, and at metered parking
spaces in front of #1 Pondfield Road.
(9) Station Plaza East, metered parking spaces in front of the bank.
(10) Stone Place Parking Area, metered parking spaces. [Amended
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(11) Studio Arcade, metered parking spaces on the north side of the
street.
B. Maximum space. No vehicle shall be angle parked if it is of such length
as to leave less than 18 feet of clear pavement on which other vehicles
may pass it.
C. Required angle. The parking of a vehicle, in a location authorized for
angle parking, with one or more of its wheels touching or crossing one
or both of the parallel lines of demarcation of the parking space, is
prohibited.
A. Designated parking spaces. Designated parking spaces are restricted to
vehicles displaying a handicapped parking permit or a handicapped
license plate. If any designated parking space is a metered parking
space, all requirements set forth in Article XI of this chapter shall apply.
A sign shall be maintained at each designated parking space indicating
§ 290-32 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-33
282:376
§ 290-34. Parking of registered vehicles only. [Added 10-10-1994]
Parking a motor vehicle upon the public streets or municipal parking lots in
the Village of Bronxville without first having been registered in accordance
with the provisions of Article 14, New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law,40
shall be prohibited.
that the designated parking space is for handicapped parking only.
[Amended 10-13-1997; 6-8-1998; 7-13-1998; 9-14-1998;
7-12-1999; 9-9-2002; 9-8-2003; 4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014;
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Lot or Street Spaces
Cedar Street Lot 4 designated spaces
Garden Avenue Lot 4 designated spaces
Kensington Garage 8 designated spaces
Kraft Avenue 1 designated space
Kraft Avenue 1 designated space, adjacent to
and in front of St. Joseph's Church
Kraft Parking Lot 3 designated spaces
Maltby Parking Lot 2 designated spaces
Meadow Avenue 1 designated space at the
intersection with Garden Avenue
Parkway Road 1 designated space
Police Department 1 designated space
Pondfield Road 4 designated spaces
Pondfield Road 2 designated spaces adjacent to
and in front of the Bronxville
Library property
Pondfield Road 1 designated space, adjacent to
and in front of the Bronxville
School
Stone Place Parking Area 2 designated spaces
Studio Arcade 2 designated spaces
Taxi Stand Plaza East side of railroad adjacent to
the current curb cut, with a time
limit of 15 minutes
B. Parking time limits. Notwithstanding any other provisions in these
regulations, all handicapped parking meters shall be adjusted and shall
permit parking for a period not to exceed the time limit of the other
meters located in the same meter zone.
40.Editor's Note: See § 401 et seq.
§ 290-33 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-35
282:377
§ 290-35. Improper parking prohibited. [Added 6-12-1995]
A. The parking of a vehicle, in a location authorized for parking at an angle
or parallel to the curbline and marked by lines delineating the parking
space, with one or more wheels touching or crossing one of the lines of
demarcation of the parking space, is prohibited.
B. The parking of a vehicle, in a location authorized for angle parking, with
the rear wheels towards the front or curbline of the parking space, is
prohibited.
§ 290-35 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-35
282:378
ARTICLE X
Village-Operated Parking Lots
§ 290-36. Applicability of article. [Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
This article shall apply to all Village-operated parking areas.
§ 290-37. Installation and operation of multispace parking
machine. [Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
§ 290-37.1. Operation of mobile payment system. [Added 4-11-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016]
The Village may authorize the use of a mobile payment system through
which a mobile device may be used to make a payment electronically
for parking in certain metered parking spaces. Payments made through a
mobile payment system shall be made in lieu of payments to parking meters
or multispace parking machines.
A. Installation. Multispace parking machines shall be installed at various
Village-operated parking areas. Each such area shall have outlined
parking spaces, together with proper signage for the operation of the
multispace parking machine.
B. Method of operation. Multispace parking machines shall accept
payment in the form of coins of the United States of America as well as
credit cards and debit cards. Fees shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. Hours and days of operation. Multispace parking machine operation
shall be enforced between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily
except Sundays and holidays specified in § 290-41 of this chapter.
§ 290-36 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-37.1
282:379

ARTICLE XI
Parking Meters
§ 290-38. Parking meter zones. [Amended 10-28-1992; 1-14-2013 by
L.L. No. 2-2013; 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014; 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
The following streets and off-street parking areas are hereby designated as
parking meter zones:
A. Streets:
Cedar Street
East Alley
Kensington Road
Kraft Avenue
Leonard Morange Square, south end
Lower Milburn Street
Meadow Avenue
Palmer Avenue
Park Place
Parkway Road
Paxton Avenue
Pondfield Road
Pondfield Road West
Sagamore Road
Station Plaza North and West, Bank of New York
Stone Place
Studio Arcade
Tanglewylde Avenue
Upper Milburn Street
Valley Road, for a distance of 75 feet from the westerly intersection
with Pondfield Road
B. Off-street parking areas:
Cedar Street Lot
Garden Avenue Lot
Kensington Garage, except where designated reserved resident permit
parking, and reserved merchant permit parking
Kraft Avenue Lot
Stone Place Parking Area
§ 290-38 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-39
282:381
§ 290-39. Installation of parking meters; type required.
In the parking meter zones established by § 290-38, pavement markings
shall be applied, where practicable, outlining parking spaces, and a parking
meter shall be installed immediately adjacent to each such parking space.
Each meter shall be so set as to operate upon deposit therein of the coin
or coins of the United States of America required by such meter as stated
thereon for the period of time prescribed as the parking time limit. Each
such meter shall indicate on expiration of the prescribed parking time, that
the lawful parking time has expired and that further parking is a "violation."
§ 290-40. Hours of metered parking space regulation. [Amended
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
Except as limited by § 290-28, parking meters, multispace parking
machines, and mobile payment systems shall operate from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except Sundays and designated holidays. Notwithstanding special
permits issued pursuant to this chapter, failure to make required payments
during hours of metered parking space regulation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 290-41. Parking time limits. [Amended 3-3-1993; 9-14-2015 by
L.L. No. 8-2015; 11-11-1991; 10-12-1992; 3-3-1993; 12-9-1996;
6-9-1997; 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007; 12-12-2011 by L.L. No.
10-2011; 1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013; 4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014;
9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014; 12-8-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014;
9-14-2015 by L.L. No. 8-2015; 11-9-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015;
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of a fire company
or of the Police Department as provided in § 290-46, or except in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control signal, when any
vehicle is parked in the space regulated by a parking meter, multispace
parking machine, or mobile payment system between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. (or such shorter period as may be specified on the meter) on
any day except Sundays and designated holidays, the owner or operator of
such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately make a
payment in a manner permitted by the parking meter, multispace parking
machine, or mobile payment system. Failure to make such necessary
payment shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding
anything in this article to the contrary, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., the parking of vehicles in metered parking spaces for a period
longer than the time limits prescribed in § 290-41 of this chapter is hereby
prohibited. To the extent that any provisions in this article conflict with this
§ 290-41, such provisions are superseded and this § 290-41 shall control.
The designated holidays on which the meters shall not be in operation are
the first day of January, known as "New Year's Day," the last Monday in May,
known as "Memorial Day," the fourth day of July, known as "Independence
Day," the first Monday in September, known as "Labor Day," the fourth
Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day," and the 25th day of
§ 290-39 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-41
282:382
December, known as "Christmas Day." If any of these holidays falls on a
Sunday and is celebrated on the following Monday, then such substitute day
shall be treated as a designated holiday.
A. One and one-half hour parking. During the hours of metered parking
space regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a
period longer than 1 1/2 hours (90 minutes) is hereby prohibited at
metered parking spaces in the following locations: [Amended
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Cedar Street, north side from easterly side of 12 Cedar Street property
line east to Pondfield Road
Park Place
Parkway Road, east side, adjacent to Leonard Morange Square
Parkway Road, at parking meters on west side
Pondfield Road, meters in front of U.S. Post Office
Pondfield Road, on the west side from the intersection of Kraft Avenue
south to Cedar Street
Pondfield Road, on the east side from the intersection of Tanglewylde
Avenue north to Valley Road
Studio Arcade
Valley Road
B. Two-hour parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than two hours is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces
in the following locations: [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
Cedar Street from driveway west of 12 Cedar Street property to Kraft
Avenue
Cedar Street extension from Kraft Avenue to railroad tracks
Cedar Street Lot, row 1
East Alley
Garden Avenue Lot, those metered parking spaces in rows 1 and 2
where the parking meters are labeled as two-hour parking
Kensington Road, west side
Kraft Avenue
Meadow Avenue, north side between Kraft Avenue and Pondfield Road
Paxton Avenue, except where designated as twelve hours
Pondfield Road, west side from Cedar Street to Meadow Avenue and
east side from Valley Road to Sagamore Road and metered spaces in
front of 1 Pondfield Road
Sagamore Road
§ 290-41 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-41
282:383
Stone Place Parking Area, north side
Tanglewylde Avenue
Upper Milburn Street
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. Four-hour parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than four hours is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces
in the following locations: [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
Garden Avenue Lot, those metered parking spaces in rows 2 and 3
where the parking meters are labeled as four-hour parking
Kraft Avenue Lot, public parking spaces in row 1
F. Three-hour parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than three hours is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces
in the following locations: [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
Cedar Street Lot, except row 1
Garden Avenue Lot, those metered parking spaces in rows 1, 2, and 3
where the parking meters are labeled as three-hour parking
Kensington Garage, except where designated reserved resident permit
parking or reserved merchant permit parking
Kraft Avenue Lot, public parking spaces in row 2
G. Thirty-minute parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than 30 minutes is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces
in the following locations:
Leonard Morange Square, south end
Spaces in front of 111 Kraft Avenue
Palmer Avenue, north and south side
Parkway Road, east and west side
H. One-hour parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than one hour is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces in
the following locations: [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(Intentionally left blank)
§ 290-41 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-41
282:384
§ 290-42. Parking meter fees.41 [Amended 10-12-1992; 5-9-1994;
5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
I. Twelve-hour parking. During the hours of metered parking space
regulation specified in § 290-40, the parking of vehicles for a period
longer than 12 hours is hereby prohibited at metered parking spaces in
the following locations: [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Garden Avenue Lot, rows 4 and 5
Kensington Garage, where designated resident permit parking or
merchant permit parking
Kraft Avenue Lot, all metered parking spaces except meters for public
spaces
Meadow Avenue, south side
Paxton Avenue, adjacent to Bronx River Parkway entrance
Stone Place Parking Area, south side
J. Exceptions. [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(1) (Reserved)
A. Fees for use of metered parking spaces for the time limits established in
this article shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
B. A special permit in lieu of parking meter, multispace parking machine,
and mobile payment system fees may be granted to allow parking at any
spaces restricted to metered resident parking. The special permit is
issued as a convenience for users of the area in lieu of making payments
through parking meters, multispace parking machines, or a mobile
payment system, with the express understanding that the purchase of
such a permit does not guarantee that there will be a space available.
The fees for such a permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees. Special permits may be purchased for the
following time periods: [Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014;
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(1) A one-year period from October 1 to September 30;
(2) From January 1 to September 30;
(3) From April 1 to September 30; and
(4) From July 1 to September 30.
C. A special permit in lieu of parking meter, multispace parking machine,
or mobile payment system fees may be granted to allow parking at any
spaces restricted to metered merchant parking. The special permit is
issued as a convenience for users of the area in lieu of making payments
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. A321, Fees Schedule.
§ 290-41 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-42
282:385
§ 290-43. Manner of parking vehicles in parking meter zones;
parking time limits.
§ 290-44. Evidence of unlawful parking. [Amended 4-11-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
During the hours of metered parking space regulation specified in § 290-40,
the mechanical indication by a parking meter of a “violation” shall be prima
facie evidence that a vehicle found in the parking space has been parked in
violation of this article.
§ 290-45. Use of slugs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter,
any slug, device or substitute for the coin or coins of the United States of
America required by such meter as stated thereon.
§ 290-46. Emergency rule; parking. [Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or property,
the use of parking meters, multispace parking machines, or mobile payment
through parking meters, multispace parking machines, or a mobile
payment system, with the express understanding that the purchase of
such a permit does not guarantee that there will be a space available.
The fees for such a permit shall be set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Trustees. Special permits may be purchased for the
following time periods: [Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014;
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(1) A one-year period from July 1 to June 30;
(2) From October 1 to June 30;
(3) From January 1 to June 30; and
(4) From April 1 to June 30.
A. Any vehicle parked in any designated parking space in a parking meter
zone shall be parked within the lines marked and, except as otherwise
provided in this article, shall remain parked in such parking space only
so long as the parking meter, multispace parking machine, and/or
mobile payment system regulating such space shall be in operation
showing that the required payment has been made and the time limit
has not expired. [Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
B. Double parking (standing). Any vehicle parked or standing outside a
parking space at the curb, four feet or further from the curb, or parked
or left standing in a traffic lane shall be deemed to be double parked.
§ 290-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-46
282:386
systems may be temporarily discontinued as to particular parking spaces on
the order of any officer of a Fire Department or of the Police Department.
§ 290-46 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-46
282:387

ARTICLE XII
Parking Permits
§ 290-47. Parking permits. [Amended 5-11-1992; 5-9-1994;
2-13-1995; 1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013; 5-13-2013 by L.L. No.
4-2013; 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014; 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. Types of permits.
(1) Resident permits.
(a) Resident parking permits. Any resident of the Village may
obtain a resident parking permit for parking in the area(s)
specified in this article, and subject to such additional
regulations or fees as provided in this chapter, upon payment
to the Village of an amount, as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that there are no
outstanding parking tickets for the individual making
application, such permit to be valid from October 1 to
September 30 the next following year. Any resident who
applies for a parking permit six months after October 1 will be
charged a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees. Where an area requiring a resident parking
permit is a metered parking space, payment is required
pursuant to Article XI of this chapter unless a resident special
parking permit is also obtained and displayed.
(b) Resident special parking permits, as set forth in § 290-42B,
which shall also entitle the permit holder to park in the
resident area(s) specified in this article.
(c) Overnight resident parking permits. Any resident of the Village
may obtain an overnight parking permit for overnight parking
(6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.) in the area(s) where off-street parking
is allowed as provided in this article, and subject to such
additional regulations or fees as provided in this chapter, upon
payment to the Village of an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that there are no
outstanding parking tickets for the individual making such
application, such permit to be valid from July 1 to June 30 the
next following year.
(d) Reserved resident parking permits. Any resident of the Village
may apply for a reserved resident parking permit, granted on a
first-come, first-served basis based on the number of parking
spaces available, for parking in a specific off-street public
parking lot in a specific parking space assigned to the permit
holder where so allowed as provided in this chapter, and
subject to such additional regulations or fees as provided in
this chapter, upon payment to the Village of an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
§ 290-47 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-47
282:389
provided that there are no outstanding parking tickets for the
individual making such application, such permit to be valid
from March 1 to the last day in February the next following
year. Reserved resident parking permit holders are allowed to
park within the designated parking space 24 hours per day,
seven days per week.
(e) Kensington Garage resident special parking permits. Residents
may obtain a Kensington Garage resident special parking
permit for parking in the Kensington Garage in the area
specified in this article, and subject to such additional
regulations or fees as provided in this chapter, upon payment
to the Village of an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that there are no
outstanding parking tickets for the individual making
application, such permit to be valid from July 1 to June 30 next
following.
(2) Merchant permits.
(a) Merchant parking permits. Any merchant doing business in the
Village may obtain a merchant parking permit for parking in
the area(s) specified in this article, and subject to such
additional regulations or fees as provided in this chapter, upon
payment to the Village of an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that there are no
outstanding parking tickets for the individual making
application, such permit to be valid from July 1 to June 30 the
next following year. Any merchant who applies for a permit six
months after July 1 will be charged a fee of an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Where
an area requiring a merchant parking permit is a metered
parking space, payment is required pursuant to Article XI of
this chapter unless a merchant special parking permit is also
obtained and displayed.
(b) Merchant special parking permits, as set forth in § 290-42C,
which shall also entitle the permit holder to park in the
merchant area(s) specified in this article except where
otherwise indicated. A holder of a merchant special parking
permit specific to a particular merchant parking area shall also
be permitted to park in other merchant parking area(s) where
the use of a merchant special parking permit is allowed
pursuant to § 290-42C.
(c) Reserved merchant parking permits. Any merchant doing
business in the Village may apply for a reserved merchant
parking permit, granted on a first-come, first-served basis
based on the number of parking spaces available, for parking
in a specific off-street public parking lot in a specific parking
space assigned to the permit holder where so allowed as
§ 290-47 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-47
282:390
provided in this article, and subject to such additional
regulations or fees as provided in this chapter, upon payment
to the Village of an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, provided that there are
no outstanding parking tickets for the individual making such
application, such permit to be valid from March 1 to the last
day in February the next following year. Reserved merchant
parking permit holders are allowed to park within the
designated parking space 24 hours per day, seven days per
week.
(d) Maltby merchant parking permits. Any merchant doing
business in the Village whose business is east of the railroad
tracks may obtain a Maltby merchant parking permit for
parking in the Maltby Parking Lot in the area(s) specified in
this article, and subject to such additional regulations or fees
as provided in this chapter, upon payment to the Village of an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, provided that there are no outstanding parking
tickets for the individual making application, such permit to be
valid from July 1 to June 30 next following.
(e) Garden Avenue merchant special parking permits. Any
merchant doing business in the Village may obtain a Garden
Avenue merchant special parking permit for parking in the
Garden Avenue Lot in the area(s) specified in this article, and
subject to such additional regulations or fees as provided in
this chapter, upon payment to the Village of an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
provided that there are no outstanding parking tickets for the
individual making application, such permit to be valid from July
1 to June 30 next following.
(f) Kensington Garage merchant special parking permits. Any
merchant doing business in the Village may obtain a
Kensington Garage merchant special parking permit for
parking in the Kensington Garage in the area(s) specified in
this article, and subject to such additional regulations or fees
as provided in this chapter, upon payment to the Village of an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, provided that there are no outstanding parking
tickets for the individual making application, such permit to be
valid from July 1 to June 30 next following.
B. All applications for resident, resident special, resident premium,
overnight resident, and reserved resident parking permit shall require
proof that the applicant is a Village resident and that there is proof that
the permit is to be used and placed upon a passenger car registered
with the Motor Vehicle Bureau with a Bronxville address or proof that
the car to be used is on a long-term lease to a Village resident.
§ 290-47 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-47
282:391
C. Except for reserved resident, reserved merchant parking permits, and
Kensington Garage resident special parking permits, the issuance of a
parking permit does not guarantee that there will be a space available.
D. Placement of stickers. All permit stickers must be affixed to the interior
of the rear side window on the driver's side of the vehicle for which the
permit was issued (not the back window facing the back wheels of the
vehicle). Failure to properly affix the permit sticker as set out in this
section may result in issuance of a summons for which a fine (set
pursuant to § 290-48) may be imposed in the Village Court.
E. Parking permits required. During the times and within the areas
specified below, the parking of vehicles other than those displaying the
valid parking permit specified below is prohibited:
(1) Avalon lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as resident parking: both resident parking
permit and resident special parking permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
(2) Cedar Street lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as resident parking: resident parking permit
(requiring payment of parking meter).
(b) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) merchant parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) merchant
parking permit and merchant special parking permit.
(c) Area(s) marked as overnight parking: overnight resident
parking permit.
(3) Colodny lot (formerly Hawkins Building parking area):
(a) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as reserved merchant parking: reserved
merchant parking permit.
(4) Garden Avenue lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) merchant parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) merchant
parking permit and merchant special parking permit specific to
the Garden Avenue lot.
(b) Area(s) marked as overnight parking: overnight resident
parking permit.
(5) Kensington Garage:
§ 290-47 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-47
282:392
(a) Area(s) marked as Kensington Garage resident special parking
permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) merchant parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) merchant
parking permit and Kensington Garage merchant special
parking permit specific to Kensington Garage.
(c) Area(s) marked as overnight parking: overnight resident
parking permit.
(d) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
(e) Area(s) marked as reserved merchant parking: reserved
merchant parking permit.
(6) Kraft Avenue lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as resident parking: (1) resident parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) resident
parking permit and resident special parking permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) merchant parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) merchant
parking permit and merchant special parking permit.
(7) Maltby lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) both merchant
parking permit and merchant special parking permit, or (2)
both merchant parking permit and Maltby merchant parking
permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as overnight parking: overnight resident
parking permit.
(c) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
(d) Area(s) marked as reserved merchant parking: reserved
merchant parking permit.
(8) Stone Place parking area:
(a) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
(b) Area(s) marked as reserved merchant parking: reserved
merchant parking permit.
(c) Area(s) marked as merchant parking: (1) merchant parking
permit (requiring payment of parking meter), or (2) merchant
parking permit and merchant special parking permit.
§ 290-47 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-47
282:393
(9) Upper Kensington lot:
(a) Area(s) marked as reserved resident parking: reserved
resident parking permit.
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. (Reserved)
I. (Reserved)
§ 290-47 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-47
282:394
ARTICLE XIII
Penalties
§ 290-48. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-11-1992; 6-8-1992;
3-3-1993; 5-10-1993; 10-10-1994; 2-13-1995; 4-7-2014 by L.L. No.
3-2014; 5-11-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
A. The following are the maximum penalties for violations of traffic
regulations:42
(1) No Parking 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(2) No Parking Bus Stop: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(3) No Parking Loading Zone: as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
(4) No Parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
(5) No Parking 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(6) Excessive Standing: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(7) No Resident Permit Village Lot: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(8) No Merchant Permit Village Lot: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(9) No Parking Permit: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(10) Unregistered Motor Vehicles: as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Trustees.
(11) Expired Inspection: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(12) Double Parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
(13) Crosswalk: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
(14) Fire Hydrant Parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. A321, Fees Schedule.
§ 290-48 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-48
282:395
(15) Blocking Driveway: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(16) Handicapped Parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(17) Improper Parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(18) Failing To Obey Sign Stopping/Standing/Parking: as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(19) Snow Removal: as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
(20) Overtime parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(21) Expired meter parking: as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
(22) Failure to properly affix parking permit sticker: as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. [Added 10-10-2017
by L.L. No. 3-2017]
B. Escalating penalties.
(1) There shall be an escalating maximum penalty for overtime parking
and for expired meter parking as set forth in Subsection C below:
(2) The schedule of escalating penalties is based upon the number of
offenses during the period commencing one year prior to the date
of the most recent offense.
C. The penalty for each violation discussed in this § 290-48 shall be
doubled if the payment for the fine is not made within 14 days from the
date of issuance of the summons for the violation. The penalty for each
violation discussed in this § 290-48 shall be tripled if the payment for
the fine is not made within 28 days from the date of issuance of the
summons for the violation.
§ 290-48 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-48
282:396
Part 3
Procedural Requirem[Aednotps tFeodr 9 P-9ro-1p9o9se1d] Traffic Regulations
ARTICLE XIV
Proposed Traffic Regulations
§ 290-49. Procedure for amendments.
Prior to the adoption of any amendment to the traffic regulations of the
Village of Bronxville, the following procedural steps shall be taken, provided
that such requirements shall not apply with respect to any addition, deletion
or other change to any such proposed amendment made at a meeting of
the Board of Trustees, and provided that the Board of Trustees retains the
authority to waive compliance with or amend or rescind this resolution at
any time:
A. Due public notice of the proposed amendment shall be given in the
same manner that notice of a proposed local law is given;
B. A public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be duly held in the
same manner that a hearing is held on a proposed local law; and
C. Comment on the proposed amendment shall be solicited from the
Parking Commission.
§ 290-49 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-49
282:397

Part 4
[Adopted 10-P15er-2m0i0t 7PaBrykLin.Lg. No. 7-2007]
ARTICLE XV
Temporary Limited Parking for Resident Vehicles Displaying LK
Parking Permits
§ 290-50. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville finds that there is a
potential for a temporary shortage of parking for residents of the Village
of Bronxville from the displacement of approximately 180 vehicles from
the Kensington parking lot, which is comprised of three public parking
lots located adjacent to the Metro-North train station, abutting Kensington
Road, in the Village of Bronxville. This displacement will occur during a
period of construction in the Kensington parking lot, when such lot will
be unavailable for public parking. Without a parking system in place to
accommodate these displaced vehicles, this lack of parking is likely to result
in traffic hazards, congestion and air and noise pollution, and could pose a
hazard to residents and other pedestrians in the area. The Board of Trustees
finds that in order to minimize and reduce such hazards and pollution
levels, the institution of a temporary residential parking permit system is
necessary.
§ 290-51. Applicability.
This article shall remain in effect until such time as parking in the
Kensington parking lot area is made fully available as public parking.
§ 290-52. Vehicles displaying LK parking permits exempt from
parking time limits.
A. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in this chapter, for the
duration of this article, vehicles displaying valid LK parking permits
shall be exempt from the parking time limits set forth in §§ 290-27 and
290-29 and shall be permitted to park any time in the parking spaces
delineated in the following locations: [Amended 7-14-2014 by L.L.
No. 4-2014]
(1) Dewitt Avenue from Paxton Avenue to the Village line.
(2) Garden Avenue from Pondfield Road to Tanglewylde Avenue.
(3) Kensington Road from Sagamore Road to Oval Court.
(4) Paxton Avenue from Stone Place to Dewitt Avenue.
(5) Sagamore Road from Pondfield Road to the Village line.
(6) Valley Road from Pondfield Road to Prescott Avenue.
§ 290-50 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-52
282:399
§ 290-53. Exemptions.
Motor vehicles registered pursuant to § 404-a of the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law shall be exempt from the requirements in this article.
§ 290-54. Fees. [Amended 4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
Fees for the LK parking permit shall be set at $110 per month, or as may be
fixed by the Board of Trustees from time to time. Such fees shall be credited
to the general fund of the Village.
B. All other vehicles shall remain subject to the established parking time
limits, unless otherwise exempt.
§ 290-52 BRONXVILLE CODE § 290-54
282:400
Chapter 310
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 140.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 156.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 257.
Trees, shrubs and plants — See Ch. 282.
§ 290-54 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 290-54
282:401

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 310-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the
Village of Bronxville, New York."
§ 310-2. General intent; applicability. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 1-2000]
Pursuant to Article 7 of the Village Law, the intent of this chapter is to
establish comprehensive controls for the use and development of land in the
Village of Bronxville, based on the general plan for the Village, in order to
promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the people. No provisions of this chapter shall apply to any
proprietary or governmental use of the Village of Bronxville.
§ 310-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADVISOR — An advisor to the Planning Board of the Village.
AGE RESTRICTED MULTIPLE RESIDENCE FACILITY — A multiple
residence for persons 62 years of age or older and their spouses, composed
of individual dwelling units, having access to communal facilities through a
common lobby.[Added 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
ALLEY — A public way having a width of less than 40 feet.
APPLICANT — A developer (as defined for purposes of this chapter)
submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
development.
ATTIC — Any space situated wholly or partly between the roof and the top
habitable story of a building.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE — A reference plane representing the average
of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior
walls.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
BANK OR FINANCIAL OFFICE — A commercial bank, savings bank, savings
and loan association, credit union, trust company, finance company,
mortgage company, or investment company. Automatic teller machines,
point-of-sale terminals and similar facilities located as incidental services in
other kinds of retail facilities shall not be deemed to be in the foregoing
categories.[Amended 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
BASEMENT — That space of a building, which is partly below grade, which
has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
§ 310-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-3
282:403
average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building. A basement
shall be considered a story if the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is:[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon
the lot on which such sign is situated.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any construction,
except where entirely underground so as to permit the use of the ground
above the same as if no building were present; the term "building" shall
include the term "structure" as well as the following:
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to, and either attached
to or detached from, the principal building on a lot used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the principal building.
CARRY-OUT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A business enterprise primarily
engaged in the on-site preparation and sale of food and/or beverages, which
may include the sale of ready-to-consume food and/or beverages which may
be consumed in limited on-site seating. Carry-out food establishments shall
be subject to the special permit provisions in § 310-42H. Carry-out food
establishments shall not include fast-food restaurants as defined in § 310-3
of this chapter. The term "carry-out food establishment" shall not include
groceries, food markets, bakeries or other similar business enterprises
which do not include seating facilities.[Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997; 1-8-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
CBAT DISTRICT — An area designated as a Central Business A Transition
District, pursuant to Article IVA of this chapter.[Added 6-28-2011 by L.L.
No. 5-2011]
A. More than six feet above the average finished grade; or
More than six feet above the finished ground level for more than 50%
of the total building perimeter; or
B.
C. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
A. Signs;
B. Fences;
Walls, other than retaining walls projecting above the ground not more
than three feet at the higher ground level and not more than 6 1/2 feet
at the lower ground level;
C.
Radio and television antennas, except for such antennas installed on
the roof of a building and extending not more than 15 feet above the
highest level of the roof of such building; and
D.
E. Pergolas, porches, outdoor bins and other similar structures.
§ 310-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-3
282:404
CBAT DISTRICT APPLICATION — An application to the Board of Trustees
to designate a parcel(s) of real property to be within the Central Business A
Transition District.[Added 6-28-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
CBD — The districts in the Zoning Law of the Village of Bronxville
designated as Central Business A and Service Business B districts.
CD DISTRICT — An area designated as a Controlled Development District,
pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, to permit planned and controlled
development of the area not otherwise permitted by applicable zoning
district regulations.
CD DISTRICT APPLICATION — An application to the Board of Trustees for
a Controlled Development District.
CELLAR — That space of a building, which is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.[Amended
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
COMMONLY OWNED SITE — Property owned by the owner of the premises
for which provision of parking is required.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Village adopted
by the Board of Trustees, as amended.
COURT, INNER — An open space enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of
a building.
COURT, OUTER — An open space enclosed on three sides by exterior walls
of a building.
COURT, OUTER, DEPTH OF — The linear average dimension measured
from the unenclosed side of the court to the farthest wall thereof.
COURT, OUTER, WIDTH OF — The linear dimension of the unenclosed side
of the court.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the combined
area of all buildings or structures on the lot.
CURB LEVEL — The established elevation of the street grade at the point
that is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the street line.
Where a building is on a corner lot, the curb level is the average of the
mean sea levels of the curb on the two intersecting streets. Where a front
yard setback of 25 feet or more is provided, or where there are two or more
buildings on a lot, the curb level is the average level of the land immediately
adjacent to the building, prior to or after any excavation or fill, as may be
determined by the Superintendent of Buildings.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — An outdoor platform attached to the principal structure of a
building and built above the natural grade. A deck does not have a roof and
is exposed to the elements.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
§ 310-3 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-3
282:405
DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE — The Design Review Committee of the
Planning Board of the Village, established pursuant to Article VIII of this
chapter.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or any other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The subdivision of land, the clearance or alteration
of land, the construction, demolition, movement, external alteration or
enlargement of any building or other structure, including installation of
an awning, the construction or enlargement of any open parking area,
accessory or otherwise, the diversion, dredging or filing in of any water
course, floodplain or wetlands, or the change of use of any land or building
or other structure, for which permission is required pursuant to this
chapter.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof containing more
than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building containing one dwelling
unit only.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one family, including
any domestic servants employed on the premises, and having no enclosed
space (other than vestibules, entrance or other hallways or porches) or
cooking or sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit. A
boardinghouse, convalescent home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house,
hotel, inn, lodging house, nursing or other similar home, or other similar
structures shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling unit.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — A facility used for or in support of education,
instruction, or research in any branch of knowledge, including private
and public elementary and secondary schools, colleges, and universities.
"Educational facility" shall not mean uses such as martial arts, dance,
music instruction, or craft studios, as these are defined as indoor
recreation.[Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a nonprofit
housekeeping unit. More than five persons, exclusive of domestic servants,
not related by blood, marriage or adoption, shall not be considered to
constitute one family unless such persons are the functional and factual
equivalent of a natural family.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings on a lot measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two
buildings, excluding:
A. Roof areas;
§ 310-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-3
282:406
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — See § 310-22E of Article V, Supplementary
Regulations and Nonconforming Buildings and Uses.[Added 4-14-2003 by
L.L. No. 2-2003]
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The gross square feet of space measured from the
outside of any exterior wall and the middle of any interior wall separating
the space to be measured from an adjoining space owned, leased or
occupied by another and including that portion of the public areas of the
building that are included in the leased space and any equipment such as
air conditioning, ventilating, elevator shafts and the like which are within or
appurtenant to the space as so defined.
HEALTH CLUB — A facility designed and used for body training,
conditioning, and rehabilitation, including activities such as aerobic and
related class exercises and which may contain equipment such as a sauna,
steam room, showers, exercise equipment, and locker facilities.[Added
7-9-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL — Any licensed physician, medical or dental
practitioner and any other person providing health care to humans.
HEIGHT —
HOSPITAL BED — All beds in a hospital for human beings for the regular
use of patients overnight, except bassinets.
Cellar and basement areas used only for storage or for the operating
and maintenance of the building; and
B.
C. Any areas devoted only to accessory off-street parking or loading.
For buildings the front wall of which is within five feet of the street: the
vertical distance in feet and in stories measured from the curb level to
the highest level of the roof surface of roofs the slope of which is not
more than one inch vertical to one foot horizontal, or the mean point
between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any
other type.
A.
For buildings located in their entirety more than five feet from the
street line: the height in feet and in stories shall be established by
the Superintendent of Buildings in such a way that no building shall
be prevented from attaining at least at one point the maximum height
permitted in the district in which such building is proposed to be
erected, such height to be measured from the elevation of the finished
grade abutting such building at that point.
B.
For one-family dwellings: the vertical distance from the average level
of the finished grade along the wall or walls of the building facing the
street to the highest level of the roof surface of roofs the slope of which
is not more than one inch vertical to one foot horizontal, or the mean
point between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is
of any other type.
C.
§ 310-3 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-3
282:407
HOTEL — A building or part of a building in which living or sleeping
accommodations are used primarily for transient occupancy on a daily
basis to the general public, one or more common entrances serve all such
living or sleeping units, and twenty-four-hour desk service is provided, in
addition to one or more of the following services: housekeeping, telephone,
or bellhop service, or the furnishing or laundering of linens. Permitted
accessory uses are restaurants or other public dining facility, bars or
lounges, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.[Added
7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A commercial establishment designed
and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure activities and other
recreational activities wholly within an enclosed building.[Added 7-9-2018
by L.L. No. 8-2018]
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting on two or more streets at
their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135º.
LOT DEPTH — For lots where the front and rear lot lines are parallel, the
minimum distance from the street line of a lot to the rear lot line of such
lot. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the average
length of lines from the front to rear lot lines, measured every ten feet at
right angles to the front lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, PRINCIPAL FRONT — In the case of a corner lot, the principal
front lot line is the front street line, as initially designated in an application
for a permit to erect or alter a building on such lot, or, if not so designated,
the street line from which the principal building is set back the greatest
distance, or, if such setback is equidistant from two or more street lines,
the street line which is nearest to the main entrance of the principal
building.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite the front lot line; in the
case of a corner lot, the lot line generally opposite the principal front lot
line, or in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length
entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front
lot line.[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot boundary line which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
LOT or PLOT — A parcel, tract or area of land, not necessarily coincident
with a lot or lots shown on a map of record, established or permitted by law
to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
§ 310-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-3
282:408
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured along a line drawn parallel
to the front lot line through the point of existing or proposed construction
nearest to such front lot line.
MEMBER — A member of the Planning Board of the Village.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building the size, dimensions or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment to conform to the regulations prescribed for the district in
which it is situated.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform
to the present regulations prescribed for the district in which it is situated.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
requirements prescribed for the district in which it is situated.
OCCUPIED or USED — Either term, as applied to a building, shall be
construed as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied or used."
OPEN SPACE — Land area open to the air not occupied by any structures
and landscaped or left in its natural state. For example, open space shall not
include swimming pools, tennis courts, decks, patios, walkways, driveways,
carports, or parking lots.[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
OUTDOOR EATING AREA — A portion of an eating or drinking
establishment (including, but not limited to, bakeries and coffee shops)
located on a public sidewalk that provides waiter or waitress service to
patrons. The space on the sidewalk typically contains readily removable
tables, chairs, railings, waiter stations, etc. For the purposes of this section,
"readily removable" shall mean that no object or fixture which is part of
the outdoor eating area shall be leaded, cemented, nailed, bolted, power
riveted, screwed in or affixed, even in a temporary manner, to either the
sidewalk on which it is placed, to the building or to any other structure it
abuts.[Added 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
PARKING SPACE — A paved or surfaced space which is accessible and
available at all hours for the parking of one passenger car. The size shall
not be less than 18 feet long and 8 1/2 feet in width and the arrangement of
parking spaces shall be determined by regulation of the Planning Board.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village established
pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRINCIPAL STREET LEVEL — When applied to a building, structure or
premises, that portion thereof which abuts an improved sidewalk and street
which provides the principal means of access to the interior of the building.
§ 310-3 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-3
282:409
RESTAURANT — A business engaged in the preparation and sale of food
and beverages selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table or
counter, served by a waiter or waitress and consumed on the premises. The
term "restaurant" does not include a bar, cabaret, carry-out restaurant or
fast-food restaurant.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business enterprise primarily engaged in
the sale of ready-to-consume food and beverages generally served in
disposable or prepackaged containers or wrappers and where patrons
usually select their orders from a posted menu offering a limited number
of specialized items, such as, but not limited to, hamburgers, chicken, fish
and chips, pizza, tacos and hot dogs, which are prepared according to
standardized procedures for consumption either on or off the premises in a
facility where a substantial portion of the sales to the public is by drive-in or
stand-up service and cleanup is generally performed by the customer. The
term "fast-food restaurant" shall not include a carry-out restaurant.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in selling goods,
merchandise, and/or services on premises to the general public at retail
for personal or household consumption or for business use. Such an
establishment may also provide services related to the products it sells,
such as an eyeglass store which provides eyeglass examinations, or a
jewelry store that fabricates or repairs jewelry it sells. Such an
establishment may have a retail food establishment as an accessory use
located entirely within the principal structure and with no exterior entrance
of its own.[Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004; amended 1-8-2018 by
L.L. No. 2-2018]
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — A dish antenna or equivalent device, the
exclusive purpose of which is to receive communication or their signals
from orbiting satellites, other extra terrestrial sources, or earth sources
intended to carry signals into the interior of a building.[Amended
6-9-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
SEPARATE BUILDING — A building not connected with another building by
means of access through a common wall.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots containing such
information as is required by this chapter.
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements where basements are defined as a story, and vehicular parking
levels, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level of the
next higher finished floor, or if there be no higher finished floor, then that
part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished floor
and the top of the roof. Screened rooftop parking will not be considered as
a story.[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
STORY, HALF — Any space partially or fully within the roof framing, where
the clear height of not more than 50% of such space between the top
of the floor beams and the structural ceiling level is five feet or more.
If the aggregate of such area exceeds 50% of the floor area of the floor
§ 310-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-3
282:410
immediately below, such area shall be considered a full story in computing
the height of the building.[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Buildings of the Village.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live
performances.[Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
TRAILER — Any vehicle mounted on wheels, movable either by its own
power or by being drawn by another vehicle, which is initially designed to
be used for living or sleeping quarters. The term "trailer" shall include such
vehicles if mounted on temporary or permanent foundations with the wheels
removed.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — An unenclosed portion of the ground of a lot which
is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces, which is free of structures
of any kind, of which not more than 25% is roofed for shelter purposes
only, the minimum dimension of which is 40 feet, and which is available and
accessible to all occupants of the building or buildings on the said lot for
purposes of active or passive outdoor recreation. Accessory building roof
space may be substituted for ground space, provided that such space is
available and accessible to all the said occupants by means of access other
than stairs.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
main use on a lot, whether such accessory use be conducted in a principal
or accessory building.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village,
unless some other person shall have been appointed to such a position by
the Village.
YARD — An unoccupied ground area unobstructed by any structure,
exclusive of walls and fences, on a lot.
YARD, FRONT — An unoccupied ground area between the front lot line and
any building, measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to
the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — An unoccupied ground area between the rear lot line and
any building, measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to
the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An unoccupied ground area between any lot line other than
a front or rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto and between the
front and rear yards.
§ 310-3 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-3
282:411

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts; Map
§ 310-4. List of districts. [Amended 6-28-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
The Village of Bronxville is hereby divided into the following districts:
One-Family Residence AAA District
One-Family Residence AA District
One-Family Residence A District
Two-Story Multiple Residence B District
Three-Story Multiple Residence C District
Six-Story Multiple Residence D District
Central Business A District
Service Business B District
Controlled Development CD District
Central Business A Transition District
§ 310-5. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the
"1995 Zoning Map of the Village of Bronxville," which is found at the end
of this chapter and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter. Said map, indicating the latest
amendments, shall be kept up to date in the office of the Superintendent of
Buildings and the office of the Village Clerk for the use and benefit of the
public.
§ 310-6. District boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries shall be construed to
coincide with the center lines of streets, alleys and main track or tracks
of railroads.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
property lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
C. In all cases where a district boundary divides a lot in one ownership and
more than 50% of the area of such lot lies in the less restricted district,
the regulation prescribed by this chapter for the less restricted district
shall apply to the portion of the more restricted portion of said lot which
lies within 30 feet of such district boundary. For purposes of this
section, the more restricted district shall be deemed that district which
is subject to regulations which prohibit the particular use intended to
§ 310-4 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-6
282:413
§ 310-7. Effect of establishment of districts.
Following the effective date of the Village of Bronxville Zoning Ordinance of
1958 or any applicable amendments thereto:
be made of said lot or which regulations require higher standards
with respect to setbacks, coverage, yards, screening, landscaping and
similar requirements.
D. In all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther than 15
feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary line shall be
construed to coincide with such lot line.
E. In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the map, the
location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
F. Where a question arises as to the exact boundary of a zoning district,
the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village may by resolution determine
the location of the boundary, giving due consideration, among other
factors, to the indicated location of the boundary on the Zoning Map,
the scale appearing thereon and the expressed intent and purpose of
this chapter.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor
shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for
any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with all regulations,
requirements and/or restrictions specified in this chapter for the
district in which such building or land is located.
B. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required open space for any other
building on the same or any other lot.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this
chapter for the district in which said lot is located. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created unless
such building and lot comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
D. The minimum lot dimension or lot area regulations or both, shall not
apply to any lot with an area, width and/or depth of less than prescribed
herein, provided that:
(1) Such lot was under different ownership from that of any adjoining
land on the effective date of the Village of Bronxville Zoning
Ordinance of 1958 or any amendments thereto;
(2) If the proposed improvement of the lot would not have been
unlawful immediately prior to the effective date of the Village of
§ 310-6 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-7
282:414
Bronxville Zoning Ordinance of 1958 or any amendments thereto;
and
(3) Such lot shall be subject to all other applicable regulations
prescribed by this chapter.
E. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building complying with existing
law, a permit for which shall have been duly issued and the construction
of which shall have been started before the effective date of the Village
of Bronxville Zoning Ordinance of 1958, or any amendments thereto,
and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of
beams, shall have been completed within six months of the date of the
permit and which entire building shall have been completed in
accordance with such plans as have been filed within one year from the
effective date of the Village of Bronxville Zoning Ordinance of 1958, or
any amendments thereto.
§ 310-7 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-7
282:415

ARTICLE III
District Use and Bulk Regulations
§ 310-8. One-Family Residence AAA District.
A. Use. In a One-Family Residence AAA District, no building or premises
shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part,
for any purpose, except the following: [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997]
(1) One-family dwelling, not to exceed one such dwelling on each lot.
(2) Municipal parks and playgrounds, including customary
recreational, refreshment and service buildings. [Amended
2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
(3) Places of worship, including parish houses and religious school
buildings and schools, including uses customarily accessory
thereto subject to the following requirements:
(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this
chapter, no building shall exceed a height of 42 feet nor shall
the number of stories at any point along the periphery of such
building exceed three stories at any point along the periphery
of such building exceed three stories. Chimneys, flues, towers,
bulkheads, spires and other decorative features shall be
exempt from the provisions of this subsection, provided that
they occupy not more than 20% of the area of the roof of the
building of which they are a part.
(b) No building or part thereof shall be erected nearer than 50 feet
to any street line nor nearer to any property line other than a
street line than 50 feet or two times the height of such
building, whichever is the greater distance.
(c) The sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot.
(d) Courts shall conform to the requirements of Subsection I of
§ 310-11 of this chapter.
(e) Any private school permitted under this Subsection shall be a
nonprofit organization within the meaning of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, and shall be registered
effectively as such thereunder.
(4) Accessory uses, limited to the following:
(a) Home occupations, as defined in § 310-42F(1)(a) of this
chapter, provided that the home occupation has no nonresident
employees and no regular visitors (with the exception of
dancing, music or other instruction where groups of up to four
§ 310-8 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-8
282:417
pupils may be present at any one time). The term "nonresident
employee" shall include those persons engaged in the business
enterprise or business activity and shall not include domestic
employees. Home occupations with a nonresident employee
and/or regular visitors shall require a special permit as set
forth in § 310-42F of this chapter. All home occupations must
meet the following standards:
[1] The home occupation shall occupy no more than 30% of
the total gross floor area of the main floor of the principal
structure, up to a maximum of 400 square feet.
[2] The residential character of the building(s) shall not be
altered.
[3] There may be no more than one sign identifying the home
occupation, located either on the house or mail box. The
sign shall not exceed one square foot in size.
[4] There shall be no display of products visible from the
street.
[5] There shall be no outdoor storage of commercial vehicles.
[6] There shall be no retail sales on the premises.
[7] There shall be no manufacturing or assemblage on the
premises.
[8] No home occupation shall create environmental impacts
(for example but not limited to noise, dust, odor or fire
hazard) or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or
more frequent extent than that usually experienced in the
district.
[9] The home occupation shall not be conducted out-of-doors
on the site.
[10] The home occupation and its location in the home and/or
its accessory buildings must comply with the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(b) Garden house, tool house, playhouse, greenhouse or swimming
pool, playsets and other recreational structures incidental to
the residential use of the premises and not operated for gain,
subject to the following requirements.
[1] No part of any swimming pool shall be nearer than 20 feet
to any property line nor, except in the case of a corner lot,
nearer to any street line than that rear wall of the main
building which is located nearest to the street. On a corner
lot, a pool may project within a distance of one of the
bounding streets equal to the required front yard.
§ 310-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-8
282:418
[2] Swimming pools shall be screened from the view of
abutting properties by means of an opaque fence or a thick
hedge with a height of not less than 6 1/2 feet, in addition
to applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
[3] Recreational structures shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from any property line and shall be screened from the
view of abutting properties by means of an opaque fence
or a thick hedge with a height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
No recreational structure shall be sited within any front
yard, as defined in § 310-3 of this chapter.
[4] Sheds, garden houses and tool houses shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from any property line and shall be
screened from the view of abutting properties by means of
an opaque fence or a thick hedge with a height of not less
than 6 1/2 feet. No shed, garden house or tool house shall
be sited within any front yard, as defined in § 310-3 of this
chapter.
(c) Private garage for passenger automobiles of residents on the
premises, including the leasing to a nonresident of the
premises of space for not more than one such automobile.
Detached garages shall not be sited within any front yard, as
defined in § 310-3 of this chapter, except as otherwise
permitted and shall be granted a reduced setback of 10 feet
from any property line, provided that the following
requirements are met: [Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
[1] A maximum height of 10 feet for flat roofs.
[2] A maximum height of 15 feet for pitched roofs.
(d) The keeping of a reasonable number of customary household
pets but excluding the commercial breeding or keeping of
same.
(e) Fences or garden walls.
(f) Solar energy systems, as defined and subject to the
supplementary standards in § 310-22F of this chapter. [Added
9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(g) Geothermal energy systems, as defined in § 310-22G of this
chapter. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(5) Special permit uses. The Planning Board may allow the following
uses by special permit, as regulated in Article VII of this chapter:
[Amended 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(a) Satellite earth stations and communications facilities.
§ 310-8 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-8
282:419
(b) Renewable energy systems, as defined in § 310-22G of this
chapter, except no special permit is required for geothermal
energy systems.
B. Height. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) hereof, no building shall
be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet, nor shall the number of
stories at any point along the periphery of any building exceed 2 1/2.
Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires and other decorative
features shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection,
provided that they occupy not more than 20% of the area of the building
of which they are a part.
C. Lot area, width and depth. The lot area shall not be less than 30,000
square feet and the lot width not less than 150 feet. All lots shall have a
minimum depth of 150 feet, except that such depth may be decreased to
125 feet if the average depth of the lot equals at least 150 feet.
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard along each street line with a
depth of not less than 25 feet, except that, where the planes of all
walls of a building facing the street intersect the street line at a
minimum angle of 25º or more, such building may project to within
20 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each lot line with a
width of not less than 15 feet; except that in case of a dwelling
erected without a garage, one side yard shall be not less than 27
feet wide. In the case of corner lots, the side yard opposite the
principal front yard shall be not less than 30 feet wide and the
other not less than 15 feet wide, except that in the case of a
dwelling erected without a garage, the lesser side yard shall be not
less than 27 feet wide. Where the planes of all walls of a building
facing a side lot line intersect such line at a minimum angle of 25°
or more, the lesser-required setback distance may be reduced by
five feet, except in the case of a building erected without a garage.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than 45 feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements. Cornices or cantilevered roofs
may project not more than two feet into a required yard. Belt
courses, window sills and other ornamental features may project
not more than six inches into a required yard. Fences or walls not
over 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected anywhere on the lot,
except that any such fence or wall erected in any front yard shall be
not more than 1/2 solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any front
yard of any corner lot shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at
any intersection as provided on § 310-22 of this chapter. Fences or
§ 310-8 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-8
282:420
§ 310-9. One-Family Residence AA District.
walls with a height in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein for buildings. Paved terraces, steps
and walks (other than such as are needed for access to the
buildings on the lot) shall not project within 15 feet of a street line
or four feet of a property line.
(5) Location of accessory buildings on the lot. In addition to complying
with all other provisions of this chapter, no accessory building shall
project nearer to the street on which the principal building fronts
than such principal building, except that, should topographic
conditions be such that practical difficulties would be caused by
this requirement with respect to the location of garages, the
Planning Board may authorize the issuance of a special permit for
the erection of such garages within not less than 10 feet of the
street line where the natural slope of the ground within 25 feet of
such line is between 12% and 20% and within not less than five feet
of the street line where such slope within 25 feet of such line
exceeds 20%.
E. Maximum building coverage. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of
§ 310-8, the sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot. [Amended
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
F. Off-street parking requirements. For each dwelling on any lot there
shall be provided on the lot not less than two spaces for the parking or
garaging of passenger automobiles. Such spaces shall be directly
accessible to a street.
G. Floor area ratio (FAR). See § 310-22E for FAR controls. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
H. Minimum open space requirement. The minimum open space
requirement for a lot shall be 50% of the area of the lot. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
A. Use. In a One-Family Residence AA District, no building or premises
shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected,
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part,
for any purpose, except the following:
(1) Any use permitted in One-Family Residence AAA Districts.
B. Height. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of § 310-8, no building
shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet, nor shall the number of
stories at any point along the periphery of any building exceed 2 1/2.
Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires and other decorative
features shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection,
provided that they occupy not more than 20% of the area of the roof of
§ 310-8 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-9
282:421
the building of which they are a part. [Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L.
No. 2-2003]
C. Lot area, width and depth. The lot area shall not be less than 15,000
square feet and the lot width not less than 100 feet. All lots shall have a
minimum depth of 120 feet, except that such depth may be decreased to
100 feet if the average depth of the lot equals at least 125 feet.
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard along each street line with a
depth of not less than 25 feet, except that, where the planes of all
walls of a building facing the streets intersect the street line at a
minimum angle of 25º or more, such building may project to within
20 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each lot line with a
width of not less than 15 feet; except that in case of a dwelling
erected without a garage, one side yard shall be not less than 27
feet wide. In the case of corner lots, the side yard opposite the
principal front yard shall be not less than 30 feet wide and the
other not less than 15 feet wide, except that in the case of a
dwelling erected without a garage, the lesser side yard shall be not
less than 27 feet wide. Where the planes of all walls of a building
facing a side lot line intersect such line at a minimum angle of 25°
or more, the lesser-required setback distance may be reduced by
five feet, except in the case of a building erected without a garage.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than 30 feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements. Cornices or cantilevered roofs
may project not more than two feet into a required yard. Belt
courses, window sills and other ornamental features may project
not more than six inches into a required yard. Fences or walls not
over 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected anywhere on the lot,
except that any such fence or wall erected in any front yard shall be
not more than 1/2 solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any front
yard of any corner lot shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at
any intersection as provided in § 310-22A of this chapter. Fences or
walls with a height in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein for buildings. Paved terraces, steps
and walks (other than such as are needed for access to the
buildings on the lot) shall not project within 15 feet of a street line
or four feet of a property line.
(5) Location of accessory buildings on the lot. In addition to complying
with all other provisions of this chapter, no accessory building shall
project nearer to the street on which the principal building fronts
§ 310-9 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-9
282:422
§ 310-10. One-Family Residence A District.
than such principal building, except that, should topographic
conditions be such that practical difficulties would be caused by
this requirement with respect to the location of garages, the
Planning Board may authorize the issuance of a special permit for
the erection of such garages within not less than 10 feet of the
street line where the natural slope of the ground within 25 feet of
such line is between 12% and 20% and within not less than five
feet of the street line where such slope within 25 feet of such line
exceeds 20%.
E. Maximum building coverage. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of
§ 310-8, the sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot. [Amended
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
F. Off-street parking requirements. For each dwelling on any lot there
shall be provided on the lot not less than two spaces for the parking or
garaging of passenger automobiles. Such spaces shall be directly
accessible to a street.
G. Floor area ratio (FAR). See § 310-22E for FAR controls. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
H. Minimum open space requirement. The minimum open space
requirement for a lot shall be 50% of the area of the lot. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
A. Use. In a One-Family Residence A District no building or premises shall
be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose, except the following:
(1) Any use permitted in One-Family Residence AA Districts.
B. Height. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of § 310-8, no building
shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet, nor shall the number of
stories at any point along the periphery of any building exceed 2 1/2.
Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires and other decorative
features shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection,
provided that they occupy not more than 20% of the area of the roof of
the building of which they are a part. [Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L.
No. 2-2003]
C. Lot area, width and depth. The lot area shall not be less than 12,000
square feet and the lot width not less than 80 feet. All lots shall have a
minimum depth of 100 feet, except that the minimum depth may be
decreased to 90 feet if the average depth of the lot equals at least 100
feet.
§ 310-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-10
282:423
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard along each street line with a
depth of not less than 25 feet, except that, where the planes of all
walls of a building facing the street intersect the street line at a
minimum angle of 25º or more, such building may project to within
20 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each lot line with a
width of not less than 15 feet; except that in case of a dwelling
erected without a garage, one side yard shall be not less than 27
feet wide. In the case of corner lots, the side yard opposite the
principal front yard shall be not less than 30 feet wide and the
other not less than 15 feet wide, except that in the case of a
dwelling erected without a garage, the lesser side yard shall be not
less than 27 feet wide. Where the planes of all walls of a building
facing a side lot line intersect such line at a minimum angle of 25°
or more, the lesser-required setback distance may be reduced by
five feet, except in the case of a building erected without a garage.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than 30 feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements. Cornices or cantilevered roofs
may project not more than two feet into a required yard. Belt
courses, window sills and other ornamental features may project
not more than six inches into a required yard. Fences or walls not
over 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected anywhere on the lot,
except that any such fence or wall erected in any front yard shall be
not more than 1/2 solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any front
yard of any corner lot shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at
any intersection as provided in § 310-22A of this chapter. Fences or
walls with a height in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall conform to
requirements set forth herein for buildings. Paved terraces, steps
and walks (other than such as are needed for access to the
buildings on the lot) shall not project within 15 feet of a street line
or four feet of a property line.
(5) Location of accessory buildings on the lot. In addition to complying
with all other provisions of this chapter, no accessory building shall
project nearer to the street on which the principal building fronts
than such principal building, except that, should topographic
conditions be such that practical difficulties would be caused by
this requirement with respect to the location of garages, the
Planning Board may authorize the issuance of a special permit for
the erection of such garages within not less than 10 feet of the
street line where the natural slope of the ground within 25 feet of
such is between 12% and 20% and within not less than five feet of
§ 310-10 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-10
282:424
§ 310-11. Two-Story Multiple Residence B District.
the street line where such slope within 25 feet of such line exceeds
20%.
E. Maximum building coverage. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of
§ 310-8, the sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot. [Amended
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
F. Off-street parking requirements. For each dwelling on any lot there
shall be provided on the lot not less than one space for the parking or
garaging of passenger automobiles. Such space shall be directly
accessible to a street.
G. Floor area ratio (FAR). See § 310-22E for FAR controls. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
H. Minimum open space requirement. The minimum open space
requirement for a lot shall be 50% of the area of the lot. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
A. Use. In a Two-Story Multiple Residence B District no building or
premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be
erected, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole
or in part, for any purpose, except the following:
(1) Any use permitted in One-Family Residence A Districts, except
that:
(a) Not more than one professional office or studio, other than
accessory to a use otherwise permitted, shall be permitted for
each 25 dwelling units or major fraction thereof on the lot.
Such office or studio shall be only on the street floor of any
building and on the floor immediately above the street floor
only if there be access to such office or studio from other than a
public hall; and
(b) Places of worship, including parish houses; and schools [as
defined in Subsection A(3)(e) of § 310-8], may be erected to
within 20 feet of any street line and to within a distance equal
to their height of any property line and may cover not more
than 35% of the area of the lot.
(2) Dwelling for two or more families.
(3) Municipally-owned and operated parking lot or, by special permit of
the Board of Trustees, privately owned and operated parking lot in
conjunction with a permitted use or an abutting property, subject to
the following requirements.
(a) No service of any kind shall be permitted to be extended to
users of the lot, including automobile service, repair or fueling.
§ 310-10 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-11
282:425
(b) Wherever such parking lot abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot
in a residence district, the said parking lot shall be screened
from such adjoining lot by a substantial wall, fence or thick
hedge, with a height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
(c) Wherever such parking lot is located across the street from
other land in any residence district, it shall be screened from
the view of such land by a thick hedge located along a line
drawn parallel to the street and a distance of 20 feet
therefrom, such hedge to be interrupted only at points of
ingress and egress. The open area between such hedge and the
street shall be landscaped in harmony with the landscaping
prevailing on neighboring properties fronting on the same
street.
(4) Accessory buildings and accessory uses.
B. Height. Except as provided in Subsection A(3) of § 310-8, no building
shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet, nor shall the number of
stories at any point along the periphery of any building exceed 2 1/2.
Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires and other decorative
features shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection,
provided that they occupy not more than 20% of the area of the roof of
the building of which they are a part. [Amended 4-14-2003 by L.L.
No. 2-2003]
C. Lot area and depth. No lot shall have an area of less than 12,000 square
feet, nor shall the land area provided for each dwelling unit on the lot
be less than 2,750 square feet. No lot shall have an average depth of
less than 100 feet.
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a minimum depth of 20
feet, except that, where the planes of all walls of a building facing
the street intersect the street line at a minimum angle of 25º or
more, such building may project to within 15 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard with a minimum width of 12
feet. Where the planes of all walls of a one-family dwelling facing a
side lot line intersect such line at a minimum angle of 25º or more,
such dwelling may project to within 10 feet of such lot line.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a minimum depth of 30
feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements.
(a) Cornices or cantilevered roofs may project not more than two
feet into a required yard. Belt courses, window sills and other
ornamental features may project not more than six inches into
§ 310-11 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-11
282:426
a required yard. Fences or walls not over 6 1/2 feet in height
may be erected anywhere on the lot; except that any such
fence or wall erected in any front yard shall be not more than
1/2 solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any front yard of
any corner lot shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at any
intersection as provided in § 310-22A of this chapter.
(b) The side yard provision may be eliminated, but not reduced,
along any portion of a lot line where a building erected on an
adjoining lot is built to the lot line, provided that the second
side yard shall be increased to a minimum width of two times
the width otherwise required.
E. Usable open space. For every dwelling unit erected on any lot there
shall be provided at least 400 square feet of usable open space.
F. Maximum coverage. The sum of all areas covered by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot, except
that, where the Planning Board finds that the provision of the required
off-street parking space underneath the principal building or in such a
way as to enable the roof thereof to be used as part of the grounds
would be impractical, the Planning Board may authorize the issuance of
a special permit allowing accessory garages to cover an additional 10%
of the area of the lot. Garages designed to enable the roof thereof to be
used as part of the grounds shall be exempt from any coverage
limitation.
G. Length of buildings. No building shall exceed a length of 160 feet.
H. Distance between buildings. The following minimum distances between
buildings shall be observed.
(1) Between a principal building, other than one-family dwelling and a
one-story accessory building: 20 feet.
(2) Between any other two buildings: A distance equal to the average
height of such buildings at the points where such buildings are
nearest one to the other.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision and except as provided
hereinafter, no building on any lot shall intrude into the area
enclosed by an arc of a circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 70º
on each side of a line perpendicular to the center of any legal
window (other than a legal bathroom or kitchen window) and the
exterior radii of such arc. All measurements shall be performed in
horizontal projection at the sill level of the subject window. This
limitation shall not apply to any wall of the same building the plane
of which intersects the plane of the wall in which the subject
window is located at an exterior angle of more than 80º. A
minimum distance of 60 feet shall be maintained between the
subject window and any wall parallel thereto, whether such wall is
a part of the same or of another building on the same lot. The
§ 310-11 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-11
282:427
§ 310-12. Three-Story Multiple Residence C District.
provisions of this subsection shall be applied in addition to
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
I. Courts.
(1) Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if the minimum dimension
of such court is not less than 1/2 times the average height of all
surrounding walls in the case of nonresidential buildings and not
less than 1 1/2 times such height, but not less than 60 feet, in the
case of residential buildings. The height of walls surrounding an
inner court shall be measured from finished grade at the base
thereof, to the top of such wall, except that, in the case of roofs with
a slope exceeding five inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal, the
height shall be measured to the mean point between the top of said
wall and the highest point of the roof.
(2) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet
and the depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
J. Off-street parking. For dwelling for two or more facilities there shall be
provided on the lot paved off-street parking space or garage space or
both, sufficient in area for parking at one time of not less than 1 1/2
times as many passenger vehicles as there are dwelling units on the lot.
All required open parking spaces shall be individually identified by
means of pavement markings. Wherever space is provided for the
parking of four or more vehicles in the open, such spaces shall be
screened by a substantial solid wall or fence or thick hedge 6 1/2 feet in
height above the average finished grade of the parking area. No
parking space shall be located in any front yard or within three feet of
any lot line in side or rear yards. The parking of motor vehicles within
15 feet of any wall or portion thereof of a two or more family dwelling,
which wall contains legal windows (other than legal bathroom or
kitchen windows) with a sill height of less than eight feet above the
level of the said parking space, is prohibited.
K. Floor area ratio (FAR). See § 310-22E for FAR controls. [Added
4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
A. Use. In a Three-Story Multiple Residence C District no building or
premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be
erected, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole
or in part, for any purpose, except the following:
(1) use permitted in Two-Story Multiple Residence B Districts.
(2) Hotels with not less than 20 sleeping rooms, provided access to all
rooms shall be had through a common lobby.
(3) Hospitals for human beings.
§ 310-11 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-12
282:428
(4) Accessory buildings and accessory uses.
B. Height. No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 42 feet, nor
shall the number of stories at any point along the periphery of any
building exceed 3 1/2 stories. Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads,
spires and other decorative features shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subsection, provided that they occupy not more than
20% of the area of the roof of the building of which they are a part.
C. Lot area and depth. No lot shall have an area of less than 12,000 square
feet, nor shall the land area provided for each dwelling unit on the lot
be less than 1,750 square feet. No lot shall have an average depth of
less than 100 feet.
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a minimum depth of 20
feet, except that, where the planes of all walls of a building facing
the street intersect the street line at a minimum angle of 25º or
more, such building may project to within 15 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard with a minimum width equal to
1/2 the height of the wall or walls of any building which face the
side lot line, but in no case nearer that 12 feet to such lot line.
Where the planes of all walls of a one-family dwelling facing a side
lot line intersect such line at a minimum angle of 25º or more, such
dwelling may project to within 10 feet of such lot line.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a minimum depth of 30
feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements.
(a) Cornices or cantilevered roofs may project not more than two
feet into a required yard. Belt courses, window sills and other
ornamental features may project not more than six inches into
a required yard. Fences or walls not over 6 1/2 feet in height
may be erected anywhere on the lot except that any such fence
or wall erected in any front yard shall be not more than 1/2
solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any front of any corner
lot shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at any intersection
as provided in Section 30.51 (A) of this chapter. Fences or walls
with a height in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein for buildings. Garages so
designed as to allow the use of the roof thereof as part of the
grounds may be erected in side or rear yards, not nearer than
four feet to any property line, provided that the average height
of such wall or walls thereof which face a side lot line or a rear
lot line is not in excess of 6 1/2 feet above the aggregate level
of such lot line.
§ 310-12 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-12
282:429
(b) The side yard provision may be eliminated, but not reduced,
along any portion of a lot line where a building erected on an
adjoining lot is built to the lot line, provided that the second
side yard shall be increased to a minimum width of two times
the width otherwise required.
E. Usable open space. For every dwelling unit erected on any lot there
shall be provided at least 400 square feet of usable open space.
F. Maximum coverage. The sum of all areas covered by all principal and
accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot, except
that, where the Planning Board finds that the provision of the required
off-street parking space underneath the principal building or in such a
way as to enable the roof thereof to be used as part of the grounds
would be impractical, the Planning Board may authorize the issuance of
a special permit allowing accessory garages to cover an additional 10%
of the area of the lot. Garages designed to enable the roof thereof to be
used as part of the grounds shall be exempt from any coverage
limitations.
G. Length of buildings. No building shall exceed a length of 160 feet.
H. Distance between buildings. The following distances between buildings
shall be observed:
(1) Between a principal building, other than a one-family dwelling and
a one-story accessory building: 20 feet.
(2) Between any two other buildings: A distance equal to the average
height of such buildings at the points where such buildings are
nearest one to the other.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions and except as provided
hereinafter, no building on any lot shall intrude into the area
enclosed by an arc of a circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 70º
on each side of a line perpendicular to the center of any legal
window (other than a legal bathroom or kitchen window) and the
exterior radii of such arc. All measurements shall be performed in
horizontal projection at the sill level of the subject window. This
limitation shall not apply to any wall of the same building the plane
of which intersects the plane of the wall in which the subject
window is located at an exterior angle of more than 80º. A
minimum distance of 60 feet shall be maintained between the
subject window and any wall parallel thereto, whether such wall is
a part of the same or of another building on the same lot. The
provisions of this subsection shall be applied in addition to
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
I. Courts.
§ 310-12 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-12
282:430
§ 310-13. Six-Story Multiple Residence D District.
(1) Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if the minimum dimension
of such court is not less than 1/2 times the average height of all
surrounding walls in the case of nonresidential buildings and not
less than 1 1/2 times such height, but not less than 60 feet, in the
case of residential buildings. The height of walls surrounding an
inner court shall be measured from finished grades at the base
thereof, to the top of such wall, except that, in the case of roofs with
a slope exceeding five inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal, the
height shall be measured to the mean point between the top of the
said wall and the highest point of the roof.
(2) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet
and the depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
J. Off-street parking. For dwellings for two or more families there shall be
provided on the lot paved off-street parking space or garage space or
both, sufficient in area for the parking at one time of not less than 1 1/2
times as many passenger vehicles as there are dwelling units on the lot.
All required open parking spaces shall be individually identified by
means of pavement markings. No parking space shall be located in any
front yard or within three feet of any lot line in side or rear yards.
Wherever space is provided for the parking of four or more vehicles,
such space shall be screened by a substantial solid wall or fence or thick
hedge 6 1/2 feet in height above the average finished grade of the
parking area. The parking of motor vehicles within 15 feet of any wall or
portion thereof of a two or more family dwelling, which wall contains
legal windows (other than legal bathroom or kitchen windows) with a
sill height of less than eight feet above the level of said parking space, is
prohibited.
A. Use. In a Six-Story Multiple Residence D District no building or
premises shall be used, and no building or part of a building shall be
erected, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole
or in part, for any purpose, except the following: [Amended 3-11-1996
by L.L. No. 1-1996; 9-18-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
(1) Any use permitted in Three-Story Multiple Residence C Districts.
(2) Age restricted multiple residence facilities having no more than 90
dwelling units for residents 62 years of age or older and their
spouses, with access to all units through a common lobby.
(a) Auxiliary uses for age restricted multiple residence facilities
may include administrative offices, residents’ lounges, medical
examination rooms, communal dining facilities, physical
therapy rooms and other uses acceptable to the Planning
Board. The aggregate square footage of the auxiliary use
spaces shall not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the total
facility.
§ 310-12 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-13
282:431
(3) Environmental improvement multiple residence facilities are
permitted by special permit as set forth in Section 310-42M of this
chapter. [Amended 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
B. Height. No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 72 feet, nor
shall the number of stories at any point along the periphery of any
building exceed six stories. Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires
and other decorative features shall be exempt from the provisions of
this subdivision, provided that they occupy not more than 20% of the
area of the roof of the building of which they are a part.
C. Lot area and depth. [Amended 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
(1) No lot, other than for use as an age restricted multiple residence
facility, shall have an area of less than 12,000 square feet nor shall
the land area provided for each dwelling unit on the lot be less than
1,500 square feet. No lot shall have an average depth of less than
100 feet.
(2) For any lot to be used for an age restricted multiple residence
facility the area of said lot shall not be less than 60,000 square feet.
Nor shall the land area provided for each dwelling unit on the lot be
less than 750 square feet. No lot to be used for an age restricted
multiple residence facility shall have an average lot depth of less
than 100 feet nor street frontage of less than 600 linear feet.
D. Yards. Except as otherwise permitted or required, the following yards
shall be provided on each lot:
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a minimum depth of 20
feet, except that, where the planes of all walls of a building facing
the street intersect the street line at a minimum angle of 25º or
more, such building may project to within 15 feet of the street line.
(2) Side yard. No building up to 36 feet in height or part thereof shall
be erected nearer to any side lot line than a distance equal to 1/2
the height of the wall or walls of such building which face the side
lot line, but in no case nearer than 12 feet to such lot line. No
building with a height in excess of 36 feet shall be erected nearer to
any side lot line than a distance of 25 feet plus 1/6 of the height of
the wall or walls which face such a lot line. Where the planes of all
walls of a one-family dwelling facing a side lot line intersect such
line at a minimum angle of 25º or more, such dwelling may project
to within 10 feet of such lot line.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a minimum depth of 30
feet.
(4) Exceptions to yard requirements. Cornices or cantilevered roofs
may project not more than two feet into a required yard. Belt
courses, window sills and other ornamental features may project
not more than six inches into a required yard. Fences or walls not
§ 310-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-13
282:432
over 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected anywhere on the lot,
except that any such fence or wall erected in any front yard shall
be not more than 1/2 solid. Any such fence or wall erected in any
front yard of any corner lot shall not be more than 1/4 solid and
shall not obstruct the clear sight triangle at any intersection, as
provided in § 310-22A of this chapter. Fences or walls with a height
in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall conform to the requirements set forth
herein for buildings. Garages so designed as to allow the use of
the roof thereof as part of the grounds may be erected in side or
rear yards, not nearer than four feet to any property line, provided
that the average height of such wall or walls thereof which face a
side lot line or a rear lot line is not in excess of 6 1/2 feet above
the average level of such lot line. The side yard provision may be
eliminated, but not reduced, along any portion of a lot line where a
building erected on an adjoining lot is built to the lot line, provided
that the second side yard shall be increased to a minimum width of
two times the width otherwise required.
(5) Yard requirements for age restricted multiple residence facilities:
[Added 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard with a minimum depth
of five feet.
(b) Side yard. There shall be two side yards having a minimum
width of 60 feet each.
(c) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard with a minimum depth of
12 feet.
(d) Exceptions to Yard Requirements. Cornices or cantilevered
roofs may project not more than two feet into a required yard.
Belt courses, window sills and other ornamental features may
project not more than six inches into a required yard. Fences or
walls not more than 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected
anywhere on the lot, except that any such fence or wall erected
in any front yard shall not be more than one quarter solid.
Fences or walls with a height in excess of 6 1/2 feet shall
conform to the requirements set forth herein for buildings.
Garages so designated as to allow the use of the roof thereof as
part of the grounds may be erected in the required yards, to
the property line, provided that direct and unobstructed access
is provided from the public street to said roof.
E. Usable open space. For every dwelling unit erected on any lot there
shall be provided at least 300 square feet of usable open space.
F. Maximum coverage.
(1) The sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot, except that,
where the Planning Board finds that the provision of the required
§ 310-13 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-13
282:433
off-street parking space underneath the principal building or in
such a way as to enable the roof thereof to be used as part of the
grounds would be impractical, the Planning Board may authorize
the issuance of a special permit allowing accessory garages to
cover an additional 10% of the area of the lot. Garages designed to
enable the roof thereof to be used as part of the grounds shall be
exempt from any coverage limitation.
(2) The sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings the use of which are for an age restricted multiple
residence facility shall not exceed 55% of the area of the lot.
Garages designed to enable the roof thereof to be used as part of
the grounds shall be exempt from any coverage limitation. [Added
3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
G. Length of buildings. [Amended 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
(1) No building, unless used as an age restricted multiple residence
facility, shall exceed a length of 180 feet. The length of a building
used as an age restricted multiple residence facility shall not
exceed 180 feet unless specifically reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board during site plan review.
(2) The Planning Board, in order to permit a building to exceed 180
feet in length, shall consider the standards set forth in § 310-30A(2)
and shall find:
(a) The location and length of the building, the nature and
intensity of the operations involved in it or conducted in
connection with it, the size of the site in relation to it and the
location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it
are such that it would be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the district in which it is located.
(b) The location, nature and height of the building, walls and
fences and the nature and extent of existing or proposed
plantings on the site are such that the length of the building
will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and
use of adjacent land and buildings.
H. Distance between buildings. The following minimum distances between
buildings shall be observed:
(1) Between a principal building, other than a one-family dwelling and
a one-story accessory building: 20 feet.
(2) Between any two other buildings: A distance equal to the average
height of such buildings at the points where such buildings are
nearest one to the other.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision and except as provided
hereinafter, no building on any lot shall intrude into the area
§ 310-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-13
282:434
enclosed by an arc of a circle with a radius of 60 feet, extending
70º on each side of a line perpendicular to the center of any legal
window (other than a legal bathroom or kitchen window) and the
exterior radii of such arc. All measurements shall be performed
in horizontal projection at the sill level of the subject window.
This limitation shall not apply to any wall of the same building
the plane of which intersects the plane of the wall in which the
subject window is located at an exterior angle of more than 80º.
A minimum distance of 60 feet shall be maintained between the
subject window and any wall parallel thereto, whether such wall
is a part of the same or of another building on the same lot.
The provisions of this subsection shall be applied in addition to
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
I. Courts.
(1) Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if the minimum dimension
of such court is not less than 1/2 times the average height of all
surrounding walls in the case of nonresidential buildings and not
less than 1 1/2 times such height, but not less than 60 feet, in the
case of residential buildings. The height of walls surrounding an
inner court shall be measured from finished grades at the base
thereof, to the top of such wall, except that, in the case of roofs with
a slope exceeding five inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal, the
height shall be measured to the mean point between the top of said
wall and the highest point of the roof.
(2) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet
and the depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
J. Off-street parking.
(1) For dwellings for two or more families there shall be provided on
the lot paved off-street parking space or garage space or both,
sufficient in area for the parking at one time of not less than 1 1/2
times as many passenger vehicles as there are dwelling units on the
lot.
(2) For age restricted multiple residence facilities adjacent to a
municipally owned and operated parking lot there shall be provided
on the lot paved off-street parking space or garage space or both,
sufficient in area for the parking at one time of not less than one
times as many passenger vehicles as there are age restricted
multiple residence dwelling units on the lot.
(3) All required open parking spaces shall be individually identified by
means of pavement markings. No parking space shall be located in
any front yard or within three feet of any lot line in side or rear
yards. Wherever space is provided for the parking of four or more
vehicles, such space shall be screened by a substantial solid wall or
fence or thick hedge 6 1/2 feet in height above the average finished
§ 310-13 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-13
282:435
§ 310-14. Central Business A District. [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997; 1-8-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 7-12-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004]
In a Central Business A District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building or part of a building shall be erected, which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except
those set forth below. Any use not specifically permitted in Subsection A
of this section or § 310-42 of this chapter, or any use which is noxious
or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, noise, smoke, fumes,
or radiation, or which presents a hazard to public health or safety, is
prohibited.
grade of the parking area. The parking of motor vehicles within 15
feet of any wall or portion thereof of a two or more family dwelling,
which wall contains legal windows (other than legal bathroom or
kitchen windows) with a sill height of less than eight feet above the
level of said parking space is prohibited. [Amended 3-11-1996 by
L.L. No. 1-1996]
K. Satellite Earth Stations. (By Special Permit, see Article VII, Special
Permits)
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Retail establishment, but excluding a supermarket or vehicle
dealership. If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of
a district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Service establishment, such as but not limited to tailoring or
dressmaking, cobbler, optician, funeral home, photocopy shop,
photography studio or film or other image processor.
(a) Service establishments may have an accessory retail
component, such as the sale of retail products by an optician.
(b) Service establishments that provide medical-related products
or services, such as opticians, hearing-aid providers, medical
equipment providers or prosthetic providers and similar
providers of medical-related products or services, shall not be
deemed medical or health-care professionals, provided that
such use is primarily retail.
(c) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a
district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
§ 310-13 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-14
282:436
(3) Personal service establishment, such as but not limited to a
barbershop, beauty salon, nail salon, or day spa, as regulated
below.
(a) No personal service establishment shall occupy street level
space on Pondfield Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar
Street/Tanglewylde Avenue.
(4) Office, including clerical, administrative, professional and other
business office, as regulated below.
(a) No office shall occupy street level space on Pondfield Road
between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/Tanglewylde Avenue,
or on Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton
Avenue.
(5) Restaurant. [Amended 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
(6) Dry cleaner, counter service only; cleaning plant is not allowed on
the premises.
(7) Place of worship and related educational facility.
(8) Dwelling unit.
(a) Separate dwelling units may be allowed above the street level
floor of a building, and in no case shall residential use be
allowed as a street level use.
(b) No one dwelling unit shall exceed 2,000 gross square feet in
area. Such limit may be increased by special permit of the
Planning Board in accordance with standards of Article VII of
this chapter to a gross square footage not exceeding 6,600
square feet.
(c) The exterior entrance to the dwelling unit(s) shall be separate
from that of any nonresidential use.
(d) Parking shall be on a separate floor from residences.
(9) Carry-out food establishments. [Added 9-11-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
(a) No carry-out food establishment shall be permitted within 100
linear feet of any other carry-out food establishment on the
same side of the street. Such distance shall he measured from
the closest point of each establishment to the other. The
measurement shall be continued on the same side of the street
around any street corner within the one-hundred-foot distance;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive this
requirement if it determines that such a waiver is appropriate
given the particular circumstances of the proposed use and its
location. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 310-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-14
282:437
(b) The cumulative floor area devoted to food preparation shall not
exceed 25% of the gross floor area.
(c) The cumulative floor area devoted to the retail sale and/or
display of goods for consumption off premises shall be a
minimum of 50% of the gross floor area.
(d) Seating provided for consumption on the premises shall be
clearly accessory to the retail sale of goods and shall be limited
to 12 seats.
(e) The establishment shall comply with all requirements of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(f) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a
district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(10) Health professional office. [Added 9-11-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
(a) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any business office of a
health professional, as defined in § 310-3 of this chapter.
(b) Health professional offices shall have one parking space per
300 square feet for the first 600 square feet of gross floor area
and one parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area
above 600 square feet.
(c) The facade of health professional offices on the street level
shall be at least 50% clear, unobstructed glass window.
(d) No health professional office shall occupy street-level space on
Pondfield Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/
Tanglewylde Avenue nor shall it occupy street-level space on
Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue
absent a special permit.
(e) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a
district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(11) Financial office or bank [Added 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
(a) No banks or financial offices shall occupy street-level space on
Pondfield Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/
Tanglewylde Avenue nor shall they occupy street-level space
on Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue
absent a special permit.
§ 310-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-14
282:438
(b) In other locations, a bank or financial office may occupy street
level, provided that the street-level facade of the proposed use
has at least 50% of its area in clear, unobstructed glass window
and there is a minimum distance, measured from the closest
point of each establishment to the other, of 150 feet between
the proposed bank or financial office and any existing streetlevel
bank or financial office on the same side of the street. The
measurement shall be continued on the same side of the street
around any street corner within the one-hundred-foot distance:
provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive this
requirement if it determines that such a waiver is appropriate
given the particular circumstances of the proposed use and its
location. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
(c) Bank or financial office off-street parking requirement: eight
spaces, together with four additional spaces for each teller
position in excess of two.
(d) For the purposes of calculating off-street parking, each
automatic teller machine is deemed a teller position.
(e) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a
district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(12) Real estate office or agency. [Added 9-11-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
(a) In no case shall a real estate agency or real estate office
occupy street level space on Pondfield Road between Kraft
Avenue and Cedar Street/Tanglewylde Avenue or on Palmer
Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue.
(b) In other locations, a real estate agency or real estate office may
occupy street-level space, provided that the street-level facade
of the proposed use has at least 50% of its area in clear,
unobstructed glass window and there is a minimum distance,
measured from the closest point of each establishment to the
other, of 150 feet between the proposed real estate agency or
real estate office and any existing street-level real estate
agency or real estate office on the same side of the street. The
measurement shall be continued on the same side of the street
around any street corner within the one-hundred-foot distance;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive this
distance restriction in cases where the resulting intensity of
use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and/or
welfare.
(c) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a
district zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D
§ 310-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-14
282:439
Residence Districts, such establishment may not be operated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(13) Health clubs smaller than 1,500 square feet. [Added 7-9-2018 by
L.L. No. 8-2018]
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Private (nonmunicipal) garage, accessory to a principal permitted
use or special permit use allowed in Central Business A.
(2) Geothermal energy systems, as defined in § 310-22G of this
chapter. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(3) Outdoor eating area. The purpose of this subsection is to allow
outdoor eating areas as a permitted accessory use, in association
with permitted eating or drinking establishment uses (including
carry-out food establishments), with conditions and safeguards to
prevent nuisance conditions within the Village. [Added 7-13-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
(a) Specific standards for outdoor eating areas.
[1] The space shall be open to the sky, except that a
retractable awning or table umbrellas may be permitted
subject to review and approval by the Design Review
Committee.
[2] All damages and liabilities sustained in relation to the use
and location of the outdoor eating area shall be the
responsibility of the owner and/or operator of the use.
[3] At minimum, the outdoor eating area shall leave a fivefoot-
wide clear path free of all obstructions in order to
allow for adequate pedestrian movement. This minimum
distance shall be measured from the portion of the outdoor
eating area frontage which is nearest either the curb or
nearest obstruction. Unless otherwise determined by the
Planning Board, parking meters, traffic signs and trees
which have gratings flush to grade, without fences or
guards, shall not count as obstructions.
[4] The area used for an outdoor eating area shall not exceed
the frontage of the related eating or drinking
establishment use.
[5] All awnings or umbrellas shall be adequately secured,
retractable and made of a noncombustible frame covered
with a flameproofed canvas or cloth, slow burning plastic
or other equivalent material, but not including glass. At no
point shall the height of the awning be lower than seven
feet from the floor of the outdoor eating area unless
otherwise approved by the Design Review Committee. The
§ 310-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-14
282:440
valance of the awning shall not exceed 12 inches in height.
Awnings or umbrellas may overhang no more than 12
inches into the five feet of clear path, as provided in
Subsection (3)(a)[3] of this section.
[6] No structure or enclosure to accommodate the storage of
garbage may be erected or placed adjacent to or separate
from the outdoor eating area on the public right-of-way.
[7] No signs are permitted on sidewalk umbrellas. All other
signage is subject to the regulations in § 310-23 of this
chapter.
[8] Musical instruments or sound reproduction devices shall
not be operated or used within an outdoor eating area for
any purpose.
[9] All planters, railings and fences as part of an outdoor
eating area shall be self-supporting. In order to maximize
visual access, the height of the railing or planter, including
the vegetation within, shall not be higher than 30 inches.
All materials, aside from planters, shall be removed from
the sidewalk during those off-season periods when the
outdoor eating area ceases operation. If not removed, a
planter may be placed with its longest side against the wall
of the accompanying restaurant, provided that such
planter does not obstruct any egress from the building.
[10] All objects other than planters shall be removed during
that period of the year when the outdoor eating area
ceases operation or at least between December 1 and
February 28.
(b) Approval procedure. The establishment of an outdoor eating
area shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance with
the terms of § 310-26; provided, however, that public notice of
the application shall be limited to properties within a onehundred-
fifty-foot radius of the proposed outdoor eating area.
(c) Renewal and changes to approval. The site plan approval or
renewal permit for an outdoor eating area shall be valid until
the end of the calendar year in which it is issued. Thereafter a
renewal permit is required from the Village Administrator,
which will be subject to fees set from time to time by the
Village Board. Any substantial changes to the Planning Board
approved layout or conditions will require Planning Board
approval. If there is any violation of the terms of the permit, the
Village Administrator shall have the right to revoke such
permit. In addition, if the Village Administrator determines
that the original Planning Board approval requires substantial
modification, he/she may refer the renewal application to the
Planning Board for approval.
§ 310-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-14
282:441
(d) Insurance requirements. The applicant shall provide evidence
of liability coverage in the amount determined by the Village,
with such insurance to be maintained for the full duration of
the approval for such outdoor eating area.
C. Special permit uses. The Planning Board may allow the following uses
by special permit, as regulated in Article VII of this chapter. See
§ 310-42 for individual standards and requirements applicable to these
special permit uses, including off-street parking requirements. At the
Planning Board's discretion, a special permit may be subject to
renewal.
(1) Health professional office occupying street-level space on Pondfield
Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/Tanglewylde Avenue
or occupying street-level space on Palmer Avenue between
Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue. [Amended 9-11-2017 by L.L.
No. 2-2017]
(2) Financial office or bank occupying street level space on Pondfield
Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/Tangleylde Avenue or
Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
(3) (Reserved)43
(4) (Reserved)44
(5) (Reserved)45
(6) Indoor recreation facility, including martial arts, dance, or crafts
instruction studio. [Amended 7-9-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
(7) Hotel.
(8) Off-street parking lot or area as a principal use on a lot.
(9) Hospital.
(10) Theater.
(11) Supermarket.
(12) Satellite earth stations and communications facility.
(13) (Reserved)46
43.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(3), listing real estate office or agency as a special
permit use, was repealed 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), listing carry-out food establishment as a special
permit use, was repealed 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017.
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), listing outdoor eating area as a special permit use,
was repealed 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015.
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(13), listing home occupations in residential use as a
special permit use, was repealed 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017.
§ 310-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-14
282:442
(14) Educational facility.
(15) Solar energy systems, as defined in § 310-22F of this chapter.
[Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(16) Renewable energy systems, as defined in § 310-22G of this chapter,
except no special permit is required for geothermal energy
systems. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(17) Health clubs larger than 1,500 square feet. [Added 7-9-2018 by
L.L. No. 8-2018]
D. Area, bulk, and height controls.
(1) Uses shall be enclosed. All permitted uses, whether principal,
accessory, or special permit uses, shall be carried on in buildings
that are fully enclosed on all sides, with the exception of off-street
parking and outdoor eating areas. [Amended 7-13-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
(2) Floor area. No single use shall occupy more than 3,500 gross
square feet of floor area on the principal street level. Such limit
may be increased by special permit of the Planning Board in
accordance with standards of Article VII of this chapter to a gross
square footage not exceeding 5,000 square feet.
(3) Floor area ratio. No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged which exceeds a floor area ratio of 1.0, except that if the
area of the lot is 2,500 square feet or less, at the discretion of the
Planning Board a building or structure may be erected or enlarged
on the lot with a floor area ratio of up to 1.6.
(4) Street frontage. Principal permitted uses shall occupy no more
than 35 linear feet of street frontage along any street measured at
the street level. Such limit may be increased by special permit of
the Planning Board in accordance with the standards of Article VII
of this chapter to a street frontage not to exceed 50 linear feet.
(5) Yards. No front, side, or rear yard is required on any lot in Central
Business A, but if any side or rear yard is provided, such yard shall
be at least six feet wide.
(6) Height.
(a) Except as provided hereinafter in § 310-42I(4), no part of any
building or structure shall be erected or enlarged to a height
greater than two stories, nor shall such height exceed 32 feet
or be less than 15 feet above the average elevation as
measured at the building line, except for the following:
[1] There may be additional levels for parking at the rear of
any building, provided that the highest of such additional
§ 310-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-14
282:443
floors shall not exceed the height of the highest level not
comprising parking.
[2] As provided in § 310-42I(4), hospitals in Central Business
A shall be allowed a maximum height of 72 feet under
certain conditions.
(b) Where a lot has frontage on two nonintersecting through
streets or other public ways, the height limitation shall apply to
the facade on each street or way and a setback shall be
provided from the lower to the higher portion of the building to
be set back at a distance not less than the difference between
the heights of the two levels.
(c) When penthouses, bulkheads, or other rooftop structures are
more than 12 feet high measured from the height of the
adjoining roof or cover more than 20% of the roof area, height
measurements shall be taken to the top of such penthouses,
bulkheads, or other rooftop structures.
(d) All penthouses, bulkheads, or other rooftop structures must be
at least 10 feet back from the front and rear walls of a building
and three feet back from the side walls, except that walls of
elevator and stair enclosures may be built on the side wall
when so required by the plan of the building.
E. Off-street parking controls. No building shall be erected or enlarged
and no change of use shall be approved unless provision is made for
adequate off-street parking to serve such building or use, as provided
below.
(1) At the discretion of the Planning Board, the off-street parking
requirement for new construction, enlargement, or change of use
equal to or less than 3,500 square feet may be reduced or
eliminated.
(2) For new construction, enlargement, or change of use involving
more than 3.500 square feet, the Planning Board may reduce the
required parking if it determines that such a reduction is warranted
by the particular circumstances of the application under
consideration. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
(3) Any off-street parking spaces eliminated as the result of building
construction shall be replaced.
(4) No use shall reduce or redesignate its required off-street parking
spaces to serve other structures or uses to a number below that
which is the minimum required by this chapter.
(5) Parking shall not be a principal street level use unless fully
enclosed in an existing building, when such building is set back a
minimum 50 feet from the street line.
§ 310-14 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-14
282:444
§ 310-15. Service Business B District. [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L.
No. 2-1997; 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
In a Service Business B District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building or part of a building shall be erected, which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose except
those set forth below.
(6) With the exceptions stated above, the following off-street parking
requirements shall be met for principal permitted uses:
(a) Retail and restaurants: one space per 300 square feet of the
first 2,500 square feet of gross floor area; together with one
additional space for each additional 200 square feet of gross
floor area thereafter. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No.
3-2018]
(b) Service: one space per 300 square feet of the first 2,500 square
feet of gross floor area; together with one additional space for
each additional 200 square feet of gross floor area thereafter.
(c) Business or professional office (other than medical and healthcare
professional): one space per 300 square feet of the first
2,500 square feet of gross floor area; together with one
additional space for each additional 200 square feet of gross
floor area thereafter.
(d) Intentionally omitted.47
(e) Dwelling unit: one space per studio; two spaces for all other
dwelling unit types.
(7) For principal permitted uses in Central Business A District that are
not listed above, the Planning Board shall determine the minimum
number of required off-street parking spaces.
(8) See Article VII, Special Permits, of this chapter for other off-street
parking requirements.
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Any principal permitted use permitted in a Central Business A
District.
(2) Storage.
(3) Self-service laundromat.
(a) A self-service laundromat shall not have more than 30 total
machines (washers and dryers totaled), and may offer dropoff
service.
47.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(6)(d), regarding restaurants, was repealed 1-8-2018
by L.L. No. 3-2018.
§ 310-14 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-15
282:445
B. Accessory uses. Any use that is customary to a principal permitted use
listed above, including, but not limited to the following: [Amended
7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
(1) Outdoor eating area, subject to the terms and requirements
enumerated in § 310-14B(3) of this chapter.
C. Special permit uses. The following uses are allowed by special permit,
as regulated in Article VII of this chapter. See § 310-42 for individual
standards and requirements applicable to these special permit uses,
including off-street parking requirements.
(1) Use allowed by special permit in Central Business A District are
allowed by special permit in Service Business B District.
(2) Automotive-related establishment and vehicle dealership.
(3) Manufacturing and assembling establishment.
(4) Printing.
(5) Dry cleaner with cleaning plant on the premises.
(6) Commercial laundry.
(7) Solar energy systems, as defined in § 310-22F of this chapter.
[Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(8) Renewable energy systems, as defined in § 310-22G of this chapter,
except no special permit is required for geothermal energy
systems. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(9) Home occupations in residential use. [Added 9-11-2017 by L.L.
No. 2-2017]
D. Area, bulk, and height controls.
(1) Uses shall be enclosed. All permitted uses, whether principal,
accessory, or special permit, shall be carried on in buildings that
are fully enclosed on all sides, with the exception of off-street
parking and loading areas and the service apron of gasoline
stations.
(2) Floor area ratio.
(a) No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged which
exceeds a floor area ratio of 1.6.
(b) If a building has frontage on two nonintersecting through
streets or other public ways not more than 150 feet apart, the
curb levels of which differ by 10 feet or more, having customer
entrances on each of said streets or other public ways, one
story of basement area may be excluded from computation as
floor area, regardless of the use to which said area is put,
§ 310-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-15
282:446
provided that, to be so excluded, the level of said basement
area shall be not less than eight feet below the curb level of the
higher of the two said streets or other public ways.
(3) Yards. No front, side, or rear yard is required on any lot in Service
Business B District, but if any side or rear yard is provided, such
yard shall be at least six feet wide.
(4) Height.
(a) Except as provided hereinafter in § 310-42I(4), no part of any
building or structure shall be erected or enlarged to a height
greater than three stories, nor shall such height exceed 42 feet
above the curb level. For the purposes of this subsection, a
basement shall not be counted as one of the three allowed
stories.
(b) Where a lot has frontage on two nonintersecting through
streets or other public ways, the height limitation shall apply
only as measured from the curb level along the street or public
way with the higher elevation.
(c) When penthouses, bulkheads, or other rooftop structures are
more than 12 feet high measured from the height of the
adjoining roof or cover more than 20% of the roof area, height
measurements shall be taken to the top of such penthouses,
bulkheads, or other rooftop structures.
(d) All penthouses, bulkheads, or other rooftop structures must be
at least 10 feet back from the front and rear walls of a building
and three feet back from the side walls, except that walls of
elevator and stair enclosures may be built on the side wall
when so required by the plan of the building.
E. Off-street parking controls. No building shall be erected or enlarged
and no change of use shall be approved unless provision is made for
adequate off-street parking to serve such building or use, as provided
below.
(1) At the discretion of the Planning Board, the off-street parking
requirement for new construction, enlargement, or change of use
equal to or less than 3,500 square feet may be reduced or
eliminated.
(2) For new construction, enlargements, or change of use involving
more than 3,500 square feet, the Planning Board may reduce the
required parking if it determines that such a reduction is warranted
by the particular circumstances of the application under
consideration. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
(3) Any off-street parking spaces eliminated as the result of building
construction shall be replaced,
§ 310-15 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-15
282:447
(4) No use shall reduce or redesignate its required off-street parking
spaces to serve other structures or uses to a number below that
which is the minimum required by this chapter.
(5) Parking shall not be a principal street level use unless fully
enclosed in an existing building, when such building is set back a
minimum 50 feet from the street line.
(6) With the exceptions stated above, the following off-street parking
requirements shall be met for principal permitted uses:
(a) Retail and restaurants: one space per 300 square feet of the
first 2,500 square feet of gross floor area: together with one
additional space for each additional 200 square feet of gross
floor area thereafter. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No.
43-2018]
(b) Service: one space per 300 square feet of the first 2,500 square
feet of gross floor area; together with one additional space for
each additional 200 square feet of gross floor area thereafter.
(c) Business or professional office (other than medical and healthcare
professional): one space per 300 square feet of the first
2,500 square feet of gross floor area; together with one
additional space for each additional 200 square feet of gross
floor area thereafter.
(d) Intentionally omitted.48
(e) Dwelling unit: one space per studio; two spaces for all other
dwelling unit types.
(7) For principal permitted uses in Service Business B District that are
not listed above, the Planning Board shall determine the minimum
number of required off-street parking spaces.
(8) See Article VII, Special Permits, of this chapter for other off-street
parking requirements.
48.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(6)(d), regarding restaurants, was repealed 1-8-2018
by L.L. No. 3-2018.
§ 310-15 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-15
282:448
ARTICLE IV
Controlled Development Districts
§ 310-16. General considerations.
A procedure is hereby established for the designation of CD Districts, in
order to facilitate planned and controlled development in accordance with
the Village Comprehensive Plan, as described in § 310-45 and to provide a
basis for possible development on a scale and with a flexibility that could
not otherwise be achieved in the Village's present zoning districts.
§ 310-17. Purposes and legislative intent.
In addition to the purposes and legislative intent set forth in § 310-2 and
Subsection A(2) of § 310-44 of this chapter, the districts established
pursuant to this article shall have among their purposes the following:
§ 310-18. Qualifying standards.
A. To recognize that some developments may, by virtue of their scale, size,
complexity and unique building sites, require specialized consideration
and treatment by Village authorities and may not be adequately
addressed by district regulations as set forth in Article III;
B. To provide for the establishment of separate and distinct substantive
standards for planned and controlled developments of varying sizes or
to recognize and encourage the advantages which may accrue from the
complexities of particular and/or unique parcel size, location within the
Village, juxtaposition with adjacent land uses and community facilities
and functions and to take into account the increasing need for flexibility
in types of uses, building types, location and design and development
timing required in such developments and the increasing need to plan
and control such complex developments so as to minimize or to
compensate for, their effect on surrounding uses and public services;
C. To provide combinations of permitted uses and variations in the
relationship of uses, structures, open spaces, density and heights of
structures in developments conceived as cohesive and unified projects;
and
D. To provide a controlled review and zoning procedure and to encourage
good development while assuring that such development shall further
the purposes of this chapter and the Village Comprehensive Plan.
A. Permitted uses. All uses within a CD District shall be determined by the
Board of Trustees according to the provisions of this article, provided
that permitted uses may include only those uses permitted in Residence
C, Residence D, Business A or Business B districts, irrespective of the
location of the CD District.
§ 310-16 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-18
282:449
§ 310-19. District standards.
In considering a CD District application, in addition to the purposes set
forth in § 310-17, the Planning Board and the Board of Trustees shall give
consideration to the standards set forth in § 310-30.
§ 310-20. Authority.
The Board of Trustees shall be the Village authority responsible for
designating a CD District.
§ 310-21. Procedure.
The procedure for designation of a CD District shall be as set forth in
§ 310-47 of this chapter.
B. Location. A CD District may be located only west of the Metro North
Railroad right-of-way which is zoned, at the time the application, as
Residence C, Residence D, Business A, Business B or Residence B.
C. Area. The minimum area required to qualify for a CD District shall be
two contiguous acres.
D. Ownership. Application for a CD District relating to a particular parcel
or parcels of land shall be made by or on behalf of all owners of such
parcel(s).
§ 310-18 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-21
282:450
ARTICLE IVA
Central Business A Transition (CBAT) District
[Added 6-28-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
§ 310-21.1. General considerations.
A procedure is hereby established for the designation of property(ies) to
be within the CBAT District in order to provide an appropriate transition
of development type and density for certain properties abutting the Central
Business A District.
§ 310-21.2. Purposes and legislative intent.
In addition to the purposes and legislative intent set forth in § 310-2 of this
chapter, the district established pursuant to this article shall have among its
purposes the following:
§ 310-21.3. Qualifying standards.
A. To provide for a graduated transition between commercial and
residential properties;
B. To recognize that some developments may, by virtue of their scale, size
and unique building sites, require specialized consideration and
treatment by Village authorities, and may not be adequately addressed
by district regulations set forth in Article III.
C. To provide for the establishment of separate and distinct substantive
standards for planned and controlled developments of varying sizes or
to recognize and encourage the advantages that may accrue from the
complexities of particular and/or unique parcel size, location within the
Village, juxtaposition with adjacent land uses and community facilities
and functions, and to take into account the increasing need for
flexibility in types of uses, building types, location and design required
in such developments, and the need to plan and control such
developments so as to minimize their effect on surrounding uses and
public services;
D. To provide combinations of permitted uses and variations in the
relationship of uses, structures, open spaces, density and size of
structures in developments to assure cohesive and unified projects; and
E. To provide a controlled review and zoning procedure and to encourage
good development while assuring that such development shall further
the purposes of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. All uses within the CBAT District shall be determined by
the Board of Trustees on a case-by-case basis for each parcel in the
district by resolution following a public hearing, provided that
permitted uses may include only those non-special permit uses
permitted in the Central Business A District, irrespective of the location
§ 310-21.1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-21.3
282:451
§ 310-21.4. District standards.
In considering a CBAT District application, in addition to the purposes set
forth in § 310-21.2, the Planning Board and the Board of Trustees shall give
consideration to the standards set forth in § 310-30.
§ 310-21.5. Authority.
The Board of Trustees shall be the Village authority responsible for
designating property(ies) to be within the CBAT District.
§ 310-21.6. Procedure.
The procedure for designation of property(ies) to be within the CBAT
District shall be as set forth in § 310-47 of this chapter.
of the CBAT District, and further provided that in no event shall dry
cleaner be a permitted use, even if no cleaning plant is on the premises.
B. Location. The CBAT District may be located only where each lot within
the CBAT District immediately abuts the Central Business A District.
For the purposes of this subsection only, where the boundary of the
Central Business A District coincides with the center line of a segment
of a street and/or alley, lots that abut such segment shall be deemed to
abut the Central Business A District.
(1) Exception to CBAT District designation: Any lot on which any
building is being used for residential purposes at the time an
application to the Board of Trustees for CBAT District approval is
submitted, or within one year prior thereto, shall not be eligible for
CBAT District designation.
C. Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations shall be set on a case-by-case basis
by resolution of the Board of Trustees following a public hearing and
according to the provisions of this article, provided that in no event
shall the bulk regulations be less restrictive than the bulk regulations of
the Central Business A District.
D. Off-street parking. Off-street parking requirements shall be set on a
case-by-case basis by resolution of the Board of Trustees following a
public hearing.
E. Ownership. Application for CBAT District designation of a particular
parcel or parcels of land shall be made by or on behalf of all owners of
such parcel(s).
§ 310-21.3 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-21.6
282:452
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations and Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 310-22. Supplementary regulations.
A. Obstruction to vision at street intersections. At all street intersections
in all residence districts, no obstructions to vision (other than an
existing building, post, column or tree) exceeding 30 inches in height
above street level shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the
triangle formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn between
points along such street lines 50 feet distant from their point of
intersection.
B. Trailers, mobile homes and boats.
(1) The storage, parking or use of a trailer, mobile home or boat by any
person or persons is hereby prohibited in each and all of the
districts enumerated in Article III of this chapter, except that
storage or parking may be conducted in public garages or in the
open on an occupied lot not nearer than eight feet from the rear lot
line of such lot, provided that such trailer or mobile home is not
placed in use and the doors thereof are kept securely locked.
(2) Parking on public lands and thoroughfares. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park a trailer, mobile home or boat or allow the same
to remain parked upon any public lands, streets or public
thoroughfares or any parts thereof within the limits of the Village.
(3) Exceptions. Any such recreational vehicle with cannot be moved to
a garage, service station or private premises because of the need
for necessary repair shall be granted, without fee and upon proper
request, a permit valid for a period of 48 hours from the issuance
thereof. Any trailer used for the removal of materials from the
premises adjacent to where the trailer is parked shall be granted,
without fee and upon proper request, a permit valid for a period of
48 hours from the issuance thereof.
(4) Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this article shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided for
in Article X of this chapter.
C. Buildings in a business district having an alley frontage. No building in
a business district on a lot fronting on an alley shall be erected or
enlarged unless an unobstructed space is provided, immediately
accessible to such alley and wholly within the confines of the lot, for the
loading and unloading of at least two motor vehicles at one time. Such
space shall be not less than 10 feet wide and 30 feet long for each
vehicle. No building shall be erected or altered so that access thereto is
solely from such alley.
D. Parking in required front yards prohibited in residential districts.
Parking spaces or parking areas, with the exception of driveways, shall
§ 310-22 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-22
282:453
not be permitted within required front yards in any residential district
in the Village. The parking or storage of vehicles upon lawns or other
unimproved areas shall not be permitted on any lot improved by a
dwelling structure in any residential district in the Village. [Amended
12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
E. Floor area ratio (FAR) controls. [Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
(1) Definition of "floor area ratio" (for a lot whose principal use is a
one- or two-family dwelling): the ratio of the gross floor area of all
buildings on a lot to the area of the lot on which the buildings are
located. For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio (FAR),
all floor areas of each floor of all principal and all accessory
structures on the lot shall be included. Any interior space with a
floor-to-ceiling height in excess of 14 feet shall be counted twice.
Notwithstanding the preceding, the following shall be excluded
from the calculation of floor area:
(a) The aggregate area of all unroofed structures such as decks
and patios and all spaces in unenclosed porches and porticos,
except that existing unenclosed porches may be enclosed and
the enclosed area excluded from the FAR calculation, provided
that the exterior walls of the unenclosed porch and the walls of
the dwelling to which the porch is attached are not relocated
closer to the lot lines of the subject property than the existing
unenclosed porch.
(b) The aggregate area of any cellar regardless of its use or of any
basement unless it is defined as a story. See "basement"
definition.
(c) The aggregate area, up to a maximum of 400 square feet, of
grade-level garage parking (whether attached or detached) or
basement-level parking. In those instances where an additional
story is provided above a garage (whether attached or
detached), such floor area shall be subject to the attic and
sloping roof limitations in Subsection E(1)(d) below.
(d) The aggregate area of all unfinished or finished space in an
attic or under a sloping roof, provided that the total exterior
width of all dormers does not exceed 30% of the exterior linear
width of the portion of the roof upon which they are situated.
The exterior linear width of the roof shall be measured from
end to end at the widest point of the roof. Where the linear
width of the dormers exceeds the limitation above, the total
area in the attic or under the sloping roof shall be included in
the calculation of FAR, except for that floor area where the
vertical distance between the top of the floor beams and the
structural ceiling level is five feet or less.
§ 310-22 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-22
282:454
(2) FAR Schedule. The maximum allowable FAR for a lot shall be
determined by the following Residential FAR (Floor Area Ratio)
Schedule. To determine the maximum gross floor area permitted
for an individual one- or two-family house, the actual lot size shall
be multiplied by the FAR listed in, or computed in accordance with,
the schedule for the appropriate lot size category. Any houses over
7,500 square feet in floor area shall be subject to site plan review
by the Planning Board. Review shall be limited to placement on the
lot and landscaping.
(3) Applicants for building permits for structures whose total floor area
exceeds the maximum permitted FAR shall seek an area variance
from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with § 310-51 of
the Bronxville Zoning Code. In considering the variance
application, the Zoning Board of Appeals may in its discretion
consider the design guidelines set forth in § 310-51C(2). The
Zoning Board of Appeals may also, in its discretion, refer the
application to the Planning Board for an advisory opinion.
(a) Any application for an area variance for FAR for a structure
shall require the submission of the following additional
materials, in addition to those required for any other area
variance:
[1] Elevations of the houses on both sides of the subject
structure;
[2] Photographs of neighboring houses, structures, and yards
within 200 feet on either side of the subject structure; and
[3] Floor area ratios of neighboring houses on similarly sized
lots within 200 feet on either side of the subject structure.
(b) The applicant shall also provide written or verbal testimony
addressing the proofs required for area variances.
Residential FAR (Floor Area Ratio) Schedule
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Lot Size (sq. ft.)
[See Note (1)]
Maximum
FAR
Maximum Gross
Floor Area (sq. ft.)
Less than 5,000 0.490
5,000 0.470 2,350
6,000 0.450 2,700
7,000 0.430 3,010
8,000 0.410 3,280
9,000 0.390 3,510
10,000 0.370 3,700
§ 310-22 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-22
282:455
Residential FAR (Floor Area Ratio) Schedule
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Lot Size (sq. ft.)
[See Note (1)]
Maximum
FAR
Maximum Gross
Floor Area (sq. ft.)
11,000 0.360 3.960
12,000 0.350 4,200
13,000 0.340 4,420
14,000 0.330 4,620
15,000 0.320 4,800
16,000 0.310 4,960
17,000 0.300 5,100
18,000 0.290 5,220
19,000 0.280 5,320
20,000 0.270 5,400
21,000 0.265 5,565
22,000 0.260 5,720
23,000 0.255 5,865
24,000 0.250 6,000
25,000 0.245 6,125
26,000 0.240 6,240
27,000 0.235 6,345
28,000 0.230 6,440
29,000 0.225 6,525
30,000 0.220 6,600
31,000 0.215 6,665
32,000 0.210 6,720
33,000 0.205 6,765
34,000 0.200 6,800
35,000 0.200 7,000
36,000 0.195 7,020
37,000
38,000
Greater than 39,000
0.195
0.190
0.190
7,215
7,220
See Note 2
§ 310-22 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-22
282:456
Notes:
(1) Each lot size range represents 1 to 999 square feet.
FAR must be interpolated for any values that fall
between the lot sizes indicated. For example a lot of
12,500 square feet would have a FAR of 0.345.
(2) Houses over 7,500 square feet in size shall be subject
to site plan review by the Planning Board. Such review
will be limited to placement on the lot and landscaping.
F. Solar energy systems and equipment. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
(1) Legislative intent, purpose and definitions.
(a) Legislative intent and purpose. The purpose of these provisions
is to allow and encourage solar energy systems and equipment
within residential and business districts, according to certain
safeguards and conditions. The intent is to balance the
desirability and demand for alternative energy systems with
maintaining the aesthetics of the Village and minimize the
potential for any negative impact by these systems and to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Village.
(b) Definitions. As used in this Subsection F, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
GROUND-MOUNTED — Directly installed in or on the ground
and not attached or affixed to an existing structure.
INTEGRATED PRIMARY EQUIPMENT — Any part of a solar
energy system, including but not limited to solar panels, that
is built into the structure in such a manner that it blends
aesthetically and functionally into that structure, such as solar
roof tiles.
NONINTEGRATED PRIMARY EQUIPMENT — Any part of a
solar energy system that is not integrated primary equipment.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM — A solar energy system that
through semiconductor devices, or photovoltaic cells, converts
solar energy directly into electricity.
PRIMARY EQUIPMENT — Any cell, panel, or other device
that converts, absorbs, or transforms solar energy, including
equipment for photovoltaic and solar thermal systems.
SECONDARY EQUIPMENT — Any supply lines, return lines,
control valves, wiring, meters, switches, modules, inverters or
other device and their cabinets associated with the installation
or function of a solar energy system.
§ 310-22 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-22
282:457
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Any primary equipment or
secondary equipment.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A photovoltaic system, a solar
thermal system or any other system wherein sunlight or solar
energy is used to generate electricity.
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM — A solar energy system that
harnesses solar energy for thermal energy (heat), which is then
used to generate electricity.
(2) General standards for solar energy systems and equipment.
(a) Solar energy equipment shall not be located in any principal
front yard.
(b) Only integrated primary equipment may be located on any face
of a building or structure facing a street, except that on corner
lots, such equipment may be installed on any facade of a
building or structure facing a nonprincipal front yard street
when approved by the Planning Board pursuant to Article XI of
this chapter.
(c) Solar energy equipment shall not be visible from any adjacent
street, except:
[1] In the case of a corner lot, roof-mounted primary
equipment may be installed upon approval by the Planning
Board as set forth in this chapter; or
[2] If such equipment is integrated primary equipment.
(d) All solar energy systems shall be designed, erected and
installed in accordance with all applicable codes, regulations
and standards and shall comply with this Subsection F.
(e) Solar energy systems shall be permitted only to provide power
for use by owners, lessees, residents or other occupants at the
premises on which they are erected, but nothing contained in
this provision shall be construed to prohibit the sale of excess
power through a "net billing" or similar program in accordance
with New York Public Service Law § 66-j or similar state or
federal statute.
(f) The applicant shall demonstrate that the solar energy system
will be minimally visually intrusive from surrounding
properties and minimally disruptive to existing vegetation. The
equipment shall use, to the extent practicable, materials,
colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to
which they are affixed or, if not affixed, to harmonize with the
natural surroundings.
(g) Equipment shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, or
reflective.
§ 310-22 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-22
282:458
(h) To the greatest extent practicable, all equipment is to appear
like and is to match the color of the part of the building or
structure to which it is attached.
(i) In any new building or structure or alteration thereof, all
primary equipment shall be integrated primary equipment.
(3) Roof-mounted solar energy equipment. Any solar energy equipment
mounted to any roof, including flush-mounted and rack-mounted,
shall be permitted under the following conditions:
(a) Integrated primary equipment. Where such equipment is
integrated as the surface layer of an existing roof structure,
such as solar roof tiles, there shall be no apparent change in
relief or projection.
(b) Nonintegrated primary equipment:
[1] Shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof. On a corner
lot, such equipment may be located on a roof facing a
nonprincipal front yard upon approval of the Planning
Board pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. The removal of
potential obstructions, such as vegetation, shall not be
sufficient cause for permitting installation on a roof facing
the front yard.
[2] Shall not exceed the lesser of 900 square feet in area or
33% of the area of the plane of the roof on which the
equipment is mounted.
[3] Shall extend no more than 12 inches above the roof
surface to which it is affixed.
[4] Shall be installed in a manner that minimizes its visibility
while maintaining viability and functional integrity.
[5] Vertical projection. When installed on a building or
structure with a sloped roof surface, nonintegrated
primary equipment shall not project above the peak of the
roof to which it is attached. When installed on a flat roof,
such equipment shall not project above any cornice or
parapet wall.
(c) Secondary equipment. No secondary equipment shall be
exposed on the outside of any building or structure unless
required by applicable codes and standards.
(4) Freestanding and ground-mounted solar energy equipment.
Freestanding and ground-mounted solar energy equipment shall be
permitted under the following conditions:
(a) It shall be located in a side or rear yard only and shall comply
with all setback requirements for a principal building.
§ 310-22 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-22
282:459
(b) It shall not exceed 6 1/2 feet in height above the ground, as
measured to the highest point on the equipment. If the ground
level is raised or built up for the installation, this height will be
measured from the preexisting ground level.
(c) It shall be fully screened from adjacent properties by fencing, a
combination of evergreen and deciduous plantings which shall
not be less than 6 1/2 feet in height when installed, or, when
possible and practicable, through the use of architectural
features, earth berms, or other screening that will harmonize
with the character of the property and surrounding area.
(d) It shall not exceed the lesser of 1,000 square feet in area or 5%
of the area of the lot on which it is located.
(5) Procedure.
(a) Site plan approval. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 310-26A, site plan approval is not required for solar energy
systems in residential districts except where Planning Board
approval is specifically required by this Subsection F.
(b) A plan shall be submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings as
a requirement for the issuance of a building permit for any
solar energy system. Such plan shall indicate all existing and
proposed grading, excavating, filling, paving, fencing, and
screening as it may relate to the proposed solar energy system.
The plan shall also indicate the location of all property lines
and adjacent buildings, including buildings across an adjacent
street, and shall comply with the requirements and standards
of this Subsection F. The Superintendent of Buildings may
refer any such application to the Planning Board and/or Design
Review Committee for review and comment, but nothing
contained in any such review or comment shall limit or
otherwise affect the authority of the Superintendent of
Buildings to issue or deny the permit.
G. Renewable energy systems. [Added 9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(1) Legislative intent, purpose and definitions.
(a) Legislative intent and purpose. The purpose of these provisions
is to allow and encourage non-solar energy alternative or
renewable energy systems, including those that harness wind
or geothermal energy, within residential and business districts,
according to certain safeguards and conditions. The intent is to
balance the desirability and demand for alternative energy
systems with maintaining the aesthetics of the Village and
minimize the potential for any negative impact by these
systems and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village.
§ 310-22 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-22
282:460
§ 310-23. Signs. [Amended 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
(b) Definitions. As used in this Subsection G, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system that
uses heat or power from the earth's core for heating, cooling,
or generating other types of energy.
RENEWABLE ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Any device,
equipment, supply lines, return lines, control valves, wiring,
meters, switches, modules, or inverters associated with the
installation or function of a renewable energy system.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES — Sources of energy that
are naturally replenished, including wind and geothermal heat,
but not including natural gas, petroleum and other
petrochemicals, and coal.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system that uses
or harnesses renewable energy sources to generate electricity,
heat, or cooling, except solar energy systems that are
regulated under § 310-22F.
(2) General standards for renewable energy systems and equipment.
(a) Any aboveground renewable energy equipment shall not be
located in any principal front yard, except that on corner lots,
such equipment may be installed in a nonprincipal front yard
when approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Procedure.
(a) Site plan approval. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 310-26A, site plan approval is not required for any
geothermal energy system except where Planning Board
approval is specifically required by this Subsection G.
(b) A plan shall be submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings as
a requirement for the issuance of a building permit for any
alternative energy system. Such plan shall indicate all existing
and proposed grading, excavating, filling, paving, fencing, and
screening as it may relate to the proposed alternative energy
system. The plan shall also indicate the location of all property
lines and adjacent buildings, including buildings across an
adjacent street, and shall comply with the requirements and
standards of this Subsection G. The Superintendent of
Buildings may refer any such application to the Planning Board
and/or Design Review Committee for review and comment, but
nothing contained in any such review or comment shall limit or
otherwise affect the authority of the Superintendent of
Buildings to issue or deny the permit.
§ 310-22 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-23
282:461
A. Legislative intent, purposes and definitions.
(1) The purpose of this section is to promote and protect the public
health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed
outdoor signs of all types and certain indoor signs. It is intended to
protect property values and create a more attractive economic
climate; to protect and enhance the physical appearance of the
community and preserve its scenic, man-made and natural beauty,
by ensuring the signage is appropriate to the character of
Bronxville and its commercial districts; to reduce sign distractions
and obstructions that may be created by signs projecting and
obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents and to reduce
hazards which may be created by signs projecting over sidewalks
or streets; and to regulate signs in a manner consistent with the
legislative intent and purposes set forth in Subsection A of § 310-43
of this chapter which establishes a Planning Board.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, either separate
or defined by permanent party walls within the building, with
a common entrance or entrances for one or more businesses
conducted therein.
ERECT — To paint, build, construct, alter, display, relocate, attach,
hang, place, suspend or affix. Such term does not include
maintenance and repair but does include the repainting or
refinishing of a sign in a manner which changes the color or design
of the sign or any of its components.
SIGN — Any material, structure or device which is:
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign, including but not limited to
neon, in or upon which an artificial light source is utilized in a
manner to illuminate the information and graphics of the sign.
There are four types:
(a) Composed of letters, pictures or symbols;
Designed or used for the purpose of attracting or which does
attract, the attention of the public to the subject matter
thereof; and
(b)
Either located out of doors on the exterior of a building or
located inside a building within five feet of the window or in a
manner to be viewed principally by passersby.
(c)
SELF-ILLUMINATED:
TYPE A — Direct source wherein the light source itself is
shaped and utilized to form the sign (e.g., neon or an array
of individual lamps).
[1]
(a)
§ 310-23 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-23
282:462
STREET — Any public or private way, street, avenue or road.
TYPE B — Internal illumination wherein a translucent,
transparent or opaque material which forms the sign is
backlighted by the light source and the light source
enclosed from direct view.
[2]
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED:
Direct external illumination wherein the sign is
illuminated by a light source place in a manner to cast
light upon the sign.
[1]
Indirect external illumination wherein the sign, whether
on an opaque, transparent or translucent panel or apply to
the window of the business establishment, is illuminated
by ambient light.
[2]
(b)
B. General standards for signs. [Amended 10-14-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
(1) The design, character, size and scale of signs shall be in keeping
with and appropriate to the architectural design of the building or
structure upon which they are placed, the design of neighboring
properties and adjoining signs and the character of Bronxville and
its commercial districts.
(2) Except as permitted in Subsection B(3) below, the number of signs
for each business establishment shall be limited to one per street
facade with a maximum of two signs per business establishment in
the case of buildings located on the corner of a public right-of-way.
Such signs may be displayed on the building or an awning or within
a window, but not in more than one such location per street facade.
Such signs shall be limited to the business name and principal
business activity conducted on the premises.
(3) In addition to the sign(s) permitted in Subsection B(2) above, the
following signs may be displayed in business establishments:
(a) Signs identifying the occupant of a permitted professional
office or studio in a residence. Each sign shall be limited to one
square foot in surface area and there shall be no more than one
such sign for each such occupant on any premises.
(b) Informational signs not larger than one square foot in surface
area relating to business hours, entrance and egress, licenses,
credit cards or as required by law. Not more than one such sign
per business establishment may be affixed to the glass or a
window or door.
(c) The name of each business conducted in a business
establishment in letters in a single color may also be displayed
on the main entrance door in letters not over two inches high
§ 310-23 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-23
282:463
or on the bottom edge of one awning in letters not over four
inches high, but not both, and in one window of a second floor
business establishment in letters not over four inches high.
(d) Temporary signs, advertising display panels, posters and
similar graphic material, provided that such signs comply with
regulations established by the Planning Board.
(4) Further, more specific sign standards may be established by the
Planning Board from time to time, pursuant to Subsection N of this
section.
C. Prohibited signs and signs regulated further by the Planning Board.
(1) The following signs are prohibited:
(a) Flashing, moving or fluttering signs and signs which emit
smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
(b) Exterior self-illuminated sign (Types A and B) and interior selfilluminated
signs (Types A and B) which are located closer than
five feet from any point to a display window or elsewhere
within the interior in a manner to be viewed principally by
passersby.
(c) Externally illuminated signs (Types C and D), whether exterior
or interior, that:
[1] Do not identify the name and type of business;
[2] Are not the principal sign of the business for that facade;
or
[3] Do not comply with other related provisions authorized by
Subsection N herein.
(d) Signs affixed to exterior glass, except informational signs as
specified in Subsection J(1)(h) of this section.
(e) Signs of such a design and location that they interfere with,
compete for attention with or may be mistaken for a traffic
signal.
(f) Freestanding or projecting signs within an area bounded by
the intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more streets and
points 30 feet from such intersection along the rights-of-way of
such streets, except informational signs erected by a
governmental body.
(g) Exterior signs containing product or service advertising, trade
names or logotypes separate from the name of the business.
(h) Temporary real estate and other trade signs erected on a
property for sale or under renovation, except that "Space
§ 310-23 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-23
282:464
Available" signs shall be permitted in the Central Business
District in compliance with regulations adopted by the
Planning Board.
(i) Signs on any exterior wall of a building above the ground floor,
except signs on windows which are otherwise permitted in
accordance with this section or which are specifically excepted
in Subsection J below.
(2) The following further sign regulations, pursuant to Subsection N
herein, apply. Prohibited exterior or interior illuminated signs
presently displayed shall not be illuminated after six months from
the date of this amendment to the Village Code except as allowed
for a time by the Planning Board Sign Regulation authorized by
Subsection N herein; provided, however, that any existing sign of
Type A or B which was in place prior to the effective date of the
Village Ordinance of 1958 and which identifies the name of the
business conducted on the premises may be illuminated during the
hours the establishment is open for business subject to the
Planning Board Sign Regulations authorized by Subsection N
herein.
D. Permit. Except as specifically exempted in Subsection J below, no sign
may be erected or displayed on a building facade, awning or on or
within a window without first obtaining a sign permit from the
Superintendent pursuant to the results of review by the Design Review
Committee and the Planning Board.
E. Application.
(1) An application for a sign permit shall be made to the
Superintendent and shall comply with regulations established by
the Planning Board. The Superintendent shall forward all
applications to the Planning Board for review and report.
(2) The Design Review Committee shall review each permit application
to determine whether the proposed sign is consistent with the
purpose and intent of this section and shall prepare a report of its
findings and recommendations to the Planning Board.
(3) The Superintendent may request a determination or interpretation
from the Planning Board on any provision of this section prior to
taking action hereunder.
F. Hearing and action. The Planning Board shall review each permit
application and shall approve, disapprove or approve subject to
modifications or conditions, being guided by the purpose and intent of
this Zoning Code, the report of the Design Review Committee, the
requirements of this § 310-23, any regulations pertaining to signs
adopted by the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection N of this section
and other laws of the Village of Bronxville. The Superintendent shall,
within five working days of approval or within five working days of
§ 310-23 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-23
282:465
compliance with any modifications or conditions required for approval,
as the case may be, issue a permit for the erection of the proposed sign.
G. Procedure. The provisions for hearing and notice of hearings on
applications for development set forth in Subsections D and E of
§ 310-44 of this chapter shall apply to hearings and notices of hearings
on permit applications under this section, except that no notice by
personal service or certified mail shall be required. Whenever an
application for development includes a proposed sign for which
approval by the Planning Board is required under this section, the
Planning Board may act upon the proposed sign under the application
for development without requiring a separate permit application, notice
of hearing and hearing under this section.
H. Permit fees. The permit fees shall be determined by resolution of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Bronxville.
I. Permit void. A sign permit shall be void if the sign authorized
thereunder has not been erected within 180 days from the date of
issuance. The owner or applicant of said sign shall be responsible for
establishing the date of sign erection in the issued sign permit.
J. Exemptions.
(1) A permit shall not be required for the following signs, provided that
such signs comply with any regulations issued or established by the
Planning Board pursuant to Subsection N of this section.
(a) Traffic signs erected by a governmental body.
(b) Emergency signs erected for the safety of the public in an area
where repair or installation work is in progress.
(c) Signs on residential premises identifying the owner or resident
and the address of such premises. Each such sign shall be
limited to one square foot in surface area.
(d) Business establishment signs which meet the requirements of
Subsection B(3) of this section. [Amended 10-14-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
(e) Signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or other
premises and signs limiting the use of private property by the
public. Each such sign shall be limited to one square foot in
surface area.
(f) Signs in the nature of memorial or historical markers, tablets
or cornerstones. Each such sign shall be limited to two square
feet in surface area.
(g) Nonilluminated signs used by places of worship to identify the
place of worship and the names of clergy thereof and
§ 310-23 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-23
282:466
§ 310-24. Lighting. [Amended 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
impending programs of worship. Each such sign shall be
limited to three feet by four feet in dimension.49
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to permit
any sign prohibited by Subsection C of this section.
K. Conditions for continued bona fide display of signs.
(1) The applicant shall be responsible for the accuracy of all
dimensions relating to the building and the sign. In cases where the
actual sign does not conform to the approved design, the applicant
may be required at his own expense to remove, correct or replace
the sign.
(2) Signs shall be maintained in good and complete condition, with
panels, letter forms and graphics firmly mounted and in true
alignment and finishes in good repair.
L. Removal of certain signs. Any sign which at any time no longer
advertises a bona fide business or other activity then being conducted
on the premises on which such sign is located or a product or service
then being offered on such premises or which does not comply with
conditions established for the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
section shall be deemed prohibited and shall be removed by the owner
of such premises or shall be brought into compliance with this section.
M. Violations and penalties. Violations of this section of the chapter shall
be subject to penal and civil penalties as set forth in Article X of the
chapter.
N. Regulations. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt regulations not
inconsistent with any specific provisions of this section, setting forth
standards by which signs will be determined to be consistent or not
consistent with the purpose and intent of this section, including without
limitation standards governing the elevations, projections and location
of the letters, symbols and pictures of which signs are composed, the
material of which signs are made and the size, color and lighting and all
other matters pertaining to the administration of this § 310-23
pertaining to signs, including the form and content of sign applications.
A. Legislative intent; purpose and definitions.
(1) Purpose. The primary purpose of these standards is to promote and
protect the public welfare by regulating the appearance of and
light trespass from exterior lighting located on private property
within the Village in order to ensure a nighttime appearance within
the Village which is consistent with the Village's character and
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J(1)(h), (i) and (j), regarding informational signs,
additional signs and temporary signs, which immediately followed, were repealed
10-14-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002. For current provisions, see Subsection B(3)(b), (c) and (d).
§ 310-23 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-24
282:467
overall architectural quality. A second purpose is to encourage and
in some cases mandate consistent nighttime appearance within the
central business district by regulating the amount and appearance
of that interior lighting within buildings housing commercial uses
which is visible from adjacent areas and by providing guidelines for
all-night lighting.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
ADJACENT AREAS — Property from which light from a light source
is visible, including sidewalks, streets and other public or private
property.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING — All outdoor lighting, inclusive of but not
limited to all lighting fixtures mounted on the exterior of buildings
or structures, freestanding poles, bollards or located at ground
level on private property.
FLOODLIGHTING — Any lighting directed to any object of regard.
HOUSE SHIELD — An opaque baffle or shield located on or within
a lighting fixture such that its light distribution is reduced in
certain directions, typically within the 90º quadrant to the rear of
the lighting fixture.
INCANDESCENT LIGHT — Illumination produced by a filament
which is heated by an electric current, including quartz and
halogen lights.
LIGHT — Radiant energy which is capable of exciting the retina
and producing a visual sensation.
LIGHTING — The combination of light source, lighting fixture and
location which provides illumination.
LIGHTING FIXTURE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a
lamp together with the parts designed to distribute the light,
position and protect the lamp and connect the lamp to the power
supply. The following terms describe generic types of lighting
fixtures:
DECORATIVE — An ornamental fixture having an appearance
and light distribution intended to provide decoration and visual
interest as well as functional illumination.
(a)
SHIELDED — A fixture whose shape and optical design
prevents a direct view to the light source at normal viewing
angles (less than 20º above the horizontal).
(b)
UNSHIELDED — A fixture whose shape and optical design
permits a direct view to the light source or its image as seen
through a diffuser, globe or lens, at normal viewing angles (less
than 20º above the horizontal).
(c)
§ 310-24 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-24
282:468
LIGHT SOURCE — A man-made source of light, typically housed
within an evacuated glass envelope and requiring the application
of electric power to produce light by heating a filament or exciting
gases or phosphors.
LUMINANCE — The photometric equivalent of the physical
sensation of brightness, specifically the amount of light leaving a
surface in a particular direction, measured in footlamberts (fL).
STOREFRONT — Display windows of a building housing a
commercial use visible from a street, sidewalk or other pedestrian
way accessible to the public or adjacent public or private property.
B. General standards for exterior lighting.
(1) The design, character, size and scale of exterior lighting fixtures
visible from adjacent areas shall be consistent with the
architectural character of adjacent buildings and their setting
within the Village.
(2) All exterior lighting visible from adjacent areas shall use
incandescent or fluorescent light sources, except as otherwise
permitted by the provisions of this section.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following light
sources and lighting fixture types shall not be used within the
Village where the light emitted is visible from adjacent areas,
except as otherwise provided in this section:
(a) High-pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, mercury vapor
and neon light sources.
(b) Cobra-head-type lighting fixtures having dished or drop lenses
or refractors which house other than incandescent sources.
(c) Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
(d) Lighting fixtures having flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or
alternating colored sources.
(4) Building facades and architectural features of buildings shall not
be floodlighted unless the following conditions are met:
(a) Floodlight fixtures are equipped with baffles and/or shields and
are so located as to limit the fixture's direct light distribution to
the facade or feature being illuminated.
(b) The configuration of the floodlight installation shall block all
view to the floodlight fixture's lamp(s) from adjacent areas.
(c) The maximum luminance of any floodlighted surface does not
exceed five fL, measured at a distance of 50 feet along the
normal from the surface to a standing observer.
§ 310-24 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-24
282:469
(5) Area and security lighting of garage forecourts, parking lots,
pedestrian paths and building perimeter areas shall conform to the
following conditions:
(a) Decorative fixtures may be used, provided either that the
maximum installed lamp wattage is no greater that 150 watts
(incandescent) or the fixture configuration limits the
luminance of any portion of its light emitting surface to a
maximum of 1,000 fL, measured at a distance of 25 feet along
the normal from the fixture center to a standing observer.
(b) Nondecorative utility-type fixtures, including security and area
floodlights, shall be provided with baffles and/or shields which
limit the lighting fixture's direct light distribution within the
property line and which block all view to the lighting fixture's
lamp from an observer standing on adjacent areas.
(c) No freestanding or building-mounted area lighting fixture shall
be located higher than 16 feet above finished grade level.
(d) Unshielded area lighting fixtures located within 15 feet of the
property line shall be provided with a house shield baffle to
reduce the degree of light trespass flowing onto adjacent
areas.
(6) Sports fields and tennis/racquet ball courts may be lighted,
provided that lighting fixtures are provided with baffles and/or
shields which limit the lighting fixture's direct light distribution to
the playing area and which block all view to the lighting fixture's
lamp from adjacent areas.
C. Lighting of signs and storefronts.
(1) Exterior signs may be lighted, providing the sign conforms to the
requirements of § 310-23 and a sign lighting permit is obtained.
The lighting of exterior signs shall conform to the following:
(a) Signs may be externally illuminated using incandescent or
fluorescent sources. Metal halide sources not exceeding 150
watts may be used for exterior sign illumination by a special
permit.
(b) Self-illuminated exterior signs shall not be permitted.
(c) The luminance of lighted exterior signs shall not exceed 100 fL,
measured at a distance of 25 feet along the normal from the
sign to a standing observer.
(2) Interior signs which are so placed as to be visible from the exterior
may be lighted, provided that the sign conforms to the
requirements of § 310-23 and a sign lighting permit is obtained.
The lighting of interior signs shall conform to the following:
§ 310-24 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-24
282:470
(a) Interior signs may be externally illuminated using
incandescent or fluorescent sources.
(b) Self-illuminated interior signs shall be permitted if located at
least five feet from any point on a display window and which
are not oriented so as to be primarily visible from the exterior.
(c) The luminance of lighted interior signs shall not exceed 200 fL,
measured at a distance of 10 feet along the normal from the
sign to an observer standing outside the display window.
(3) Interior lighting associated with display windows and storefronts
shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Light sources and lighting fixtures which are prohibited for
exterior use or which require a special use permit under the
provisions of this section shall not be used within buildings
where the light emitted from such sources or lighting fixtures
is visible from adjacent areas. This requirement shall extend to
interior security lighting as well as general and display lighting
used during operating hours.
(b) Lighting within display windows and storefronts shall use
incandescent sources.
(c) Although not required by the provisions of this section,
landlords and tenants of storefronts are strongly encouraged
to light such storefronts from dusk to dawn with a minimum
level of all-night storefront lighting equivalent to 15 watts of
incandescent lighting per linear foot of display window
fronting a street or pedestrian pathway accessible to the
public.
D. Permit.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a permit shall be
required for the following uses:
(a) Lighting of signs.
(b) Uses set forth in this section.
(2) A permit shall not be required for temporary holiday and special
event lighting of a nonpromotional nature, provided that such
lighting uses incandescent sources and is limited to a maximum of
60 days per year. Colored and flashing incandescent sources shall
be permitted for such temporary uses, but the use of other light
sources shall require a permit.
(3) Certain light sources and lighting fixture types otherwise
prohibited by provisions of this section may be installed when
approved by the Planning Board, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 310-24 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-24
282:471
(a) Metal halide sources may be used for parking and area
lighting, provided that they are housed within either of the
following:
[1] Shoebox or sharp cutoff-type lighting fixtures whose light
distribution pattern directs all light emitted from the
lighting fixture below the horizontal plane level with the
bottom of the lighting fixture.
[2] Decorative lighting fixtures whose optical configurations
limit the luminance of any portion of the globe surface to a
maximum of 1,000 fL, measured along the normal from the
globe center at a distance of 25 feet to a standing observer.
(b) Shoebox-type metal halide lighting fixtures shall be located
such that the bottom surface of their lenses are no higher than
16 feet above finished grade level. All metal halide lighting
fixtures located within 15 feet of the property line shall be
provided with a house shield baffle to reduce the degree of
light flowing onto adjacent areas.
(c) Metal halide sources may be used for the lighting of sports
fields and tennis/racquet ball courts, provided that lighting
fixtures housing such sources are provided with baffles and/or
shields which limit the lighting fixture's light distribution to the
playing area and which block all view of the lighting fixture's
lamp from adjacent areas.
E. Application.
(1) An application for a permit shall be made to the Superintendent
and shall comply with regulations established by the Planning
Board. The Superintendent shall forward all applications to the
Planning Board for review and approval.
(2) The Design Review Committee shall review each permit application
to determine whether the proposed lighting is consistent with the
purpose and intent of this section and shall prepare a report of its
findings and recommendations to the Planning Board.
(3) The Superintendent may request a determination or interpretation
from the Planning Board of any provision of this section prior to
taking action hereunder.
F. Hearing and action. The Planning Board shall review each permit
application and shall approve, disapprove or approve subject to
conditions, being guided by the purpose and intent of this chapter, the
report of the Design Review Committee, the requirements of this
section, any regulations pertaining to lighting adopted by the Planning
Board and other laws of the Village. The Superintendent shall, within
five working days of approval or within five working days of compliance
§ 310-24 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-24
282:472
§ 310-25. Nonconforming buildings and uses. [Amended
12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
The following provisions shall apply to all buildings and uses existing
lawfully on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance of 1958, or any
amendments thereto, which buildings and/or uses do not conform to the
requirements set forth in this chapter.
with any modifications or conditions required for approval, as the case
may be, issue a permit for the proposed lighting.
G. Procedure. The provisions for hearings and notice of hearings on
applications for development set forth in Subsections D and E of
Section § 310-44 of this chapter shall apply to hearings and notices of
hearings on permit applications under this section, except that no
notice by personal service or certified mail shall be required. Whenever
an application for development includes a proposed lighting use for
which approval by the Planning Board is required under this section,
the Planning Board may act upon the proposed lighting usage under the
application for development without requiring a separate permit
application, notice of hearing and hearing under this section.
H. Permit fees. Permit fees shall be determined by resolution of the Board
of Trustees of the Village.
I. Permit void. A permit issued under this section shall be void if the
lighting authorized thereunder has not been erected within 180 days
from the date of issuance.
J. Removal of noncomplying lighting. Any lighting use authorized by a
permit which does not comply with conditions established for the
issuance of the permit shall be deemed prohibited and shall be removed
by the owner of such premises or shall be brought into compliance with
this section.
K. Violations and penalties. Violations of this section shall be subject to
penal and civil penalties as set forth in Article X of this chapter.
L. Regulations. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt regulations not
inconsistent with any specific provisions of this section, setting forth
standards by which lighting will be determined to be consistent or not
consistent with the purpose and intent of this section and all other
matters pertaining to the administration of this section, including the
form and content of a special permit application.
M. Governmental exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the federal or state government or any of their respective agencies,
political subdivisions or municipal corporations, including the Village,
public schools or railroads.
A. Such nonconforming use of buildings or open land may be continued
indefinitely, but:
§ 310-24 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-25
282:473
(1) Shall not be enlarged, extended or placed on a different portion of
the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use on the effective date
of this chapter, nor shall any external evidence of such use be
increased by any means whatsoever;
(2) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use; and
(3) Shall not be reestablished if such use has for any reason been
discontinued for a period of over one year or has been changed to
or replaced by, a conforming use. Intent to resume a
nonconforming use shall not confer the right to do so.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D below, no building which houses
such a nonconforming use shall be:
(1) Structurally altered or enlarged; or
(2) Moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
(3) Subject to Subsection A, if a building which houses such a
nonconforming use is destroyed up to 50% of its market value
accidentally due to fire, explosion or other cause, such building
may be restored within one year in substantially the same form and
location and the same nonconforming use may be reinstated,
without being extended. Any nonconforming use destroyed beyond
50% of its market value must be reconstructed in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any building (other than a sign), the use of which is in conformity with
the regulations set forth in this chapter, but which building does not
conform to one or more of the requirements hereof other than the use
requirements, may be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, provided that such
building shall not be altered, enlarged or rebuilt so as to increase the
degree of nonconformity thereof.
D. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
and repair of any building or the carrying out upon issuance of a
building permit of major structural alterations or demolition necessary
in the interest of public safety. In granting such a permit, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall state the precise reason why such
alterations were deemed necessary.50
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which followed, regarding banks, as amended
1-8-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001, was repealed 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004.
§ 310-25 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-25
282:474
ARTICLE VI
Site Plan and Subdivision Approval
[Amended 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 310-26. Site plan approval.
A. Site plan approval required. Pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law, no
land shall be cleared or altered nor shall any building or other structure
be constructed, demolished, moved, externally altered or enlarged, nor
shall any watercourse, floodplain or wetlands be diverted, dredged or
filled, nor shall the use of any land. building or other structure be
changed, nor shall any building or other use permit be issued, except in
accordance with final approval of a site plan granted by the Planning
Board pursuant to this article, except detached single-family residential
buildings permitted as-of-right under applicable zoning regulations:
provided, however, building permits for interior alterations only, not
involving a change in use, shall not require site plan approval. Further
provided, a change in permitted use of first-floor space in the Central
Business A District and Service Business B District to another use
within the same permitted use category (e.g., retail establishment to
another retail establishment, or restaurant to another restaurant), not
involving changes to any previously issued special permit, shall not
require site plan approval. Further provided, that in the Central
Business A District and Service Business B District, a change from a
permitted retail, service, or restaurant use to a permitted office use, not
involving changes to any previously issued special permit, shall not
require site plan approval. [Amended 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015;
1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
B. Pre-application filing. Prior to filing an application for development, a
developer and/or his or her representative may and shall, in the case of
any development, the cost of which is estimated to exceed $50,000,
request in writing an informal meeting with the Planning Board and
Design Review Committee to obtain general information and guidance
before entering into binding commitment or incurring unnecessary
expense related to formal application. The purpose of such review is to
provide an informal and free exchange of ideas. Such a pre-application
filing shall not be deemed to be the filing of an application for
development for the purpose of determining the time within which an
application must be acted upon by the Planning Board. The request
shall be accompanied by a written description or diagrammatic
material outlining the matters the applicant wishes to review. No
statements or representations made prior to formal review shall be
binding on the Village.
C. Conditions attached to the approval of site plans. The Planning Board
shall have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and
restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to a proposed site
plan. Upon its approval of said site plan, any such conditions must be
§ 310-26 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-26
282:475
§ 310-27. Preliminary approval of site plan.
met in connection with the issuance of permits by applicable
enforcement agents or officers of the Village.
A. Applications for preliminary site plan approval. Applications for
preliminary site plan approval of a development shall include all the
supporting documentation required by § 310-31 of this article. Ten
copies of the application, each containing all required supporting
documentation, shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
B. (Reserved)51
C. Review of applications by Superintendent and Village Engineer; report;
referral. [Amended 10-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) The Superintendent shall review each application and prepare a
report with respect thereto. The report shall include a statement
regarding compliance with applicable Village zoning laws and
other regulations, but the applicant shall not be relieved of the
requirements of such regulations by reason of any matters included
in or omitted from the report.
(2) The Village Engineer shall comment on the adequacy of
engineering matters included in or affected by the proposal.
(3) Each of the aforesaid persons shall review each such application
within such time after its receipt so that the Planning Board may
take action thereon within the time prescribed by this article and
Article VIII. After the completion of these reviews, the
Superintendent shall prepare a report of the findings and
recommendations. He or she shall forward copies of the report and
copies of the application to the Design Review Committee and the
Planning Board.
D. Review and report by Design Review Committee. The Design Review
Committee shall review each such application within such time after its
receipt so that the Planning Board may take action thereon within the
time prescribed by this article and Article VIII. The Design Review
Committee shall prepare a report of its findings and recommendations
in conformity with the standards set forth in § 310-30.
E. Hearing and action by Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board shall review such application and after notice
and hearing shall take official action within 62 days after such
hearing by granting preliminary approval or preliminary approval
with modifications (including conditions and safeguards designed
to promote the purposes of Article VIII) or disapproving the
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding additional fees for experts engaged by the
Planning Board, was repealed 5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007. See now Art. X of this
chapter.
§ 310-26 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-27
282:476
§ 310-28. Final approval of site plan.
§ 310-29. Site agreement, parkland and on-tract improvements.
application, being guided by the standards set forth in § 310-30 of
this article. Preliminary approval shall be subject to any site and
on-tract improvement requirements imposed pursuant to § 310-29
of this article. The Board shall furnish copies of the decision to the
Superintendent of Buildings and the Village Clerk.
(2) If the Planning Board approves the application without
modification, it may deem such action as final approval of the
application within the meaning of Subsection D of § 310-28 of this
article.
A. Applications for final site plan approval. The applicant shall submit to
the Superintendent for final approval by the Planning Board 10 copies
of the application, each of which shall include the final site plan and
such supplemental documentation as is required by this article. The
final site plan and documentation shall be in accordance with the
preliminary site plan, incorporating, however, all changes or
modifications required by the Planning Board in connection with
preliminary approval.
B. Statement from Superintendent, Village Engineer and experts. The
Superintendent, the Village Engineer and any experts retained by the
Village shall report in writing to the Planning Board and to the
applicant as to the applicant's compliance with the requirements for
final approval.
C. Statement from Design Review Committee. The application shall be
reviewed by the Design Review Committee which shall report in writing
to the Planning Board and to the applicant as to the applicant's
compliance with the requirements for final approval.
D. Grant or denial of final approval.
(1) After notice and hearing, the Planning Board shall grant final
approval or final approval with modifications (including conditions
and safeguards designed to promote the purposes of Article VIII), if
it finds that the submission conforms to the standards and
legislative intent and purposes established by this article.
Otherwise it shall disapprove the application.
(2) Final approval of the Planning Board shall not relieve the applicant
of the requirements of applicable Zoning, Building Code, floodplain
or any other laws or regulations.
A. Site improvements and development limitations. Prior to the granting
of any preliminary site plan approval the applicant shall propose and
prior to the granting of any final site plan approval, the applicant shall
enter into an agreement with the Village, in form satisfactory to the
§ 310-27 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-29
282:477
Village Counsel, requiring the installation and maintenance by the
applicant and the applicant's successors in interest, of such on-tract
improvements or imposing such limitations upon or staging of the
development of the site as are deemed necessary by the Planning Board
for implementing the standards set forth in § 310-30 of this article
and granting to the Village such rights and easements as shall be
reasonably required for access by the Village to such improvements
and developments for such purposes, provided that the Village may
cause such improvements to be installed, maintained and inspected and
developments in violation of such limitations to be corrected, at the
expense of the applicant or the applicant's successors in interest, if they
shall fail to do so.
B. Parkland. Pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law of New York State,
before the Planning Board may approve a site plan containing
residential units, the Planning Board may require the site plan to
include a park or parks suitably located for playground or other
recreational purposes.
(1) Findings required. Land for park, playground or other recreational
purposes may not be required until the Planning Board has made a
finding that a proper case exists for requiring that a park or parks
be suitably located for playgrounds or other recreational purposes
within the Village. Such findings shall include an evaluation of the
present and anticipated future needs for park and recreational
facilities in the Village based on projected population growth to
which the particular site plan will contribute.
(2) In the event the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to
Subsection B(1) above that the proposed site plan presents a
proper case for requiring a park or parks, but that a suitable park
or parks of adequate size to meet the requirement cannot be
properly located on such site plan, the Planning Board may require
a sum of money from the applicant in lieu thereof to be established
by the Board of Trustees.
(a) In making such determination of suitability, the Planning Board
shall assess the size and suitability of lands shown on the site
plan which could be possible locations for park or recreational
facilities, as well as practical factors including whether there is
a need for additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood.
(b) Any moneys required of the applicant by the Board of Trustees
in lieu of land for park, playground or other recreational
purposes, pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be
deposited into a trust fund to be used by the Village exclusively
for park, playground or other recreational purposes, including
the acquisition of property.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, if the land
included in a site plan under review is a portion of a subdivision
§ 310-29 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-29
282:478
§ 310-30. Standards.
plat which has been previously reviewed and approved, the
Planning Board shall credit the applicant for any land set aside
or money donated in lieu thereof under such subdivision plat
approval. In the event of resubdivision of such plat, nothing shall
preclude the additional reservation of parkland or money donated
in lieu thereof.
C. Performance guaranty. The Planning Board shall specify the
improvements as to which such determination is made and shall require
that the installation thereof be secured by a performance and
maintenance guaranty from the applicant furnished and administered
in accordance with the provisions of this article. No such guaranty shall
be canceled or reduced unless the applicant submits a certification of
completion thereof or a written approval of the cancellation or
reduction by the Superintendent of Buildings and the Planning Board.
A. Enumeration. The following standards, without limitation, shall be used
by the Design Review Committee and the Planning Board in reviewing
applications for development and in thereby implementing the
legislative intent and purposes set forth in § 310-43 of this chapter.
(1) Landscape and environment. To prevent the unnecessary
destruction or blighting of the Village's landscape or achieved manmade
environment, particular consideration shall be given to the
following, insofar as practical:
(a) Provision for minimal degradation of unique or irreplaceable
land types and protection of the water flow of aquifers and
other groundwater courses and wetlands;
(b) Preservation of desirable land characteristics and significant
geological and topographic features;
(c) Preservation or replacement of trees, plants and other
vegetation;
(d) Preservation and protection of historical, archaeological and
landmark areas and structures;
(e) Protection of animal and plant life processes; and
(f) Underground placement of utility services.
(2) Relationship of structures and open space: To ascertain that the
treatment of built-up areas and open spaces in the Village have
been designed so that they relate harmoniously to the terrain and
landscape and to existing buildings that have a visual relationship
to the proposed development, particular consideration shall be
given to:
(a) Siting of buildings and accessory structures and equipment;
§ 310-29 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-30
282:479
(b) Effects of building height, length, bulk and shadows;
(c) Landscape design;
(d) Location and layout of walks, drives and other site features;
(e) Preservation of views from the site and from adjoining areas;
(f) Appropriateness of building materials;
(g) Provisions of screening around and landscape treatment within
open parking and service areas;
(h) Relationship and scaling of building design and exterior
architectural features to the pedestrian; and
(i) Likelihood of nuisances.
(3) Circulation and parking. To determine that the proposal facilitates
safe and appropriate pedestrian access, vehicular traffic
movement, servicing and parking within the Village, and, when
necessary, compliance with other regulations for the very young,
the elderly and the handicapped, particular consideration shall be
given to:
(a) Vehicle sight lines at street and drive intersections;
(b) Provisions for access and movement of fire and emergency
vehicles;
(c) Separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and, where
practicable, separate provisions for bicycle circulation;
(d) Width and alignment of drives and access roads and layout of
parking and service areas;
(e) Location and distance of curb cuts in relation to street
intersections;
(f) Effect of traffic generated by the proposed development upon
surrounding streets, intersections and off-site parking;
(g) Discouraging routing of vehicular traffic through local
residential streets;
(h) Layout and handling of pedestrian areas (plazas, walks, etc.) to
avoid unnecessary congestion and overcrowding;
(i) Minimization of left-hand turns, other turning movements and
backing movements; and
(j) Appropriateness of location, width and layout of internal
circulation to the proposed development.
§ 310-30 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-30
282:480
(4) Protection of neighbors. To protect owners and users and the
Village by providing for such matters as:
(a) Surface water drainage;
(b) Sound and sight buffers;
(c) Light and air;
(d) Disposal of solid, liquid and gaseous waste and for avoidance of
odors and air pollutants; and
(e) Aspects of design not adequately covered by other regulations
which may have substantial effects on neighboring land uses
and the functioning of the Village and its services.
(5) Compliance with other laws and regulations. To coordinate
compliance with other standards and local, state and federal laws
and regulations which affect design:
(a) The Comprehensive Plan;
(b) This chapter and other local laws related thereto;
(c) New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code;
(d) Utility standards and regulations;
(e) Environmental protection laws;
(f) Pollution control standards;
(g) Noise control standards; and
(h) Floodplain regulations.
B. Surface water drainage. Developments involving significant stormwater
runoff from land areas and paved, roof and other surfaces shall provide
an engineering analysis and design for a method of controlled drainage
and/or storm system improvements that will eliminate an adverse
discharge into the Village system. The design of the drainage system
shall be in accordance with good engineering practice and applicable
governmental regulations. All costs for the analysis, design and
construction of the drainage system or improvements to the Village
system shall be paid for by the applicant. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, where, pursuant to Article X of this chapter,
the Planning Board or Superintendent engages experts to review the
analysis and design of such drainage systems and improvements, the
applicant shall reimburse the Village for such costs. [Amended
5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
C. Application to accessory uses. The standards of review prescribed by
this section shall also apply to all accessory buildings, structures,
§ 310-30 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-30
282:481
§ 310-31. Site plans.
freestanding signs and other site features, however related to primary
buildings or structures of a site development.
A. Site plans required. Every application for preliminary or final site plan
approval shall be documented by site plans and building drawings as
specified by this section, except as otherwise provided pursuant to this
article. Such plans and drawings shall accompany and be deemed part
of the application. Plans and drawings submitted for preliminary
approval may be submitted for final approval to the extent that they are
unchanged.
B. Contents of site plans. Each application for preliminary and/or final
approval of site plans shall include:
(1) Preliminary building floor plans and exterior elevations drawn to
scale adequate to show clearly the design intent.
(2) A site plan or plans, drawn at a scale adequate to show clearly the
following:
(a) The dimensions, orientation and acreage of each lot or plat to
be built upon or otherwise used and the location of present and
proposed easements, prepared by a licensed surveyor under
his or her seal;
(b) The layout of the entire project and its relation to surrounding
properties and the existing buildings and land uses thereon;
(c) The location and dimensions of present and proposed street
and highway dedications required to handle the traffic
generated by the proposed uses;
(d) The location of points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and
the internal vehicular circulation patterns;
(e) The location and layout of all existing and proposed paved
areas, including off-street parking and loading facilities;
(f) All existing and proposed topography and grading;
(g) The location of significant natural features including, without
limitation, watercourses, rock outcrops and wooded areas;
(h) The location of existing and proposed plantings and
screenings, including all existing trees of four-inch caliper and
over, measured at a height of four feet above grade. Trees over
four-inch caliper and other significant plantings to be removed
shall be indicated;
(i) The size, shape, location and lot line set back dimension of
existing and proposed construction;
§ 310-30 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-31
282:482
(j) Indication of the proposed use of construction shown on the
site;
(k) Indication of building divisions into separate occupancies or
uses;
(l) The location of walls, fences and railings and the indication of
their height and the materials of their construction;
(m) Indication of exterior lighting adequate to determine its
character and to enable review of possible hazards and
disturbances to the public and adjacent properties;
(n) Indication of other potential disturbances to the public and
adjacent properties including, without limitation, noise or
odors to be emitted from the proposed use; and
(o) The location, size and design of exterior signs and outdoor
advertising.
(3) If a proposed project is to be developed in separate stages, a plan
shall be submitted indicating the total development and the
sequence and timing for each phase of the development.
(4) Analysis and statement of compliance with applicable sections of
this chapter including, without limitation, density, building height,
number of stories, bulk, dimension, setback, usable open space,
building coverage, occupancy and parking.
(5) A statement of the zoning history of the property, including all
amendments to the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance
and prior decisions by the Planning Board (and its predecessor)
and the Zoning Board of Appeals in the case of any development,
the cost of which is estimated to exceed $50,000.
C. Waiver of requirements. The Planning Board may waive any of the
above submissions that it believes to be unnecessary. The Planning
Board may require such other information and exhibits as it deems
reasonably necessary to enable it to reach an informed result. That
information may include but is not limited to:
(1) Photographs of the site and neighboring structures;
(2) Sections to explain the character of the design;
(3) Professional studies of the effect of the proposed development upon
the Village with respect to such factors as traffic and parking,
surface water drainage facilities and public utilities;
(4) Detailed drawings of decorative elements;
(5) Samples of exterior materials and colors;
(6) Location and method of refuse storage;
§ 310-31 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-31
282:483
§ 310-32. Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA).
The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act under Article Eight of the Environmental
Conservation Law and its implementing regulations and Chapter 140,
Environmental Quality Review, of this Code.
§ 310-33. Subdivisions.
No land may be subdivided unless the subdivision is approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of this article. It is the
intention of the Board of Trustees in adopting this requirement to rely upon
the enabling power of § 7-725-a of the Village Law of New York State in lieu
of §§ 7-728, 7-730, 7-732, 7-738 and 7-740 of the Village Law. The Planning
Board may, in accordance with § 310-31C of this chapter, waive submissions
by the applicant which it believes are unnecessary in light of the nature of
the particular subdivision.
(7) Scale drawings of signs; and
(8) Model(s).
§ 310-31 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-33
282:484
ARTICLE VII
Special Permits
[Amended 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 310-34. General provisions.
The Planning Board shall have the power, pursuant to § 7-725-b of the
Village Law, after public notice and hearing, to grant special use permits for
the uses specified within this article. Any use designated in a given district
as requiring a special use permit shall be deemed to be a permitted use
in such district, subject to satisfaction of the conditions and standards set
forth in this article in addition to all other requirements of this chapter. All
such uses are hereby declared to possess characteristics of such unique and
special forms that each specific use shall be considered as an individual
case.
§ 310-35. Application procedures.
§ 310-36. Public hearing.
The Planning Board shall fix a time for a public hearing within 62 days from
the day a complete application for a special permit is made. Public notice
shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the Village of such
hearing at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. A notice of such
hearing shall also be transmitted to the applicant.
§ 310-37. Decision.
A. Site plan review required. Any land use requiring a special use permit
shall also require site plan review as provided in Article VI of this
chapter.
B. Application to the Planning Board. Application for a special use permit
shall be made in writing to the Planning Board. The application to the
Planning Board for a special use permit shall also be accompanied by a
site plan application containing all information and plans as required in
Article VI of this chapter.
C. Additional information. In addition to the specific requirements of this
article and Article VI, the application to the Planning Board for a special
permit use shall show any other information that the Planning Board
may require as it deems necessary to act on the application for a special
permit use.
A. Time for decision. Within 62 days of said hearing, the Planning Board
shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the special
permit application. The time within which the Planning Board must
render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the Planning
Board and the applicant.
§ 310-34 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-37
282:485
§ 310-38. Expiration.
A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular special use
or uses permitted in any district and shall expire if:
§ 310-39. Standards for all special permit uses.
The Planning Board shall approve an application for a special permit,
subject to such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed special permit use, if it finds that
the following conditions have been met:
B. Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Planning Board on the
appeal shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five
business days after the day such decision is rendered and a copy
thereof mailed to the applicant. No building permit shall be issued for a
special permit use until the conditions required by the Planning Board
have been met.
C. Grant of site plan approval with special permit. The Planning Board is
empowered but not required to grant a special use permit and
preliminary and final site plan approval with respect thereto
simultaneously.
A. Construction and commencement. Construction has not been
commenced within one year and has not been completed within two
years of the date of final special permit approval; if no construction is
involved, the use has not been commenced within one year of the date
of final special permit approval.
B. Cessation. The special use or uses shall cease for more than 12 months
for any reason.
A. Compatibility with district. That the location and size of the use, the
nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in
connection with such use, the size of the site in relation to the use, the
assembly of persons in connection with the use and the location of the
site with respect to streets giving access to the site are such that the
use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of
the district in which the use is proposed to be located.
B. Compatibility with Comprehensive Plan. That the proposed use will be
compatible with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Services. That all proposed structures, equipment or material will be
readily accessible for fire and police protection.
D. Adjacent properties. That the location, nature and height of buildings,
the location, nature and height of walls and fences and the nature and
extent of landscaping on the site shall will such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent
land and buildings.
§ 310-37 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-39
282:486
§ 310-40. Additional conditions; revocation; waiver of requirements;
permit renewal. [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
E. Nuisance. That operations in connection with the use will not be
offensive, dangerous or destructive of basic environmental
characteristics or detrimental to the public interest of the Village and
not be more objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise,
fumes, vibration, flashing of or glare from lights and similar nuisance
conditions than would be the operation of any permitted use not
requiring a special permit.
F. Neighborhood character and property values. That neighborhood
character and surrounding property values shall be reasonably
safeguarded.
G. Traffic. That the use will not cause undue traffic congestion or create a
traffic hazard.
H. Parking. That parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular
use, property located and suitably screened from adjoining residential
uses and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve
maximum safety.
I. That the use conforms in all respects to all the regulations of this
chapter and particularly to the specific supplementary regulations that
may apply to such use.
A. Additional conditions. The Planning Board shall require such additional
conditions and safeguards to the special use permit as may be
necessary to assure continual conformance to all applicable standards
and requirements.
B. Revocation. In all instances, a special use permit may be revoked by the
Planning Board after public hearing, if it is found and determined that
there has been a substantial failure to comply with any of the terms,
conditions, limitations and requirements imposed by the special use
permit.
C. Waiver of requirements. Upon a finding by the Planning Board that, due
to special conditions peculiar to a site, certain of the dimensional or
other specific standards normally required for a special use permit are
inappropriate or unnecessary or that strict compliance with said
requirements may cause extraordinary and unnecessary hardships, the
Board may waive such requirements wherever, in the opinion of the
Board, such waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety
or general welfare or have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of the special permit provisions or this chapter, provided that
the Planning Board shall not waive any numerical standard by more
than 10%. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
D. Permit renewal. At the Planning Board's discretion, a special permit
may be subject to renewal. [Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
§ 310-39 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-41
282:487
§ 310-41. Referral to County Planning Department.
The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of Article 12-B, §§ 239-l
and 239-m of the General Municipal Law, as amended and refer to the
Westchester County Department of Planning such special permit
applications which are within its jurisdiction.
§ 310-42. Individual standards and requirements for certain special
permit uses. [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities. [Amended 2-9-2004 by L.L.
No. 1-2004]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Any accessory facility or structure
serving or being used in conjunction with wireless
telecommunications facilities and located on the same property
or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but
not limited to utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or
cabinets.
ANTENNA — Any system of electrical conductors that transmits
or receives electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other
wireless signals.
COLLOCATION — The use of a structure to support antenna(s) for
the provision of wireless services without increasing the height of
the structure.
COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE — The inability to perform an
act on terms that are reasonable in commerce. The inability to
achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit,
standing alone, shall not be deemed to be a situation that is
“commercially impracticable” and shall not render an act or the
terms of an agreement “commercially impracticable”.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.
MODIFICATION — The addition, removal or change of any of the
physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a
wireless telecommunications facility, such as antennas, cabling,
radios, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds;
changing the color or materials of any visually discernable
components; and/or an upgrade or replacement of equipment for
better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier
or service provider to a telecommunications site is a modification. A
modification shall not include the replacement of any components
of a wireless telecommunications facility where the replacement is
identical to the component being replaced or the normal repair and
maintenance of a wireless telecommunications facility.
§ 310-41 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:488
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — A wireless telecommunications
facility that consists of a dish antenna or equivalent device the
exclusive purpose of which is to receive communication or their
signals from orbiting satellites or other extraterrestrial sources
or earth sources intended to carry signals into the interior of a
building.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — The minimization of
adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property,
buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in
generally the same area as the requested location of a wireless
telecommunications facility, which shall mean using the least
visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically,
structurally or commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of
audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency,
light, or other electronic or electromagnetic systems.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any equipment
used in connection with the provision of wireless
telecommunications services to transmit and/or receive
frequencies, including but not limited to antennas, accessory
telecommunications equipment and supporting masts.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Wireless
telecommunications services, including but not limited to those
commonly referred to as commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services, common carrier wireless exchange access
services, cellular telephone service and personal wireless services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any freestanding
tower on which a wireless telecommunications facility is located
in connection with the provision of wireless telecommunications
services.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of these special permit provisions shall be to
allow wireless telecommunications facilities within residential and
business districts, according to certain safeguards and conditions.
The intent of these provisions is to minimize the negative impact of
wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient
process for review and approval of applications, assure an
integrated; comprehensive review of environmental impacts of
such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village.
(3) Application of this subsection.
(a) Any wireless telecommunications facility to be installed,
constructed or erected in any zoning district, and any
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:489
modification thereof, shall require a special permit, other than
such facilities to be exclusively used:
[1] For or by the Village's Fire or Police Departments;
[2] For private, noncommercial radio and television reception;
[3] For private citizen bands, amateur radio, and other similar
noncommercial telecommunications; or
[4] For wireless networking, including equipment generally
referred to as wireless fidelity.
(b) In the case of A(3)(a)[2] and [3] above, the facility may not
exceed three feet in height or 18 inches in diameter and the
facility may not be sited in any front yard, as defined in § 310-3
of this chapter.
(4) Zoning districts. Wireless telecommunications facilities may be
allowed in any residential or business zoning district.
(5) Specific standards applicable to wireless telecommunications
facilities other than satellite earth stations.
(a) Application:
[1] An application for a special permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be signed on behalf of
the applicant by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made
therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the
information.
[2] Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein,
or which are otherwise incomplete, may be rejected by the
Village.
[3] The application shall include a statement in writing:
[a] That the applicant's proposed wireless
telecommunications facility shall be maintained in a
safe manner and in compliance with all conditions of
the special permit, without exception, unless
specifically granted relief by the Village in writing, as
well as all applicable and permissible local codes, laws
and regulations, including any and all applicable
Village, state and federal laws, rules and regulations;
and
[b] That the construction of the wireless
telecommunications facility is legally permissible,
including but not limited to the fact that the applicant
is authorized to do business in the state.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:490
[4] If the applicant is not the owner of the property on which
the wireless telecommunications facility is proposed to be
located, a copy of the signed lease or other agreement
pursuant to which the applicant is entitled to utilize such
property for such facility, which may have proprietary
business terms redacted.
[5] All applications for the construction or installation of new
wireless telecommunications facilities shall include the
following information:
[a] Documentation that demonstrates the need for the
wireless telecommunications facility to provide
service primarily and essentially within the Village,
unless the applicant demonstrates that more extensive
service is required under applicable law to fill a
service gap. Such documentation shall include
propagation studies of the proposed site and all
adjoining planned, proposed, in-service or existing
sites;
[b] The name, address and telephone number of the
person preparing the report;
[c] The name, address and telephone number of the
property owner, operator and applicant;
[d] The postal address and tax map parcel number of the
property;
[e] The zoning district or designation in which the
property is situated;
[f] The location, size and height of all proposed and
existing antenna(s) and all appurtenant structures;
[g] The type, location, and dimensions of all proposed and
existing landscaping and fencing;
[h] The number, type and design of the antenna(s)
proposed and the basis for the calculations of the
facility's capacity to accommodate multiple users;
[i] The make, model and manufacturer of the antenna(s);
[j] A description of the proposed antenna(s) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and
apparatus, including height above preexisting grade,
materials, color and lighting;
[k] The frequency, modulation and class of service of
radio or other transmitting equipment;
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:491
[l] The actual intended transmission and the maximum
effective radiated power of the antenna(s);
[m] Direction of the maximum lobes and associated
radiation of the antenna(s);
[n] Certification bearing the signature and seal of a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New
York that the NIER levels at the proposed site are
within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
[o] Certification bearing the signature and seal of a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New
York that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with existing communication devices;
and
[p] A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended
use of the wireless telecommunications facility.
[6] The applicant shall certify that the wireless
telecommunications facility, foundation and attachments
are designed and will be constructed to meet all local,
Village, state, and federal structural requirements for
loads, including wind and ice loads.
[7] The applicant shall certify that the wireless
telecommunications facility will be effectively grounded
and bonded so as to protect persons and property and
installed with appropriate surge protectors.
[8] An applicant may be required to submit an environmental
assessment analysis and a visual addendum. Based on the
results of the analysis, including the visual addendum, the
Village may require submission of a more detailed visual
analysis. The scope of the required environmental and
visual assessment will be reviewed at the preapplication
meeting.
[9] The applicant shall demonstrate that the facility will be
minimally visually intrusive and minimally disruptive to
existing vegetation. The facility and its associated
structures shall use, to the extent practicable, building
materials, colors, and textures designed to blend with the
structure to which it is affixed or, if not affixed, to
harmonize with the natural surroundings. The applicant
shall be required to submit a visual impact assessment.
The visual impact assessment shall include the following:
[a] A zone-of-visibility map indicating locations from
which the facility may be seen;
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:492
[b] Graphic representations of before and after views
from key vantage points, both inside and outside
Village boundaries, as may be appropriate. The
Planning Board may instruct the applicant regarding
appropriate key sites;
[c] An assessment of the visual impact of the facility's
base, guy wires, and accessory structures from
abutting and adjacent properties and streets;
[d] A screening plan where necessary and appropriate;
[e] Examples of the paint or other finish to be used on the
facility;
[f] Examples of proposed signage, if any. Such signage
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter;
[g] Examples of proposed lighting. Such lighting shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be
unobtrusive and shall not spill onto adjacent
properties;
[h] A plan for the use of stealth or concealment
technology; and
[i] Other information or documentation as deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
(b) Any and all representations made by the applicant to the
Village on the record during the application process, whether
written or verbal, shall be deemed part of the application and
may be relied upon in good faith by the Village.
(c) Location.
[1] Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located
only on existing buildings. Such facilities shall be located,
sited and erected in accordance with the following
priorities, unless technologically, structurally or
commercially impracticable, [a] being the highest priority
and [d] being the lowest priority:
[a] Within Central Business A and Service Business B
Districts;
[b] Within CD Districts;
[c] Within Multiple Residence Districts;
[d] Within One-Family Residence Districts, with
preference given to locations on institutional and/or
educational facilities located within such districts.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:493
[2] If the proposed site is not located within the highest
priority listed above, then the applicant must demonstrate
that a site of a higher priority is technologically,
structurally, or commercially impracticable.
[3] Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located at a
height no greater than required to accomplish the purpose
they are proposed to serve; provided, however, that in no
event shall the height of such facilities exceed by more
than 10 feet the highest point of the building on which they
are located.
[4] New wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
collocated on existing telecommunications facilities within
the applicable priority district unless technologically,
structurally, or commercially impracticable. In no event
shall a wireless telecommunications facility be located on
a wireless telecommunications tower.
(d) Accessory structure. No accessory structure shall be permitted
other than equipment facility housing equipment which is
required to be located at the site of the wireless
telecommunications facility in order to operate such a facility.
All accessory structures shall be located so as to comply with
the applicable setback requirements for the property on which
they are located.
(e) Security. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
facility will be located, fenced, alarmed, or otherwise secured
against unauthorized access.
(f) Utilities. All utilities at wireless telecommunications facilities
sites shall be installed underground and in compliance with all
applicable law, including specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical
Code, where appropriate.
(g) Preapplication meeting. There shall be a preapplication
meeting in accordance with § 310-26B of this chapter,
regardless of the cost of the development.
(h) Lighting. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be
artificially lighted or marked, except as required by law. If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting, which shall be as unobtrusive and
inoffensive as is permissible under such law.
(i) Signs. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a
sign no larger than four square feet in order to provide
adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the
presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities and
it shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:494
the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The
sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the
applicant and be visible from the access point of the site. No
other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted.
(j) Annual NIER certification. The holder of the special permit
shall, annually, certify to the Village that NIER levels at the site
are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
(k) Recertification.
[1] During the 12 months prior to each five-year anniversary
of the effective date of the special permit, the holder of the
special permit shall submit a written application for
recertification of the special permit.
[2] Subject to the provisions of [4] below, the Planning Board
shall issue a recertification of the special permit if it finds
that the holder of the special permit is in compliance with
the terms of the special permit, the requirements of this
subsection and the requirements of applicable state and
federal law. If the recertification process is not complete
by such anniversary date, the special permit may be
extended for no more than six months. In the event of
disapproval of the recertification application, the wireless
telecommunications facility shall not be used after the
date that the applicant receives written notice of
disapproval.
[3] Unless recertified, each special permit and any
authorizations granted thereunder shall terminate as of
the last day of the then current term.
[4] Notwithstanding the foregoing, in connection with each
recertification, the Planning Board shall consider changes
to wireless technology since the date of issuance or last
recertification, as applicable, of the special permit and
determine whether the special permit should be modified
or terminated as a result of such change.
(l) Default and/or revocation. If a wireless telecommunications
facility is not in compliance with this chapter or with its special
permit, the Planning Board may revoke the special permit in
accordance with § 310-40B of this chapter.
(m) Removal. If a special permit for a wireless telecommunications
facility shall expire, terminate or be revoked, or if a wireless
telecommunications facility is not operated for the provision of
wireless telecommunications services for a continuous period
of 12 months or more, the holder of the special permit and the
owner of the property on which such facility is located shall
jointly and severally be obligated to dismantle and remove
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:495
such facility and all associated structures and facilities from
the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition
as is possible, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from
the Planning Board, or within such shorter time as determined
by the Planning Board if the violation causes, creates or
presents an imminent danger or threat to the residents of
the Village. If the facility is not removed within 90 days after
the permit holder and the property owner have received a
removal notice (or such shorter time as the Planning Board
may determine), then the Village may order officials or
representatives of the Village to remove and dispose of the
facility at the sole expense of the special permit holder and
such property owner.
(n) Compliance. The special permit holder shall obtain and
maintain at all times all required federal and state permits and
licenses regarding the wireless telecommunications facility
and shall comply with all other relevant state and federal
requirements regarding such facility.
(o) Application fee. A nonrefundable fee shall be payable with each
application for a new wireless telecommunications facility and
with each application for a modification in such amount as
shall be set by the Board of Trustees.
(p) Retention of experts.
[1] Pursuant to the Professional Consultation Fees Law,
Chapter 310, Article X of the Village Code, the Planning
Board may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to
assist the Planning Board in reviewing and evaluation any
application for the construction of a new or modification of
an existing wireless telecommunications facility or the
recertification of the special permit for any such facility.
The applicant and Board shall comply with all provisions
and procedures established under the Professional
Consultation Fees Law. [Amended 5-14-2007 by L.L.
No. 3-2007]
[2] Each applicant shall deposit with the Village funds
sufficient to reimburse the Village for all reasonable costs
of consultants and/or experts retained by the Planning
Board in connection with the review of any application for
the construction of a new or modification of an existing
wireless telecommunications facility or the recertification
of the special permit for any such facility. The initial
deposit shall be $5,000. Any such consultants/experts shall
invoice the Village for services in reviewing the
application, including the construction and modification of
the site, once permitted. If at any time during the process
the remaining balance of the deposit shall be less than
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:496
$1,500, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification
by the Planning Board, replenish said deposit so that it has
a balance of at least $2,500. Such additional funds shall
be deposited with the Village before any further action or
consideration is taken on the application. In the event that
the deposit amount held by the Village is more than the
amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the
project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded
to the applicant.
[3] The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in
Subsection A(5)(p)[2] of this section may vary with the
scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of
the application and the completeness of such submissions
of other information as may be required by the Planning
Board.
(q) Bond. Prior to the commencement of construction, the
applicant shall submit a bond acceptable in form to the Village
Attorney and in an amount determined by the Planning Board
to be sufficient to ensure the safe and timely removal of the
wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection, which such bond shall be
renewed by the applicant annually thereafter.
(r) Liability insurance.
[1] A holder of a special permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall secure and at all times
maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries,
death and property damage, and umbrella insurance
coverage, for the duration of the special permit in amounts
as set forth below:
[a] Commercial general liability covering personal
injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
[b] Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate; and
[c] Workers compensation and disability, statutory
amounts.
[2] The commercial general liability insurance policy shall
specifically include the Village and its officers, boards,
employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and
consultants as additional named insureds.
[3] The insurance policies shall be issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of New York
and with a Best's rating of at least A.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:497
[4] The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement
obligating the insurance company to furnish the Village
with at least 30 days' prior written notice in advance of the
cancellation of the insurance.
[5] Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be
delivered to the Village at least 15 days before the
expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew
or replace.
[6] Before construction of a permitted wireless
telecommunications facility is initiated, but in no case later
than 15 days after the grant of the special permit, the
holder of the special permit shall deliver to the Village a
copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the
insurance in the required amounts.
(s) Indemnification. Any application for a wireless
telecommunications facility that is proposed for Village
property shall contain a provision with respect to
indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to
the extent permitted by applicable law, to at all times defend,
indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the
Village, its officers, boards, employees, committee members,
attorneys, agents and consultants from any and all penalties,
damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims,
suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages,
whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising
therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of,
or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, products performance, use, operation,
maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or
restoration of said facility; excepting, however, any portion of
such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of
damages as may be attributable to the grossly negligent or
intentional acts or omissions of the Village or its servants or
agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges
referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fee, consultants' fees,
and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are
recoverable by the Village.
(t) Determination. The Planning Board shall grant a special permit
for a wireless telecommunications facility pursuant to this
subsection only upon finding that:
[1] The applicant is duly authorized to provide wireless
telecommunication services by the FCC and is required
thereby to provide such services in the area in which the
Village is located;
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:498
[2] The proposed facility is necessary to meet the current or
expected demands for the wireless telecommunications
services provided by the application;
[3] The proposed facility is necessary to provide services to
locations which cannot be served with existing wireless
telecommunications facilities within and outside of the
Village or from less obtrusive locations within or outside of
the Village;
[4] The proposed facility conforms with applicable regulations
promulgated by the FCC;
[5] The proposed facility is so sited as to minimize its visibility
from surrounding public streets and adjacent properties;
[6] The proposed facility is the least obtrusive type of wireless
telecommunications facility technologically capable of
meeting the current or expected demands for the wireless
telecommunications services provided by the applicant;
[7] The design and finish of the proposed facility minimize its
visual impact;
[8] The proposed facility is designed and will be constructed,
maintained and operated in a manner that ensures the
security of the facility; and
[9] The proposed facility will otherwise comply with the
standards set forth in this subsection.
(6) Specific standards applicable to satellite earth stations.
(a) In the Six-Story Multiple Residence D District, Central
Business A District, Service Business B District and CD
Districts and on all hospitals and educational institutional
buildings within residence districts, satellite earth stations
may be erected only on or on top of a building. The height of
the station not to exceed six feet and shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from the front, side and back wall of a roof
line. Such stations shall serve only tenants and/or occupants of
the building.
(b) Where more than one building is located on a property, such as
an apartment complex, there shall not be more than one
satellite earth station permitted on each building.
(c) In the One-Family Residence AAA, AA and A Districts, Two-
Story Multiple Residence B District and Three-Story Multiple
Residence C District, satellite earth stations to be erected on
the roof of a building shall not exceed one meter in diameter or
six feet in height and shall be mounted in such a manner as to
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:499
be screened from the street and adjacent properties and not to
extend above the chimney.
(d) Only noncommercial receiving satellite earth stations for home
use may be freestanding stations erected on the ground. Such
satellite earth stations shall be restricted to a location in a rear
yard or, if less than or equal to 18 inches in diameter, in a rear
or side yard. The height of such satellite earth stations shall
not exceed 12 feet (measured from the highest part of the
antenna to ground level). Such satellite earth station shall not
be located any nearer to any property line than that permitted
for a principal building for the district and lot in which it is
located.
(7) Waiver of requirements. In addition to the provisions of § 310-40C
of this chapter, the Planning Board may waive any numerical
standard set forth in this § 310-42A based on the criteria set forth
in § 310-40C for the waiver of nonnumerical requirements.
B. Health Professional Offices occupying street-level space on Pondfield
Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/Tanglewylde Avenue or
occupying street-level space on Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road
and Paxton Avenue. [Amended 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004;
9-14-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015; 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any business office of a
health professional, as defined in § 310-3 of this chapter.
(2) Health professional offices shall have one parking space per 300
square feet for the first 600 square feet of gross floor area and one
parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area above 600
square feet.
(3) The street-level facade of the proposed use shall have at least 50%
of its area in clear, unobstructed glass window.
(4) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a district
zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D Residence
Districts, such establishment may not be operated between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
C. Automotive-related uses. [Amended 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following term shall
have the meaning indicated:
AUTOMOTIVE-RELATED USE — Includes any business related to
gasoline filling for vehicles, auto repair and service, hand washing
and detailing of vehicles and garages for vehicle maintenance.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:500
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this special permit is to allow automotiverelated
uses in the Service Business B District in order to serve the
needs of the Village.
(3) Specific standards for automotive-related uses.
(a) Lot size. No automotive-related use shall be located on a lot of
less than 10,000 square feet.
(b) Lot frontage. No automotive-related use shall be located on a
lot with a frontage of less than 100 feet.
(c) Floor area. The sum of the floor area of buildings and
structures shall not exceed 50% of the gross lot area.
(d) Height. The height of all structures shall not exceed 20 feet or
one story.
(e) All automobile repair work and storage of automobile parts
shall be enclosed within a building.
(f) Fuel storage. All gasoline and other motor vehicle fuels shall
be stored underground in conformance with State and County
environmental and building code regulations.
(g) Fuel pump location. No fuel pumps shall be located within 20
feet of any street line or within 25 feet of any property line
other than a street line. There shall be a minimum distance of
25 feet between pump islands and a minimum distance of 15
feet between pump islands and buildings on the site.
(h) Access. There shall be no more than one driveway for every 50
feet of street frontage and at least 40 feet between any two
driveways. Driveways shall be not more than 30 feet and not
less than 20 feet in width at the curbline. Driveways shall be
sufficiently far from intersections so as not to impede sight
distance.
(i) Landscaping. A landscaped strip of not less than five feet in
width shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines with
vegetative screening sufficient to buffer the use and minimize
its impact on the surrounding area.
(j) Lighting. Lighting shall be limited to the minimum necessary
for traffic and safety purposes in accordance with the lighting
regulations of § 310-24 of this chapter.
(k) Canopies. Canopies will be designed so as not to obstruct sight
distance at intersections and to provide coverage only as
necessary for fire suppression and safety of customers. This
coverage shall not exceed the area immediately over gasoline
pumps. All canopies shall have a maximum thickness of four
feet.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:501
(l) Mechanized car wash facilities shall not be permitted.
(m) No more than three cars may be stored on the premises
overnight.
(n) Retail sales on the premises shall be limited to incidental
automotive products such as motor oil, washer fluid or
antifreeze. Any such retail sales shall be clearly subordinate to
the principal automotive use.
D. Health clubs larger than 1,500 square feet and indoor recreation
facilities. [Amended 7-9-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
(1) (Reserved)
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this special permit is to allow health clubs
over a certain size and indoor recreation facilities within the
Central Business A and Service Business B Districts.
(3) Specific standards for health clubs over a certain size and indoor
recreation facilities.
(a) The entrance to any health club larger than 1,500 square feet
or indoor recreation facility shall be at least 250 feet from the
nearest residence district boundary. The Planning Board may
waive this requirement if it determines that such a waiver is
appropriate given the particular circumstances of the
proposed use and its location.
(b) All facilities, equipment and activities shall be within
completely enclosed and soundproofed structures. Acoustical
insulation shall be sufficient to minimize adverse effects on the
surrounding area.
(c) There shall be a minimum of one parking space per 150 square
feet of gross floor area.
(d) Areas for the service of food or beverages shall be permitted on
the premises, provided that the total area devoted to
concession and eating areas does not exceed 10% of the gross
floor area of the facility.
(e) No more than two electronic amusement devices, as defined in
Chapter 86 of the Village Code, shall be permitted on the
premises. All electronic amusement devices shall have a
minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor area per game. No
electronic amusement devices shall operate between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(f) Therapeutic services and facilities such as sun tanning, baths,
showers, steam rooms, flotation tanks or isolation or
meditation facilities shall only be permitted upon issuance of
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:502
and in conformity with all appropriate licensing and health
regulations.
E. Intentionally omitted.52
F. Home occupations.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
HOME OCCUPATION — Any business enterprise or business
activity conducted entirely within a dwelling unit. The use must
be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
dwelling unit.
NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE — Includes those persons engaged in
the business enterprise or business activity and shall not include
domestic employees.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this special permit is to allow home
occupations within the residential districts of the Village while
safeguarding the character of the Village's residential
neighborhoods.
(3) Exemptions. Home occupations which have no nonresident
employees, which have no regular visitors (with the exception of
dancing, music or other instruction where groups of up to four
pupils may be present at any one time) and which meet all of the
criteria established in § 310-8A(4)(a) of this chapter, shall be
allowed as-of-right and shall not require a special permit.
(4) Special permit required. Home occupations which have a
nonresident employee and/or which have regular visitors shall
require a special permit pursuant to this section.
(5) Specific standards for home occupations.
(a) The home occupation shall meet all of the criteria established
in § 310-8A(4)(a) of this chapter.
(b) The home occupation shall have no more than one nonresident
employee.
(c) The home occupation shall have no more than one visitor at a
time, with the exception of dancing, music or other instruction
where groups of up to four pupils may be present at any one
time.
(d) The lot shall have space on site for parking at least three cars.
G. Manufacturing, assemblage, printing and cleaning.
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, pertaining to sidewalk cafes, was repealed 7-13-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:503
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
MANUFACTURING, ASSEMBLAGE, PRINTING and CLEANING —
Includes laundries and the assembling, converting, altering,
finishing, cleaning, printing or any other processing of products
where goods so produced or processed are to be sold exclusively
on the premises.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this special permit is to allow for the
manufacturing, assemblage, printing and cleaning of products
within the Service Business B District.
(3) Specific standards for manufacturing, assemblage, printing and
cleaning.
(a) All activities shall take place within a fully enclosed,
soundproofed building.
(b) Except in connection with clothes pressing, electrical power
not exceeding a total of 10 electric horsepower shall be used
exclusively, unless the Planning Board finds that the use of an
installation other than electric of not over 10 electric
horsepower will have no adverse effect on neighboring uses.
(c) Not more than 10 persons may be engaged in such production
or processing.
H. (Reserved)53
I. Hospitals in Central Business A Districts. Hospitals or clinic facilities
providing emergency care or services or ambulatory, outpatient,
consultation, clinic, educational or similar (hereinafter "outpatient")
care and services, and their customary accessory uses and structures
may be allowed in Central Business A Districts by special permit to be
issued by the Planning Board, provided that: [Added 7-12-2004 by
L.L. No. 3-2004]
(1) Beds. A hospital shall provide no more than 85 beds for each acre of
total lot area on which said hospital is located.
(2) Off-street parking requirements. The hospital will provide paved
off-street parking spaces on its lot (whether in a garage or not) as
required below:
(a) A minimum of off-street parking spaces shall be provided equal
to one space per 2.5 average daily emergency visits and one
space per 2.5 average daily outpatient visits. A total of 73
spaces shall be deemed to be the minimum off-street parking
spaces required of Lawrence Hospital.
53.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Carry-out food establishments, was repealed
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:504
(b) Any increase or decrease in such minimum required spaces
shall be provided in minimum increments of five measured by
the average number of daily visits during the previous calendar
year.
(c) These requirements may be modified by the Planning Board
under such conditions as it may impose where such
modifications and conditions are consistent with public health,
safety, and general welfare.
(3) Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of all buildings on any lot
occupied by a hospital and its customary accessory uses shall not
exceed 1.5. Floor area calculations shall include all basement
areas.
(4) Height. A hospital's maximum height shall be 72 feet, provided
that:
(a) The number of stories above grade at any point along the
periphery of such building does not exceed six;
(b) For any such building exceeding 42 feet in height, the walls of
which made an angle of less than 45° with a street line, shall be
distant from such street line an average distance of 19 feet and
no part of such building shall be nearer than six feet to a street
line;
(c) Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires, and other
decorative features shall be exempt from the height provisions
of this subsection, provided that they do not occupy more than
20% of the roof area of the building of which they are a part.
J. Banks or financial offices occupying street-level space on Pondfield
Road between Kraft Avenue and Cedar Street/Tanglewylde Avenue or
on Palmer Avenue between Parkway Road and Paxton Avenue. [Added
7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004; amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
(1) A bank or financial office may occupy street level, provided that the
street-level facade of the proposed use has at least 50% of its area
in clear, unobstructed glass window and there is a minimum
distance, measured from the closest point of each establishment to
the other, of 150 feet between the proposed bank or financial office
and any existing street-level bank or financial office on the same
side of the street. The measurement shall be continued on the same
side of the street around any street corner within the one-hundredfifty-
foot distance; provided, however, that the Planning Board may
waive this requirement if it determines that such a waiver is
appropriate given the particular circumstances of the proposed use
and its location. [Amended 1-8-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:505
(2) Bank or financial office off-street parking requirement: eight
spaces, together with four additional spaces for each teller position
in excess of two.
(3) For the purposes of calculating off-street parking, each automatic
teller machine is deemed a teller position.
(4) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a district
zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D Residence
Districts, such establishment may not be operated between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
K. Theaters. A theater may be allowed in a Central Business A District and
may be allowed no more than 50 linear feet of street frontage and no
more than 15,000 gross square feet in floor area at street level. Offstreet
parking shall be required, as determined by the Planning Board.
[Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
L. Supermarkets. [Added 7-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
(1) A supermarket may be allowed in a Central Business A District, and
may be allowed no more than 120 linear feet of street frontage and
no more than 40,000 gross square feet in floor area at street level.
Off-street parking shall be required, as determined by the Planning
Board.
(2) If such use is located within 250 feet of the boundary of a district
zoned for residence, including AAA, AA, A, B, C, and D Residence
Districts, such establishment may not be operated between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
M. Environmental improvement multiple residence facilities. [Added
9-18-2006 by L.L. No. 2006; amended 7-13-2015 by L.L. No.
6-2015]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meaning indicated:
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENT MULTIPLE RESIDENCE
FACILITY — A multiple residence facility constructed on a site
requiring significant environmental remediation.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this special permit is to allow additional
residential density in the Six-Story Multiple Residence D District in
circumstances where the applicant has demonstrated, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that the requested density is
justified by the costs of the proposal relating to remediation costs
associated with any environmental conditions on the site.
(3) Specific standards for environmental improvement multiple
residence facility.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:506
(a) The applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board, that the requested density is justified by the
costs of the proposal relating to remediation costs associated
with any environmental conditions on the site.
(b) The proposed development must incorporate reasonable onsite
and/or off-site traffic improvements to mitigate any traffic
impact resulting from the project.
(c) Provided that the foregoing conditions are satisfied, the bulk
and area requirements for an environmental improvement
multiple residence facility shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area: 60,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot depth: 80 feet.
[3] Minimum street frontage: 600 feet.
[4] Maximum units: 55.
[5] Maximum building length: 675 feet.
[6] Minimum front yard: zero feet.
[7] Minimum rear yard: zero feet.
[8] Minimum side yard:
[a] One yard: zero feet.
[b] Two sides combined: zero feet.
[9] Minimum habitable dwelling area: 1,000 square feet per
unit.
[10] Open space: 500 square feet per unit.
[11] Maximum building coverage: 100%.
[12] Maximum building height: 60 feet or five stories.
[13]Off-street parking: 1.75 spaces per unit of which at least
1.0 space per unit must be accessible and available at all
hours and the remainder of which may be tandem.
N. Solar energy systems and renewable energy systems. [Added
9-13-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, terms shall have the same
meanings as set forth in § 310-22F and G of this chapter and as
follows:
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM — Solar energy systems and
renewable energy systems.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:507
(2) Legislative intent and purpose. The purpose of these provisions is
to allow and encourage alternative energy systems and related
equipment within residential and business districts, according to
certain safeguards and conditions. The intent is to balance the
demand for alternative energy systems with maintaining the
aesthetics of the Village and minimize the potential for any
negative impact by these systems and to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Village.
(3) Application of this subsection. A special permit shall be required
for any solar energy system to be installed, constructed or erected
in the Central Business A or Service Business B zoning district, any
modification thereof, or any renewable energy system, except a
geothermal energy system, in any district.
(4) Application for special permit.
(a) An application for a special permit for an alternative energy
system shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person
preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. If the applicant is not the
owner of the property in which such system is proposed, the
applicant shall submit a copy of the signed lease or other
agreement pursuant to which the applicant is entitled to utilize
such property for such system, which may have proprietary
business terms redacted.
(b) Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein, or
which are otherwise incomplete, may be rejected by the
Village.
(c) The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the
application, drawings, photographs and documents to the
Planning Board in folded and collated sets no larger than 11
inches by 17 inches. All applications shall include the following
information:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
[2] The name, address, telephone number and written consent
of the property and/or building owner.
[3] A description of the proposed installation(s).
[4] A plot plan and/or survey indicating the dimensioned
location of the subject building or structure and all
proposed equipment.
[5] Sealed and dimensioned drawings and/or photographs of
the subject building or property and all adjacent buildings
or properties within 75 feet on all sides.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:508
[6] Scaled and dimensioned drawings, photographs,
documents and materials, including, but not limited to,
layout plans, elevations, sections, details, manufacturers'
specifications and catalogue cuts, material types, colors,
finishes and structural support methods. Such drawings
and documents shall also include proposed screening, if
any.
[7] Where a freestanding or ground-mounted solar energy
system or any renewable energy system is proposed, a
landscape and screening plan shall be submitted. The plan
shall indicate all existing and proposed grading,
excavating, filling, paving, fencing, and screening as it
may relate to the alternative energy system and shall
indicate the location of all property lines and neighboring
buildings and structures.
(d) Material samples shall be presented at the Planning Board and
Design Review Committee meetings.
(5) Specific standards.
(a) All alternative energy systems shall be designed, erected and
installed in accordance with all applicable codes, regulations
and standards and shall comply with § 310-22F and G of this
chapter.
(b) Alternative energy systems shall be permitted only to provide
power for use by owners, lessees, residents or other occupants
at the premises on which they are erected, but nothing
contained in this provision shall be construed to prohibit the
sale of excess power through a "net billing" or similar program
in accordance with New York Public Service Law § 66-j or
similar state or federal statute.
(c) The applicant shall demonstrate that the alternative energy
system will be minimally visually intrusive from surrounding
properties and minimally disruptive to existing vegetation. The
equipment shall use, to the extent practicable, materials,
colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to
which they are affixed or, if not affixed, to harmonize with the
natural surroundings.
(d) Equipment shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, or
reflective.
(e) To the greatest extent practicable, all equipment is to appear
like and is to match the color of the part of the building or
structure to which it is attached.
§ 310-42 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-42
282:509
(6) Preapplication meeting. There shall be a preapplication meeting in
accordance with § 310-26B of this chapter, regardless of the cost of
development.
(7) Recertification; termination.
(a) During the six months prior to expiration of a special permit,
the holder of the special permit shall submit a written
application for recertification of the special permit.
(b) Subject to the provisions of Subsection N(7)(d) below, the
Planning Board shall issue a recertification of the special
permit if it finds that the holder of the special permit is in
compliance with the terms of the special permit, the
requirements of this Subsection N, and the requirements of
applicable federal, state, and local law. If the recertification
process has begun but is not complete by such anniversary
date, the special permit may be extended for no more than
three months. In the event of disapproval of the recertification
application, the alternative energy system shall not be used
after the date that the applicant receives written notice of
disapproval and, unless an appeal is timely filed, shall be
immediately removed upon the expiration of such appeal
limitations period.
(c) Unless recertified, a special permit and any authorizations
granted thereunder shall terminate as of the last day of the
then current term as specified in the special permit.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in connection with each
recertification, the Planning Board shall consider changes to
alternative energy technology since the date of issuance or last
recertification, as applicable, of the special permit and
determine whether the special permit should be modified or
terminated as a result of such change.
(8) Default and/or revocation. If an alternative energy system is not in
compliance with this chapter or with its special permit, the
Planning Board may revoke the special permit in accordance with
§ 310-40B of this chapter.
(9) Application fee. A nonrefundable fee shall be payable with each
application for a special permit for an alternative energy system
and with each application for a modification in such amount as shall
be set by the Board of Trustees from time to time.
§ 310-42 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-42
282:510
ARTICLE VIII
Planning Board
[Amended 12-11-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 310-43. General.
A. Established; name; legislative intent and purposes.
(1) A Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to § 7-718 of the
Village Law.
(2) Legislative intent and purposes. It is the intent and purpose of the
Board of Trustees in adopting this article to grant to the Planning
Board the full authority that is or may be granted to such body by
New York State Law (whether statutory, judicial or otherwise)
including, but not limited to, preparation of a Village
Comprehensive Plan and the review of, approval or disapproval of
site plans and subdivisions and thereby, in conformance with and in
furtherance of the purposes, goals and legislative intent of such
law:
(a) To guide and encourage the appropriate use or development of
land and hence to promote the rational functioning, the
economic stability and the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community;
(b) To secure the public safety from fire, flood, panic and other
natural or man-made disasters, and further to protect
neighboring owners and users by insuring, in connection with
any development, that the standards set forth in Article VI, Site
Plan and Subdivision Approval, are fully and expressly applied
to such development;
(c) To preserve and provide adequate light, air, views and open
space;
(d) To promote the establishment of appropriate population
densities that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and the preservation of the environment;
(e) To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of
public funds by the coordination of public development with
land use policies;
(f) To encourage the location and design of transportation routes
that will promote the flow of traffic while discouraging and,
where necessary and appropriate, prohibiting locations of such
facilities and routes that result or may result in congestion,
blight, excessive noise, threat to the public safety or
comparable problems;
§ 310-43 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-43
282:511
(g) To encourage qualities of excellence in building, landscape and
other design; and to create a desirable visual environment by
insuring that the appearance of structures is congruent and
consistent with the character and quality of the community;
(h) To preserve the character and quality of the Village's heritage
by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a
discernible character or are of special historic significance;
(i) To promote those qualities in the environment which bring
value to the community and to prevent degradation and
blighting of the environment;
(j) To foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the
community as a place in which to live and work;
(k) To promote the conservation of open space and valuable
natural and historical resources; and
(l) To encourage planned development and, where appropriate, a
mix of uses within permissible use zones.
B. Composition; terms, vacancies, compensation; disqualification for
interest.
(1) The Planning Board shall consist of five members and two alternate
members, residents of the Village, to be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the Board of Trustees. Insofar as practicable
one member of the Planning Board shall be a licensed architect of
the State of New York. Alternates may, but need not, be Design
Review Committee Advisors. [Amended 2-14-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000]
(2) The term of each member shall be five years, with eligibility for
reappointment, computed from the first day of the official Village
year of the year of appointment except that full terms filled for the
first time shall be so fixed (for five or less years) and so arranged
that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of terms will
be distributed evenly over the first five years after the initial
appointments. If a vacancy shall occur, it shall be filled by
appointment as above provided for the unexpired term only.
Members shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified.
(3) Members shall serve without salary.
(4) Members shall hold no other Village office or position except that a
member may also serve as a member of the Design Review
Committee.
(5) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
§ 310-43 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-43
282:512
(6) Each alternate member of the Planning Board shall attend
meetings of the Planning Board and shall be entitled to participate
in all activities of the Planning Board as if such alternate was a
member, but shall vote only in the event that a member is absent,
has a conflict of interest or is otherwise unable to vote with respect
to a particular matter and the Chairman designates such alternate
to so vote. At any meeting at which the Chairman determines that
one or more members is unable to vote for any of the foregoing
reasons, the Chairman may (but shall not be required to) designate
an alternate (or alternates, as appropriate) to vote at such meeting
in place of such member or members. One or more of the alternates
may be substituted for member(s) when required for a quorum.
This subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by
§ 10, Subdivision 1e(3), of the Municipal Home Rule Law and shall
supersede any provision of the Village Law which is inconsistent
herewith. [Added 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
(7) The provisions of this Subsection B regarding terms, vacancies,
compensation and interest of members of the Planning Board shall
apply to alternate members, except that the terms of alternates
shall be three years. [Added 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
C. Officers; Counsel; staff.
(1) The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Planning Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Trustees,
from among the members. Their terms of office as such shall each
be two years to run concurrently, with eligibility for
reappointment.54
(2) The Planning Board may appoint Counsel, who shall be an attorneyat-
law of the State of New York, whose term of office shall be one
year, with eligibility for reappointment. [Amended 5-14-2007 by
L.L. No. 3-2007]
(3) The Planning Board may, with the consent of the Board of Trustees,
employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such experts
and other staff and services as it deems necessary. These experts
and/or staff shall provide services for the general operation of the
Planning Board. Where review of a particular application requires
services from experts or professional consultants, the reasonable
costs for such experts and/or consultants shall be paid pursuant to
Article X. [Amended 5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
D. Design Review Committee. [Amended 5-9-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
(1) The Design Review Committee shall consist of three Advisors and
one alternate Advisor. For purposes of duties, responsibilities and
requirements of this § 310-43D, alternate Advisors shall be deemed
54.Editor's Note: Original § 30.81.C.2, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
the appointment of a Secretary, was repealed 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000.
§ 310-43 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-43
282:513
Advisors unless otherwise specified. Advisors shall be residents of
the Village of Bronxville and, insofar as practicable, individuals
especially qualified in design by reason of training, education and/
or experience in architecture, landscape architecture, urban
design, engineering, building construction or similar business or
profession. Advisors shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Board of Trustees. An Advisor may, but need not, be
a member of the Planning Board. A Chairman of the Design Review
Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees, from among its members. His or her term of
office as such shall be two years with eligibility for reappointment.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B of this § 310-43 regarding terms,
vacancies, compensation and interest of members of the Planning
Board shall apply to Advisors, except that the term of each Advisor
shall be three years.
(3) The Advisors and any non-member Secretary shall be entitled to
participate in all activities of the Planning Board as if they were
members, except that, unless they are members of the Planning
Board, they shall not be entitled to a Planning Board vote and shall
not be counted in determining the presence of a quorum.
(4) In addition to the other duties and responsibilities set forth in this
article, the Design Review Committee shall review such aspects of
an application for development as the Planning Board may refer to
it, conduct such investigations as it may deem appropriate and
make recommendations thereon to the Planning Board.
(5) The Design Review Committee's meeting shall be open to the
public and held on notice to members, Advisors, Secretary,
Counsel, the applicant and the public, in accordance with
applicable legal requirements.
(6) The alternate Advisor shall attend meetings of the Design Review
Committee and shall be entitled to participate in all activities of the
Design Review Committee as if such alternate Advisor is a member,
but shall vote only in the event that an Advisor who is not an
alternate is absent, has a conflict of interest or is otherwise unable
to vote with respect to a particular matter and the Chairman of the
Design Review Committee designates such alternate to so vote. At
any meeting at which the Chairman of the Design Review
Committee determines that an Advisor who is not an alternate is
unable to vote for any of the foregoing reasons, the Chairman may
(but shall not be required to) designate the alternate to vote at such
meeting in place of such Advisor.
E. Powers and duties as to Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Board shall
prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees to adopt a
Comprehensive Plan within the meaning of § 7-722 of the Village Law
for the physical, economic and social development of the Village and
§ 310-43 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-43
282:514
shall review and may recommend to the Board of Trustees to amend
the same from time to time. It may make such additional surveys and
studies as may be necessary or desirable to carry out its duties.
F. Powers and duties as to applications for development; exemptions.
(1) The Planning Board shall receive, review and act upon applications
for development, except as provided in Subsection F(2) hereof.
(2) Applications for development relating to detached single family
residential buildings permitted as of right under applicable zoning
regulations and structures and uses incidental thereto, are exempt
from the provisions of this article; but this exemption shall not
apply to any subdivision nor to the construction of two or more
dwelling units under common ownership or control on contiguous
lots or on lots within the same subdivision under a building permit
issued during the same period of 12 months beginning with the
date of the first permit issued.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection F(2), any proposed use
of nonincandescent lighting which is or may be visible from public
or adjacent premises shall be subject to Planning Board review and
approval as hereinafter provided.
G. Powers as to CD and CBAT District applications. The Planning Board
shall receive, review and act upon CD and CBAT District applications as
provided in § 310-44C(4) of this article. [Amended 6-28-2011 by L.L.
No. 5-2011]
H. Delegated powers and duties generally. All other powers and duties
provided by New York State Law (statutory, judicial or otherwise) for a
planning board are hereby delegated to the Planning Board.
I. Planning Board powers not to be exercised by any other body. No power
expressly authorized by this article to be exercised by the Planning
Board shall be exercised by any other body.
J. Appropriations; disbursing officer.
(1) Special appropriations for the activities of the Planning Board may
be made from time to time by the Board of Trustees in such
amounts and for such proposes as it shall approve and such special
appropriations shall be raised, assessed, levied and collected in the
manner provided by law.
(2) The Treasurer of the Village shall disburse moneys to the Planning
Board only upon authorization signed and approved by the
Chairman or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairman of the
Planning Board and supported by proper vouchers, after satisfying
himself or herself that such disbursements are within budgetary
limitations and appropriations made available for the use of the
Planning Board.
§ 310-43 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-44
282:515
§ 310-44. Administration and procedure in general.
A. General.
(1) Rules and regulations. The Planning Board may adopt, amend and
rescind reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this
article, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties,
including hearings and shall finish a copy therefore to any person
upon request and may charge a reasonable fee for such copy.
Copies of all such rules and regulations and amendments thereto
shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk.
(2) Published and mailed notices.
(a) Whenever any notice by publication is required or permitted
under the provisions of this article, it shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Village if there be one or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
(b) Whenever any notice is required or permitted to be given by
certified mail under the provisions of this article, such notice
shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
B. Meetings.
(1) Regular meetings. The Planning Board shall hold regular meetings
at the times and places fixed by its rules. Regular meetings shall be
scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development
to process or other appropriate business.
(2) Special meetings.
(a) Special meetings of the Planning Board may be provided for at
the call of the Chairman or in his or her absence the Vice
Chairman or on the request of any two members and such
meetings shall be held on notice to the members, Advisors,
Secretary, Counsel and the public in accordance with
applicable legal requirements.
(b) Meetings of the Design Review Committee may be provided for
at the call of its Chairman, the direction of the Chairman of the
Planning Board or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairman or
on the request of any two members and such meetings shall be
held on notice to the members, Advisors, Secretary, Counsel
and the public in accordance with applicable legal
requirements.
(3) Open to public. All regular and special meetings shall be open to
the public (excluding executive sessions authorized by law) and
notice thereof shall be given in accordance with the requirements
of the Open Meetings Law.55
§ 310-44 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-44
282:516
(4) Actions at meetings; quorum. No action except adjournment shall
be taken at any meeting of the Planning Board and Design Review
Committee without a quorum being present. A quorum shall consist
of three members in the case of the Planning Board and two
members in the case of meeting of the Design Review Committee.
All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of members present in
the case of the Planning Board and Advisors present in the case of
meetings of the Design Review Committee, except that approval by
the Planning Board of a site plan, subdivision application, CD or
CBAT District application or any action affecting the
Comprehensive Plan shall require the affirmative vote of at least
three members. [Amended 6-28-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
(5) Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting of the
Planning Board and the Design Review Committee shall be kept
and shall include the names of the persons appearing and
addressing the Planning Board or Design Review Committee and
the persons appearing by attorney, the action by the agency, the
findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Village Clerk.
C. Applications to Planning Board.
(1) Form; submissions. Whenever an application for development to
the Planning Board is permitted or required by this article, it shall
be in such form and submitted to the Superintendent in such
number of copies and accompanied by such documents and
materials, as are prescribed by this article and the rules of the
Planning Board. The Superintendent shall forward a copy of each
such application to the Chairman of the Planning Board and the
Chairman of the Design Review Committee promptly upon receipt
from the applicant.
(2) Fees. Each such application for development shall be accompanied
by payment of a fee to the Village as established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
(3) Applications for development to include description of related
variance. Each application for development shall include a
description of any variance which is to be submitted to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with Article IX of this chapter.
(4) Applications for development involving CD or CBAT District
designation. Each application for development that involves a
request for CD or CBAT District designation shall be accompanied
by a CD or CBAT District application to the Board of Trustees.
[Amended 6-28-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
55.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 101 et seq.
§ 310-44 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-44
282:517
(5) Filing dependent upon approval of adequacy of content and
completeness; incomplete application for development. The
Superintendent and the Chairman of the Design Review Committee
shall each make an examination of the application as to adequacy of
content and completeness and shall report their respective or joint
findings to the Chairman of the Planning Board and the applicant
within 10 days of the date of submission to the Superintendent. If
any application for development is found to be incomplete by either
the Superintendent or the Chairman of the Design Review
Committee or if it is not accompanied by the required fee, the
applicant shall be so notified by the Superintendent within 10 days
after the submission of the application and the application shall be
deemed incomplete until the deficiencies are corrected. If notice is
not given within such period, the application shall be deemed to
have been properly made to the Planning Board on the 10th day
after submission to the Superintendent.
D. Hearings on applications for development.
(1) Hearing required. The Planning Board shall hold a hearing which
may be adjourned from time to time on each application for
development within 62 days of receipt of a complete application.
(2) Documents to be filed and available for public inspection; other
documents. Any maps and documents in support of an application
for which approval is sought shall be on file and available for public
inspection at least 10 days before the date of the hearing during
normal business hours in the office of the Village Clerk. Other
documents, records or testimony may be produced at the hearing
to substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
(3) Public comment. In connection with any public hearing by the
Planning Board, members of the public shall be given reasonable
opportunities to comment upon any matter then being considered
by the Planning Board and to make written submissions in
connection therewith.
(4) Recordings of proceedings; transcripts.
(a) The Planning Board may provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or
electronic means and if one is made, shall furnish a transcript
or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to any person
at his or her expense.
(b) In directing that notice of a meeting be given, the Chairman or,
in his or her absence, the Vice Chairman shall instruct the
Village Administrator whether to arrange for verbatim
recording. Insofar as practicable, such recording shall be made
when any member advises he or she cannot attend the meeting
or when two or more members so request.
§ 310-44 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-44
282:518
(c) Any person shall, on reasonable notice of request, be given
permission to make a verbatim recording of any meeting,
provided that a copy of the transcript or a duplicate is provided
free of charge to the Planning Board.
E. Notice of hearings on applications for development.
(1) Notice required; length of notice; exceptions. Notice of hearing
shall be mailed by the applicant.
(2) Notice by publication required. Notice shall be given in all cases by
publication in the official newspaper of the Village at least 10 days
prior to the hearing.
(3) Contents. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and the location
and times at which any maps and documents relating to the
proposal or application for which approval is sought are available
in the office of the Village Clerk. In addition, in the case of an
application for development, the notice shall contain an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current Village tax roll in the Village Assessor's office and
shall include reference to all requests made in conjunction
therewith, whether for approval of a site plan, subdivision, variance
or CD or CBAT District designation. [Amended 6-28-2011 by L.L.
No. 5-2011]
(4) Notice by personal services or certified mail to property owners;
list of property owners to be furnished. In cases of applications for
development, notice shall also be given by the applicant to the
owners of all real property, as shown on the current Village tax
rolls, located within 400 feet in all directions of the property that is
the subject of the hearing, by serving a copy thereof on each such
owner or his or her agent in charge of the property or by mailing a
copy thereof by certified mail to each such owner at his or her
address as shown on such tax roll. Notice to a partnership owner
may be given to its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation. The Village Clerk shall, within seven days
after written request by the applicant, make and certify a list from
the current Village tax rolls of the names and addresses of the
property owners entitled to notice and a sum as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees shall be charged for such list.
The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list and failure to give notice to any owner not on
the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
(5) Proof of service. An affidavit of proof of the giving of notice as
required by this subdivision for any application for development
§ 310-44 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-44
282:519
shall be filed by the applicant with the Village Clerk at or prior to
the hearing.
(6) Notice to county planning agency. At least 10 days before such
hearing, the Planning Board shall mail notices thereof to the
Westchester County planning agency as required by § 239-m of the
General Municipal Law, which notice shall be accompanied by a full
statement of the matter under consideration.
F. Decisions on applications for development.
(1) Decisions to be in writing and contain findings and conclusions.
Each decision on any application for development shall be in
writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon.
(2) Developments barred by administrative or judicial order. In the
event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party or by a directive or other issued by any
state agency, political subdivision or court of competent
jurisdiction, the Planning Board may process such application
complies with the requirements of this article, the Planning Board
may approve such application conditioned on removal of such legal
barrier to development.
(3) Approval by other Village agencies. In the event that a development
proposed by an application requires an approval by a Village
agency other than the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, in
appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent
approval of such Village agency.
(4) Absence of Planning Board members from hearings. A member who
has not attended a hearing before the Planning Board shall not be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted. When any hearing before the Planning Board shall
carry over two or more meetings, a member who was present for at
least one of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted; provided, however, that
such member has available to him or her a transcript or recording
of the meeting or meetings from which he or she was absent and
certifies in writing to the Planning Board that he or she had read
such transcript or listened to such recording.
(5) Decisions to be furnished to applicant and others. A copy of each
decision shall be mailed by the Planning Board without charge
within 30 days after the date of decision to the applicant or, if
represented, to his or her attorney and to all others upon request
for a reasonable fee.
§ 310-44 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-44
282:520
(6) Filing in the office of Village Clerk. A copy of each decision shall
also be filed by the Planning Board in the office of the Village Clerk,
who shall provide a copy of the filed decision to any person for a
reasonable fee and make a copy of such decision available for
public inspection at his or her office during reasonable hours.
(7) Publication. A brief notice of each decision shall be published by
the Village.
(8) Time for decision on applications to Planning Board for
development. Preliminary approval shall be granted or denied on
applications for development to the Planning Board within 62 days
after the date of submission of a complete application to the
Planning Board, except as otherwise provided in this article. Final
approval shall be granted or denied on applications for
development to the Planning Board within 62 days after the date of
the first hearing on a preliminary application, except as otherwise
provided in this article. [Amended 6-12-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
(9) Extension of time decision. Any time period specified for action by
the Planning Board may be extended with the consent of the
applicant.
(10) Failure to make decision with time. The failure of the Planning
Board to act within such time period or extension thereof shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant. A certificate of the
Planning Board as to such failure shall be issued on request of the
applicant and it shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or
other evidence of approval required by this article and shall be
accepted as such by the Village. The running of time for the
purpose of this section shall be suspended during the months of
July and August and from the date of any written request by the
Planning Board or the Design Review Committee to the applicant
for additional information or documentation reasonably deemed
necessary for proper consideration of the application until the
request is complied with, provided that there shall be no more than
two such suspensions.
G. Appeals. In conformity with § 7-712-c of the Village Law, any person
aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board in approving or
disapproving an application for development and of the Superintendent
in issuing or denying a building or other permit because of such an
approval or disapproval, may bring a proceeding to review in the
manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such
proceeding must be commenced within 30 days after the filing in the
office of the Village Clerk of the decision.
§ 310-44 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-45
282:521
§ 310-45. Comprehensive Plan. [Amended 2-12-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
The Village Board has the authority to adopt and amend a Comprehensive
Plan from time to time, and the Village Board may, in its discretion, refer
issues regarding the Comprehensive Plan to the Planning Board for its
advice.
§ 310-46. Capital project review; advisory opinions.
The Board of Trustees, before taking action necessitating the expenditure
of any public funds for a capital project of a total cost of $100,000 or more,
shall refer the action involving such capital project to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation in conjunction with the Comprehensive
Plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until 30
days have elapsed after such reference without receiving such
recommendation. The Board of Trustees may request from the Planning
Board, from time to time, opinions on other aspects of action that may be
taken by Village government as they may affect land use policies of the
Village.
§ 310-47. CD and CBAT District designation. [Amended 6-28-2011
by L.L. No. 5-2011]
A. Procedure. When property is being considered for CD or CBAT
designation on the Village Board's own initiative, or on
recommendation of the Planning Board, the procedure for designation
shall be as determined by the Board of Trustees on a case-by-case basis.
The procedure for CD or CBAT designation upon application of the
owner or owners of the parcel or parcels to be designated shall be as
set forth in this Subsection A and the remainder of this § 310-47. Upon
application of the owner(s) of the parcel(s), the procedure for
designation of a CD or CBAT District, as provided for in Articles IV and
IVA, respectively, shall involve the following process:
(1) Application to the Board of Trustees for CD or CBAT District
approval;
(2) Concurrent application to the Planning Board, pursuant to § 310-44
and Article VI of this chapter for approval of the site plan covering
the proposed district;
(3) Concurrent Planning Board hearing, review and action on the CD
or CBAT District application and on the site plan application; and
(4) Hearing and decision by the Board of Trustees on the CD or CBAT
District application.
B. Application. Application for the designation of a CD or CBAT District
shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees concurrently with the
submission of a site plan application pursuant to Article VI of this
chapter. The CD or CBAT District application shall be accompanied by
§ 310-45 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-47
282:522
fees as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The fees shall
be in addition to any fee(s) required by Article X of this chapter. The
application shall contain the information set forth in Subsection C of
this section and shall be submitted (including the information from the
site plan application incorporated by reference) in 15 copies, except
that only one scale model need be submitted. Any information required
to be submitted in the application may be waived by the Planning Board
on the basis that the particular item is not necessary, in light of the
type, size or scope of development proposed, to a full and complete
review of the proposed development.
C. Form of application for CD or CBAT District. Every application for CD or
CBAT District designation shall incorporate by reference the site plans
and other information required by Subsection B of § 310-31 with
respect to a site plan application and in addition shall include the
following:
(1) Graphic renderings and photographs of the existing site conditions,
which depict but are not limited to all significant, natural,
topographical and other physical features of the subject property,
location and extent of tree cover, watercourses, existing drainage
patterns, vistas and soil conditions as they affect development and
structures and significant natural features on abutting properties;
(2) A written statement generally describing the proposed
development, the need and market which it is intended to serve and
its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan (Where the proposal is
inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the statement shall
include reasons justifying an amendment of the Comprehensive
Plan.);
(3) A model built to scale adequate to show clearly the design intent;
(4) A written statement of the extent to which the proposed
development does not comply with and conform to the standards of
the zoning district in which the property is located and the reasons
why; and
(5) Professional studies of the anticipated impact of the proposed
development upon the Village with respect to parking, traffic and
transportation facilities, public utilities (such as storm and sanitary
sewers and water supply), public services (such as fire protection,
police and garbage disposal) and potential disturbances to the
public and adjacent properties due to signs, walls, light and noise
or odors to be emitted from the proposed use.
D. Referral and availability to the public. The Superintendent shall refer
the CD or CBAT District application to the Design Review Committee
and Planning Board, for review and report as hereinafter provided,
concurrently with the referral to the Planning Board of the site plan
application. The Superintendent shall also cause the CD or CBAT
District application to be made available to the public for inspection and
§ 310-47 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-47
282:523
copying in the office of the Village Clerk and shall cause public notice
of the filing of the application to be given.
E. Hearing and recommendation by the Design Review Committee and
Planning Board.
(1) The Design Review Committee and Planning Board shall each
review the CD or CBAT District application concurrently with its
review and action upon the site plan application. The Design
Review Committee shall report its findings to the Planning Board
simultaneously with its report on the site plan application. The
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing upon the CD or CBAT
District application. Such a hearing may be held in conjunction
with the public hearing required on the site plan application
pursuant to Subsection D of § 310-44. Concurrently with the
issuance of its decision on the site plan, the Planning Board shall
issue a written report to the Board of Trustees which recommends
approval, approval subject to modifications of the application or
disapproval of the application.
(2) The Planning Board shall set forth in its report findings as to why
the proposed CD or CBAT District would or would not be in the
public interest, in what respect it is or is not consistent with the
purposes set forth in § 310-17 or § 310-21.2, respectively, of this
chapter, and, if approval is subject to modifications, the reason
therefor. The Planning Board shall also state in what respects the
proposed CD or CBAT District designation is or is not consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan and if the Planning Board
recommends approval, it shall recommend to the Board of Trustees
to adopt any necessary modifications to the Comprehensive Plan
and shall include in its report the reasons justifying such
modifications. In addition, the Planning Board shall state in what
respects the proposed CD or CBAT District designation is or is not
in conformity with the requirements of the zoning district(s) in
which it is located, and, if the Planning Board recommends
approval, the reasons justifying variance from those requirements.
F. Effect of Planning Board action. If the report of the Planning Board
recommends approval of the CD or CBAT District application (whether
or not subject to modifications) and if the Planning Board approves the
site plan application (whether or not subject to modifications), the CD
or CBAT District application shall be referred to the Board of Trustees.
If either application is disapproved by the Planning Board, the CD or
CBAT District application shall be deemed disapproved by the Board of
Trustees without further action.
G. Public hearing. Within 30 days after receiving the report of the
Planning Board recommending approval of the CD or CBAT application
or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, a
public hearing on the application shall be held by the Board of Trustees
in the manner prescribed for hearings on amendments to this chapter.
§ 310-47 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-47
282:524
§ 310-48. Rule of reason.
In discharging its duties and responsibilities under the foregoing provisions
of this article, the Planning Board and the Design Review Committee shall
be guided at all times by a rule of reason, whereby such provisions while
being fully implemented in accordance with the legislative intent and
purposes set forth in Subsection A(2) of § 310-43, shall be interpreted
and applied on the basis of reasonableness, consistency, practicability and
fundamental fairness and with due consideration for the interest of the
applicant and the Village.
Notice of such public hearing shall state that the application and the
report of the Planning Board are available for inspection and copying in
the office of the Village Clerk.
H. Action by the Board of Trustees. Within 30 days following the
conclusion of this public hearing by the Board of Trustees or such
longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, the Board of
Trustees shall either:
(1) Disapprove the CD or CBAT District application;
(2) Refer the application back to the Planning Board for further
consideration within 60 days of specified matters; or
(3) Approve the CD or CBAT District application and any necessary
modifications to the Comprehensive Plan and so designate on the
1995 Zoning Map of the Village of Bronxville that the subject area
is within the CD or CBAT District; provided, however, that if the
application is approved with modifications, the Zoning Map shall
not be so designated until the applicant has filed his or her written
consent to such modifications. The failure of the Board of Trustees
to take action within the time limit herein specified shall be deemed
disapproval of the CD or CBAT District application.
I. Effect of approval. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees of a CD or
CBAT District application, the area designated in the application shall
be within the CD or CBAT District for which the requirements are all of
the specifications set forth in the application, as modified and approved.
J. Rezoning. If the approved site plan is abandoned or is not substantially
implemented within the two years following its approval by the
Planning Board, the Board of Trustees shall have the power to rezone
the CD or CBAT District.
§ 310-47 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-48
282:525

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 310-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by
the applicable zoning regulations.
§ 310-50. Continuation of Board; membership.
§ 310-51. Permitted action by the ZBA.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals ("ZBA"), heretofore duly appointed in
conformity with § 7-712 of the Village Law is hereby continued with all
powers and duties conferred by the Village Law.
B. The ZBA shall consist of five members and two alternate members
appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members shall be appointed for a
term of two years. The Mayor shall also designate a Chairman and a
Vice Chairman from among the members of the ZBA. [Amended
2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000; 6-12-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000;
7-9-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018]
C. Board of Trustees ineligible. No person who is a member of the Village
Board of Trustees shall be eligible for membership on such ZBA.
D. Each alternate member of the ZBA shall attend meetings of the ZBA and
shall be entitled to participate in its deliberations, but shall vote only in
the event that a member is absent, has a conflict of interest or is
otherwise unable to vote on an application or matter before the board
and the Chairman designates such alternate member to vote. At any
meeting at which the Chairman determines that one or more members
is unable to vote for any of the foregoing reasons, the Chairman may
(but shall not be required to) designate an alternate member (or
members as appropriate) to vote at such meeting in the place of such
member or members. This subsection is adopted pursuant to the
authority granted by § 10, Subdivision 1(e)(3), of the Municipal Home
Rule Law, and shall supersede any provision of the Village Law which is
inconsistent herewith. [Added 2-14-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
E. One or more of the alternate members may be substituted for
member(s) when required for a quorum. [Added 2-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 1-2000]
§ 310-49 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-51
282:527
A. Orders, requirements, decisions, interpretations, determinations. The
ZBA is empowered to reverse, affirm or modify certain orders,
requirements, decisions, interpretations and determinations of the
Building Inspector as provided in § 7-712-b of the Village Law.
B. Use variances. The ZBA is empowered to grant use variances as defined
in § 310-49A of this chapter.
(1) No such use variance shall be granted by the ZBA without a
showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove
such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
ZBA that for each and every permitted use under the zoning
regulations for the particular district where the property is located,
the following four criteria are satisfied:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) The ZBA, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the minimum
variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the
unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant and at the same time
preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Area variances. The ZBA is empowered to grant area variances as
defined in § 310-49B of this chapter.
(1) Area variances do not need to meet the hardship requirement of a
use variance. Instead, the ZBA needs only to consider two basic
elements: the benefit to the applicant versus the detriment to the
neighborhood if the variance is granted. In balancing these two
interests the ZBA must consider the following five factors:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue other than
an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
§ 310-51 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-51
282:528
§ 310-52. Procedures.
The powers and duties of the ZBA shall be exercised in accordance with the
following procedure:
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the ZBA, but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area
variance.
(2) In considering an area variance application that seeks relief from
the maximum permitted FAR pursuant to § 310-22E, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may consider the extent to which the subject
structure successfully employs design techniques which reduce the
appearance of scale and aid in keeping the subject structure
visually in scale with those structures to which it is adjacent and to
those which are located on similarly sized lots in the neighborhood
of the subject structure, thereby maintaining the established
character of the neighborhood. In considering an application for a
variance from the maximum permitted FAR, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may in its sole discretion consider, among other factors:
[Added 4-14-2003 by L.L. No. 2-200356]
(a) The employment by the applicant of architectural design
techniques that reduce the visual appearance of the actual
scale of the proposed structure;
(b) The extent to which the visual appearance of the actual scale of
the proposed structure is consistent or in keeping with that of
structures on the adjacent lots and on other neighborhood lots
sized similarly to the lot of the applicant;
(c) The employment by the applicant of landscaping techniques,
including screening, that reduce the visual appearance of the
actual scale of the proposed structure;
(d) The extent to which the proposed structure thereby is
consistent with the established character of the neighborhood.
(3) The ZBA, in the granting of area variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and
at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
A. A public hearing shall be held by the ZBA on every appeal and
application made to it. The ZBA shall decide upon the appeal within 62
56.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection C(2) as C(3).
§ 310-51 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-52
282:529
days after the conduct of the hearing; provided, however, that such time
may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the ZBA.
B. Hearing notice.
(1) A notice of such hearing and of the substance of the appeal or
application shall be given by the ZBA by publication in the official
newspaper of the Village at least 10 days before the date of such
hearing. A notice of such hearing shall also be transmitted to the
applicant.
(2) The applicant shall be required to notify any property owner within
100 feet of the subject property by certified mail or registered mail
and shall, on or before the date of the hearing, file with the ZBA a
verified statement that such property owners were so notified.
Should the ZBA deem an area beyond 100 feet of the subject
property to be affected by the application, it may require the
notification of property owners within not more than 200 feet of
said property by certified mail or registered mail.
(3) At least 10 days before such hearing, the ZBA shall mail notices
thereof to the Westchester County Planning Department, if
required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, which notice
shall be accompanied by a full statement of the matter under
consideration.
(4) If the land involved in an appeal or application lies within 500 feet
of the boundary of any other municipality, the applicant shall also
transmit to the Municipal Clerk of such other municipality a copy of
the official notice of the public hearing thereon not later than the
day after such notice appears in the official newspaper of the
Village.
C. At least five days before the date of any public hearing, the Secretary of
the ZBA shall transmit to the Village Clerk a copy of any appeal or
application, together with a copy of the notice of such hearing. The
Board of Trustees may submit to the ZBA an advisory opinion on said
appeal or application at any time prior to the rendering of a decision.
D. Unless work is commenced and diligently prosecuted within one year of
the date of the granting of a variance, such variance shall become null
and void.
E. Each and every application for a hearing and determination by the ZBA
whereby the ZBA is called upon to exercise the powers and duties
granted to it under and pursuant to the Village Law shall be
accompanied by the filing fee determined as provided under Article X.
F. Each and every application shall refer to the specific provision of the
ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted.
§ 310-52 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-52
282:530
G. A majority vote of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is
necessary to take action.
H. Every decision of the ZBA shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
within five business days after the day such decision is rendered and a
copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
I. All the provisions of this chapter relating to the ZBA shall be strictly
construed. The ZBA, as a body of limited jurisdiction, shall act in full
conformity with all provisions of law and of this chapter and in strict
compliance with all limitations contained therein; provided, however,
that if the procedural requirements set forth in this chapter have been
substantially observed, no applicant or appellant shall be deprived of
the right of application or appeal.
J. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both use variances
and area variances, have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to
the proposed use of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent
with the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the
purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on
the Village.
K. The ZBA shall comply with the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA), Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law of New York
State.
§ 310-52 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-52
282:531

ARTICLE X
Professional Consultation Fees
[Added 5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-200757]
§ 310-53. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; title.
§ 310-54. Referral of application to professional consultant;
reimbursement of fees and expenses.
§ 310-55. Deposit of funds; deposit amounts.
A. It is well-settled that the Village of Bronxville has the authority to
impose reasonable fees in connection with its regulation of land use
activities within the Village. The Village Board hereby finds and
determines that in order to protect and safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the Village of Bronxville, its residents and their property, in
certain land use application cases it may become necessary to seek the
assistance of professional consultants who have expertise in matters or
aspects involved. In such cases, the reasonable costs of retaining such
competent consultants should ultimately be borne by the applicant.
B. This shall be known and may be cited as the "Professional Consultation
Fees Law of the Village of Bronxville."
A. The Village Board of Trustees, Planning Board, including the Design
Review Committee and Zoning Board of Appeals may refer any
application presented to it to such engineering, planning, legal,
technical, environmental, or any other professional consultant as such
board shall deem reasonably necessary to enable it to review such
application as required by law.
B. All applicants seeking approval pursuant to this chapter from the Board
of Trustees, the Planning Board, including the Design Review
Committee, and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals shall reimburse the
Village for all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the
Village in connection with the review and consideration of its particular
application.
A. Simultaneously with the filing of an application for approval pursuant to
this chapter from the Board of Trustees, the Planning Board, including
the Design Review Committee, and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
applicant shall deposit with the Village Treasurer a sum of money that
shall be used to reimburse the Village for the professional services as
described in § 310-54A of this chapter. The funds, the amount of which
shall initially be calculated in accordance with the schedule of deposits
established pursuant to this article, shall be deposited in a segregated
57.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former Art. X, Administration, Amendments,
Enforcement and Appeals, comprised of §§ 310-53 through 310-56, as Art. XI, comprised
now of §§ 310-60 through 310-63.
§ 310-53 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-55
282:533
§ 310-56. Payment of fees; audit; refund.
account maintained by the Village, which shall not be required to be an
interest-bearing account.
B. If additional funds beyond the initial amount deposited are required to
pay for the professional consultation services, the Village shall notify
the applicant, and the applicant shall deliver such amounts to the
Village Treasurer for deposit in the account. If such additional funds are
not provided to the Village, any action on the part of the Village may be
suspended until said funds are provided.
C. The amount of the initial deposit required under this article shall be as
set forth in a schedule of deposits established by resolution of the
Village Board. Said schedule shall remain in effect and shall apply to all
applicants until amended or revised by subsequent resolution. Within
the schedule of deposits, types of applicants may be categorized based
on objective criteria including but not limited to type of use, size or
value of the property at issue, number of lots or dwelling units affected,
and gross floor area, and the deposits shall reflect the average costs for
similar applications. Such classifications may occur when, in the
Village's experience or in the experience of other villages of comparable
size, average costs justify classifications among different kinds of
applicants.
A. Professional consultants engaged pursuant to this article shall submit
to the Village itemized vouchers for services rendered. Upon receipt
and approval by the Village Administrator, the Village Treasurer shall
cause such vouchers to be paid out of the moneys deposited pursuant to
this article.
B. The Village Administrator shall review and audit all such vouchers and
shall approve payment of only such professional consultant fees as are
reasonable in amount and reasonably necessarily incurred by the
Village in connection with the review and consideration of applications
made pursuant to this chapter.
(1) For the purposes of the audit, a fee or part thereof is reasonable in
amount if it bears a reasonable relationship to the average charge
by professional consultants to the Village or other municipalities in
Westchester County for services performed in connection with
similar developments. In this regard, the Village Administrator may
consider the size, type and number of buildings to be constructed
or altered; the complexity of such construction and development;
the amount of time to complete the development and all necessary
inspections; the topography of the land on which the development
is located; soil, surface water and drainage conditions; relevant
traffic conditions; and any other considerations the Village
Administrator may deem relevant to a particular application. In
considering whether such fees are reasonable, the Village
§ 310-55 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-56
282:534
§ 310-57. Application fees.
The deposits required by this article shall be in addition to any application
fees as may be required by other laws, rules or regulations of the Village
and shall not be used to offset the Village's general expenses for
professional consultant services.
§ 310-58. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder hereof, but
shall be limited in its application to the word, clause, sentences, paragraph,
Administrator shall also consider the Village's experience in
applications of the same or similar type.
(2) For the purposes of the audit, a fee or part thereof is necessary
when it is incurred by the Village out of a need for expert advice
and opinion that the Village cannot reasonably and practicably
obtain through the members of its boards and staff. Such fees are
necessary when charged by the professional consultant for services
rendered in connection with an application made pursuant to this
chapter when such services are performed to help protect or
promote the health, safety or other vital interests of the residents
of the Village; to help protect public or private property from
potential damage from uncontrolled environmental factors, such as
surface water runoff; to ensure the proper construction of the
development and all related utilities, drainage systems and other
facilities; to protect the legal interests of the Village, including the
avoidance of claims and liability; and other interests as the Village
Administrator may deem relevant to a particular application.
C. Upon request, the Village shall provide the applicant with a copy of said
itemized vouchers relating to the applicant's development, from which
confidential information may be redacted.
D. Final determination or action on an application shall not occur until all
fees due from the applicant have been paid in full to the Village. If at the
termination of any application, however, the applicant is indebted to the
Village for any fees mandated under this article, the Village may pursue
all legal options to recover such fees.
E. After final action on the application by the relevant board, and after
payment of all approved vouchers submitted regarding such application
and development, the Village shall refund to the applicant any balance
remaining in the account. In the event that an application is withdrawn,
the applicant shall be responsible for any expenses incurred by the
Village with regard to said application prior to such withdrawal, and
after payment of such fees, the Village shall refund to the applicant any
balance remaining in the account.
§ 310-56 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-58
282:535
subdivision or part hereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 310-59. Superseding other laws.
All local laws or parts of local laws that conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby superseded.
§ 310-58 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-59
282:536
ARTICLE XI
Administration, Amendments, Enforcement and Appeals
§ 310-60. Enforcement officers.
The Superintendent of Buildings and such other persons as may be
designated by the Board of Trustees, shall be the enforcement officers of
this chapter.
§ 310-61. Building permits and certificates of occupancy.
§ 310-62. Amendments.
§ 310-63. Violations; penalties for offenses.
A. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 112, all of the requirements
of this chapter, to the extent applicable, shall be met before a building
permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
B. Every building permit or certificate of occupancy in connection with
which a variance has been granted or an application for development
has been approved, shall contain a statement of such variance and of
any conditions to which the same is subject.
A. This chapter or any part thereof, may be amended, supplemented or
repealed, from time to time, by the Board of Trustees on its own motion
or on petition, as provided in the Village Law of New York State.
B. Each petition for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied by such fee
as shall be otherwise prescribed, payable to the Village Clerk upon the
filing thereof. If no hearing is held, the fee shall be refunded to the
petitioner in full. No fee shall be required for petitions filed in favor of
or against a pending application.
A. Authority. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, located or maintained or any
building, structure, land or premises is used in violation of this chapter
or any regulation or requirement made pursuant thereto or under
authority conferred thereby, in addition to other remedies, the Board of
Trustees, or, with the approval of the Board of Trustees the
Superintendent, may, pursuant to § 7-714 of the Village Law, institute
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, repair,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to
prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, land or premises; or
to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
B. Discovery of violations. The Superintendent shall determine the
existence of violations of the provisions of this chapter through such
investigations as he or she shall conduct pursuant to the issuance of
§ 310-60 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § 310-63
282:537
building permits and certificates of occupancy and through the prompt
investigation of such written complaints as are filed with him or her
by persons having reason to believe that such violations exist. The
Superintendent may also determine the existence of such violations by
means of investigations conducted at his or her own initiative.
C. Procedures for abatement of violations.
(1) Notice of violation. Upon finding a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the Superintendent shall serve written notice, either by
personal service or certified mail, addressed to the premises of
such violation, on the person committing or permitting such
violation or on the owner of the property. Such notice shall specify
the nature of such violation and shall specify a reasonable time
limit, of not less than five days, in which compliance shall be
achieved.
(2) Legal action. The Superintendent shall, upon failure of a party to
comply with a violation order within the specified time, refer the
matter to the Board of Trustees so that the Board of Trustees may,
by resolution, direct the proper Village officials to undertake
appropriate legal action against such party.
D. Penalty for violation.
(1) Any person, whether as owner, lessee, architect or builder or the
agent or employee of any of the above who violates or is accessory
to the violation of any provision of this chapter or any regulation
made under the authority conferred by this chapter or who shall
erect, construct, alter, enlarge, convert or move any building or
structure in violation of any statement or plans submitted and
approved under the provisions of this chapter or who shall use any
building, structure or land in violation of this chapter or any
regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter or in
violation of the provisions of any building permit or certificate of
occupancy, shall be guilty of a violation of the Penal Law and shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding in the case of any one violation
$250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
(2) Any person violating this chapter shall also be subject to a civil
penalty enforceable and collectible by the Village in the amount of
$50 for each week such offense shall continue. Such penalty shall
be collectible by and in the name of the Village for each week that
such violation shall continue, not to exceed $250.
(3) For the purposes of this section, each twenty-four-hour period or
portion thereof in which a violation of any provision of this chapter
or any regulation made under the authority conferred by this
chapter or in violation of the provisions of any building permit or
certificate of occupancy, continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 310-63 BRONXVILLE CODE § 310-63
282:538
Appendix
Chapter A321
FEES SCHEDULE
§ A321-1. Chapter 80, Part 2, Alarm Fees and Charges. [Adopted
7-8-1991; amended 10-12-1992]
§ A321-2. Chapter 92, Animals.
Section 92-8, License fees. License fee, authorized by the New York
Agriculture and Markets Law to be collected by the Village Clerk, for a dog
more than six months of age:
§ A321-3. Chapter 112, Building Construction. [Added 10-8-2001;
amended 5-10-2010]
Section 112-22, Fees:
A. Annual user permit fee for both residential and commercial property:
$50. [Amended 5-10-2010, effective 6-1-2010]
B. Fees and charges for false alarms occurring within one calendar year:
(1) Two false alarms - police respond: no charge.
(2) Third false alarm - police respond: $25.
(3) Fourth false - police respond: $50.
(4) Fifth and each additional false alarm - police respond: $75.
(5) First 12 verified false alarms - no police response: no charge.
(6) Each additional verified false alarm - no police response: $25.
A. For each spayed or neutered dog: $12.50.
B. For each unspayed and unneutered dog: $20.50.
A. Building permits (new buildings or structures): $425, plus $15/$1,000
of estimated cost.
B. Building permits (alterations, additions, repairs): $150, plus $15/$1,000
of estimated cost.
C. Plumbing permits: $100, plus $10/fixture over three fixtures.
D. Electrical permits: $100.
E. Fences and sheds: $100, plus $15/$1,000 of estimated cost.
F. Signs and awnings: $100.
§ 310-63 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § A321-3
282:539
§ A321-4. Chapter 164, Gardeners and Gardening.
Annual fee for the registration of gardeners: $15.
§ A321-5. Chapter 290, Vehicles and Traffic.
G. Elevators: same as building permit.
H. Demolition: same as building permit.
I. Certificate of occupancy:
(1) One- or two-family: $125.
(2) Multiple-family: $125/family or unit.
J. Zoning Board application: filing fee of $300, plus transcription costs.
K. Oil burner/oil tank: $100/burner or tank.
L. Planning Board application: $250,plus $5/$1,000 of construction cost;
or 1% of the Village's assessed value if no construction is planned.
M. Amendment to permits: $100, plus $15/$1,000 of estimated cost.
N. Reinspection fee: $100.
O. Mechanical/HVAC permit: $100, plus $10/each additional compressor.
P. Emergency generator: $100, plus the greater of $15/1,000 kwh or
$15/$1,000 of estimated cost.
A. Section 290-23, Immobilization and impounding of vehicles, Subsection
C. Storage of vehicles; release to owner.
(1) For any vehicle taken into custody or immobilized as provided in
§ 290-23, an administrative fee to repossess or to secure the
release of said vehicle: $50.
B. [Repealed 5-10-2004]
C. Metered parking space fees. [Amended 6-12-2000; 5-10-2004;
4-13-2009, effective 6-1-2009; 5-13-2013; 4-11-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016; 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(1) Twenty-five cents for 15 minutes at the following metered parking
spaces:
(a) Those metered parking spaces designated in § 290-41A,
290-41B, 290-41F, 290-41G, and 290-41H.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Garden Avenue Lot: metered parking spaces not restricted to
merchant permit parking.
§ A321-3 BRONXVILLE CODE § A321-5
282:540
(2) Twenty-five cents for 20 minutes at the following metered parking
spaces:
(a) Garden Avenue Lot: metered parking spaces restricted to
merchant permit parking.
(b) Kensington Garage: metered parking spaces restricted to
merchant permit parking.
(3) Twenty-five cents for 30 minutes, Monday through Friday, and
$0.25 for 15 minutes on Saturday at the following metered parking
spaces:
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Meadow Avenue: metered parking spaces designated as
twelve-hour parking.
(c) Kensington Garage: metered parking spaces designated as
twelve-hour parking and restricted to resident permit parking.
(d) Kraft Avenue Lot: metered parking spaces designated as
twelve-hour parking and restricted to merchant or resident
permit parking.
(e) (Reserved)
(f) Stone Place Parking Area: metered parking spaces designated
as twelve-hour parking and/or restricted to merchant permit
parking.
(4) Resident special parking permit: Permits issued to residents
permitting parking in restricted metered or nonmetered spaces in
Kraft Avenue and Avalon Lots: $1,000 for a one-year period from
October 1 to September 30; $750 for the period from January 1 to
September 30; $500 for the period from April 1 to September 30;
and $250 for the period from July 1 to September 30.
(5) Merchant special parking permit: Permits issued to merchants
permitting parking in restricted metered or nonmetered spaces in
the Kraft Avenue Lot, Maltby Lot, and Stone Place Parking Area:
$1,000 for a one-year period from July 1 to June 30; $750 for the
period from October 1 to June 30; $500 for the period from January
1 to June 30; and $250 for the period from April 1 to June 30.
(6) Garden Avenue merchant special parking permit and Kensington
Garage merchant special parking permit: Permits issued to
merchants permitting parking in restricted metered spaces in the
Garden Avenue Lot or Kensington Garage: $1,200 for a one-year
period from July 1 to June 30; $900 for the period from October 1 to
June 30; $600 for the period from January 1 to June 30; and $300
for the period from April 1 to June 30.
§ A321-5 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § A321-5
282:541
(7) Kensington Garage resident special parking permit: Permits issued
to residents permitting parking in restricted metered spaces in
Kensington Parking Garage: $1,250 for a one-year period from
October 1 to September 30; $937.50 for the period from January 1
to September 30; $625 for the period from April 1 to September 30;
and $312.50 for the period from July 1 to September 30.
(8) Maltby merchant parking permit: Permits issued to merchants
permitting parking in restricted metered spaces in the Maltby
Parking Lot: $25 per month for the period from July 1 to June 30.
D. Section 290-47, Parking permits. [Amended 6-12-2000]
(1) Resident parking permits: $20, to be valid from October 1 to
September 30 next following; application for a permit six months
after October 1: $10.
(2) Merchant parking permits: $30, to be valid from July 1 to June 30
next following; application for a permit six months after January 1:
$15.
(3) Off-street public parking lot resident reserved parking permit:
[Amended 4-14-2003, effective 6-1-2003; 5-10-2004;
2-13-2006; 1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013; 5-13-2013;
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(a) Colodny lot: $110 per month.
(b) Maltby parking lot:
[1] $110 per month.
[2] (Reserved)
(c) Upper Kensington Road parking area: $110 per month.
(d) Kensington Garage: $125 per month.
(e) Stone Place parking area: $110 per month per single space; for
spaces in tandem, $55 per month per space.
(f) Avalon parking lot:
[1] $110 per month.
[2] (Reserved)
(4) Off-street public parking lot reserved merchant parking permit:
[Amended 5-13-2013; 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(a) Colodny lot: $110 per month.
(b) Stone Place parking area: $110 per month per single space; for
spaces in tandem, $55 per month per space.
§ A321-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § A321-5
282:542
(c) Kensington Garage: $125 per month per single space.
(d) Maltby parking lot: $110 per month.
(5) Overnight parking permit. An off-street parking permit for
overnight parking (from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.) in off-street parking
lots Cedar Street Lot, Garden Avenue Lot, Maltby Lot and
Kensington Garage: $230 per year. [Amended 5-10-2014;
10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
E. Section 290-48, Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-2003;
4-13-2009, effective 6-1-2009]
(1) Maximum penalties for violations of traffic regulations. (The
penalty for each violation shall be doubled if the payment for the
penalty is not made within 14 days from the date of issuance of the
summons for the parking violation.) [Amended 10-10-2017 by
L.L. No. 4-2017]
Violation Penalty
No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. $30
No parking bus stop $35
No parking loading zone $70
No parking $35
No parking 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. $35
Excessive standing $35
No resident permit Village lot $35
No merchant permit Village lot $35
No parking permit $35
Failure to properly affix parking permit
sticker
$35
Unregistered motor vehicles $35
Expired inspection $35
Double parking $70
Crosswalk $70
Fire hydrant parking $70
Blocking driveway $35
Handicapped parking
Street $110
Off-street $110
Improper parking
Parking across line $35
Rear wheels to curb $35
§ A321-5 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § A321-5
282:543
§ A321-6. Chapter 310, Article X. [Added 5-14-2007]
Schedule of initial deposits required under Article X of the Zoning Code:
§ A321-7. Chapter 156, Flood Damage Prevention. [Added
9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007; amended 5-10-2010, effective
6-1-2010]
Floodplain development permit fee: $250, plus required building permit fee.
Violation Penalty
Failing to obey sign
Stopping/standing/parking $35
Snow removal $35
Fire lane $70
Other $35
(2) There shall be an escalating maximum penalty for overtime parking
and for expired meter parking. The fine for each violation shall be
doubled if the payment (for the fine is not made within 14 days from
the date of issuance of the summons for the parking violation.
[Amended 4-7-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
A. For subdivisions and residential site plan applications:
Number of Dwelling Units or
Lots Initial Deposit Amount
1 to 4 $5,000
5 to 25 $25,000
25 or more $25,000 + $1,000 per unit
B. For nonresidential site plan applications:
(1) Up to and including 2,500 square feet: $5,000.
(2) More than 2,500 square feet: $5,000 plus $2 per square foot.
C. For wireless communication facilities: $5,000.
D. Other applications to the Village Board, Planning Board, Design Review
Committee and/or Zoning Board where the Superintendent of Buildings
or Village Engineer determines that professional consultation services
will be required: $2,500.
E. Provided, however, that the Village Administrator may reduce the
required amount of the above deposits in his or her discretion
depending on individual circumstances and only to an amount that will
still cover Village anticipated costs and consultant expenses. [Added
11-20-2018]
§ A321-5 BRONXVILLE CODE § A321-8
282:544
§ A321-8. Chapter 194, Newsracks. [Added 6-9-2008 by L.L. No.
5-2008]
Newsrack permit fee: $25 per newsrack per year.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2000 6-12-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Res. 6-12-2000 Fees Schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 3-2000 11-13-2000 Senior citizen tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. II
Res. 10-9-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. 10-9-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2001 1-8-2001 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 150
L.L. No. 2-2001 1-8-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 3-2001 6-11-2001 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 210
L.L. No. 4-2001 6-11-2001 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 150
L.L. No. 5-2001 7-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 6-2001 11-12-2001 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 15
Res. 9-10-2001 Building
construction
amendment
Ch. 112
Res. 10-8-2001 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
Res. 1-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
§ A321-8 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § DL-1
282:545
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2002 3-11-2002 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 210
Res. 9-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 2-2002 10-14-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 3-2002 10-14-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 4-2002 11-11-2002 Senior citizens tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. II
L.L. No. 5-2002 11-11-2002 Building
moratorium
NCM
Res. 11-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2003 2-10-2003 Residency
requirements for
Village Clerk;
Deputy Clerk;
Treasurer; Deputy
Treasurer; Court
Clerk ; Assistant
Court Clerk
Ch. 47, Art. I
Res. 2-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 2-2003 4-14-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
Res. No. 2-2003 4-14-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A321
Res. No. 3-2003 4-14-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A321
Res. No. 4-2003 4-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 5-2003 4-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2003 7-14-2003 Sidewalk
maintenance and
repair amendment
Ch. 260, Part 1
Res. No. 6-2003 9-8-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 7-2003 9-8-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2003 10-14-2003 Moratorium NCM
L.L. No. 5-2003 12-8-2003 Senior citizen tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. II
§ DL-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § DL-1
282:546
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2004 2-9-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 2-2004 4-12-2004 Moratorium NCM
Res. No. 1-2004 5-10-2004 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 3-2004 7-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
Res. No. 2-2004 7-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 3-2004 7-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 4-2004 10-11-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 5-2004 10-11-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 1-2005 2-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 2-2005 11-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 3-2005 12-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. No. 1-2006 2-13-2006 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 1-2006 9-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 2-2006 12-11-2006 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 274
L.L. No. 3-2006 12-11-2006 Senior citizen tax
exemption
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. II
L.L. No. 4-2006 12-19-2006 Taxation: eligible
funds veterans
exemption
Ch. 268, Art. VII
L.L. No. 1-2007 4-9-2007 Storm drainage
system: illegal
discharge and illicit
connections
Ch. 256, Art. I
L.L. No. 2-2007 4-9-2007 Stormwater
management and
erosion and
sediment control
Ch. 257
L.L. No. 3-2007 5-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
Res. No. 1-2007 5-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
§ DL-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § DL-1
282:547
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. 5-14-2007 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 4-2007 9-10-2007 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 210
L.L. No. 5-2007 9-10-2007 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 260, Part 1
L.L. No. 6-2007 9-10-2007 Flood damage
prevention; fee
schedule
amendment
Chs. 156; A321
L.L. No. 7-2007 10-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment (permit
parking)
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 8-2007 10-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 9-2007 12-10-2007 Public access to
records
Ch. 46
L.L. No. 1-2008 3-10-2008 Newsracks Ch. 194
L.L. No. 2-2008 3-10-2008 Residency
requirements for
Village Clerk;
Deputy Clerk;
Treasurer; Deputy
Treasurer; Court
Clerk; Assistant
Court Clerk
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2008 3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2008 3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 5-2008 6-9-2008 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 6-2008 10-20-2008 Residency
requirements for
Village Clerk;
Deputy Clerk;
Treasurer; Deputy
Treasurer; Court
Clerk; Assistant
Court Clerk
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
§ DL-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § DL-1
282:548
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2009 4-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. 4-13-2009 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 2-2009 7-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2009 7-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2009 12-14-2009 Moratorium on
installation of solar
panels, wind-driven
turbines and other
alternative-energy
structures
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2010 3-8-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. 5-10-2010 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 2-2010 9-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 3-2010 10-12-2010 Animals
amendment
Ch. 92
L.L. No. 4-2010 11-8-2010 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 260, Part 1
L.L. No. 1-2011 3-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 2-2011 3-14-2011 Stormwater
management and
erosion and
sediment control
amendment
Ch. 256
L.L. No. 3-2011 4-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2011 5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 5-2011 6-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 6-2011 6-28-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Res. 6-28-2011 Use and bulk
regulations for
CBAT District at
117 Pondfield Road
NCM
§ DL-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § DL-1
282:549
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 7-2011 7-11-2011 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 210
L.L. No. 8-2011 12-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 9-2011 12-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 10-2011 12-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2012 4-9-2012 2012 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2012 5-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2013 1-14-2013 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 2-2013 1-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 3-2013 4-1-2013 2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2013 5-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. A290
Res. 5-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
Res. 5-13-2013 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 5-2013 11-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 1-2014 1-13-2014 Grease traps Ch. 172
L.L. No. 2-2014 2-10-2014 2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2014 4-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; fees
schedule
amendment
Ch. 290; Ch.
A321
L.L. No. 4-2014 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 5-2014 9-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 6-2014 10-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 7-2014 12-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
§ DL-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § DL-1
282:550
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2015 2-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 2-2015 3-9-2015 2015 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2015 5-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2015 7-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 5-2015 7-13-2015 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 260
L.L. No. 6-2015 7-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 7-2015 9-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 8-2015 9-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 9-2015 11-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 10-2015 12-14-2015 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 260, Part 1
L.L. No. 1-2016 2-8-2016 2016 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2016 4-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; fees
schedule
amendment
Ch. 290; Ch.
A321
L.L. No. 3-2016 6-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2016 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 5-2016 11-14-2016 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 260, Part 1
L.L. No. 1-2017 3-13-2017 2017 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2017 9-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 3-2017 10-10-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 4-2017 10-10-2017 Fees schedule
amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 1-2018 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 2-2018 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
§ DL-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS § DL-1
282:551
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 3-2018 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 4-2018 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 5-2018 1-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 6-2018 2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 290
L.L. No. 7-2018 4-9-2018 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM
L.L. No. 8-2018 7-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
L.L. No. 9-2018 7-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
Res. 11-20-2018 Fees Schedule
Amendment
Ch. A321
L.L. No. 1-2019 2-14-2019 Building
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 112
§ DL-1 BRONXVILLE CODE § DL-1
282:552