Part I, Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-15-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local
laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Batavia, as codified by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 235, together with an
Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Town of Batavia," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Town of Batavia" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing in
the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so
read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local
laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this local law, are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as
to their adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Batavia, and it is the intention of
said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it
appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are
omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Batavia
in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code
or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and
after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not
affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Town of Batavia prior to the effective date of this local law or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in
violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Batavia or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law
or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or
part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of
the Town of Batavia and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until
final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Town of Batavia.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Batavia.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Batavia providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing
name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street,
road, highway, park or other public place within the Town of Batavia or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Batavia appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing
the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of Batavia or other instruments
or evidence of the town's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for town employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance establishing a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the town.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 1-1-2001.
O. Any local laws or ordinances regulating junkyards.
§ 1-4 BATAVIA CODE § 1-6
1:4
shall be certified by the Town Clerk of the Town of Batavia by impressing thereon the
Seal of the town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town
Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all
purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Town of Batavia" or
any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Town Board to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the
loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing
contained in this local law shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution
contained herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code of the Town of Batavia required to be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws, ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this local law
in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall,
when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, local laws,
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.)
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Town
Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by
resolution of the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or amends, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Town of Batavia or
who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
legislation of the Town of Batavia to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any
other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for publication as
the Code of the Town of Batavia, no changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws,
ordinances and resolutions have been made. In addition, certain grammatical changes
and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code of the
Town of Batavia, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I, Adoption
of Code," and the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
§ 1-10 BATAVIA CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 3
ANTI-DISPLACEMENT PLAN
§ 1-13 ANTI-DISPLACEMENT PLAN § 1-13
3:1

Chapter 7
DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The Town of Batavia believes in the dignity of the individual and recognizes the rights of
all people to equal employment opportunities in the workplace. In this regard, the Town
(hereinafter "municipality") is committed to a policy of protecting and safeguarding
the rights and opportunities of all people to seek, obtain and hold employment without
subjugation to harassment or discrimination in the workplace. It is the municipality's
policy to provide an employment environment free from harassment and discrimination
based on race, color, gender, religion, religious creed, sex, familial or marital status,
age, national origin or ancestry, physical or mental disability, genetic information/
predisposition or carrier status, military or veteran status, sexual orientation, selfidentified
or perceived sex, gender expression, gender identity and the status of being
transgender, pregnancy (including childbirth and related medical conditions, and
including medical conditions related to lactation), citizenship, domestic violence victim's
status or any other characteristics protected by applicable federal, state or local law.
A. Scope of policy. This policy applies to all municipality employees and all personnel
in a contractual or other business relationship with the municipality including, for
example, applicants, temporary or leased employees, interns (whether paid or
unpaid), volunteers, visitors, independent contractors, contractors, subcontractors,
vendors, consultants or other persons providing services pursuant to a contract in
the workplace, including employees of independent contractors, contractors,
subcontractors, vendors, consultants or others providing services pursuant to a
contract in the workplace. In the remainder of this policy, the term "employees"
refers to this collective group. This policy applies with equal force on municipality
property as it does at municipality-sponsored events, programs, and activities that
take place off municipality premises.
B. Policy objectives. By adopting and publishing this policy, it is the intention of the
municipality's governing body to:
(1) Notify employees about the types of conduct that constitute harassment and
discrimination prohibited by this policy;
(2) Inform employees about the complaint procedures established by the
municipality that enable any employee who believes (s)he is the victim of
harassment or discrimination to submit a complaint which will be investigated
by the municipality;
(3) Clearly advise all supervisory staff, managers, and employees that harassment
and discrimination is strictly prohibited, and no such person possesses the
authority to harass or discriminate; and
(4) Notify all employees that the municipality has appointed Compliance Officers
who are specifically designated to receive complaints and ensure compliance
with this policy.
§ 1-13 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-1
7:1
§ 7-2. Definitions.
NOTE: The title and office location of each Compliance Officer designated to
receive and investigate complaints are listed below in § 7-11 of this policy. Any
change in the designated Compliance Officers shall be distributed in writing to all
current employees and shall be posted.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HARASSMENT — Harassment is strictly prohibited and includes, but is not
limited to, conduct that is unwelcome and has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with a person's work performance, or creating an intimidating, hostile
or offensive working environment. Such harassment of employees is prohibited by
this policy if it is based on a protected characteristic or directed at an individual
because of a protected characteristic. In this regard, individuals subject to this
policy should be mindful that conduct or behavior that is acceptable, amusing or
inoffensive to some individuals may be viewed as unwelcome, abusive or offensive
to others.
PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION OF EMPLOYEES — Prohibited
discrimination of employees can take the form of any adverse employment action
against an employee, by either a municipality employee or official or a third
party engaged in activities sponsored by the municipality which is based upon the
employee's protected characteristic. Prohibited discrimination of employees also
includes harassment based on a protected characteristic even where there is no
tangible impact upon the employee's employment opportunities and/or employment
benefits. The phrase "prohibited discrimination" as used in this policy includes
all forms of prohibited discrimination and harassment based on a protected
characteristic, including "sexual harassment" as defined below.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT —
Sexual harassment is strictly prohibited. It is a form of sex discrimination
and is unlawful under federal, state, and (where applicable) local law. Sexual
harassment includes harassment on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, selfidentified
or perceived sex, gender expression, gender identity and the status
of being transgender.
(1)
Sexual harassment includes unwelcome conduct which is either of a sexual
nature, or which is directed at an individual because of that individual's sex
when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment;
(a)
Submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual (e.g.,
promotion, transfer, demotion, termination); or
(b)
Such gender-based conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work performance, or of creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment, even if the
(c)
(2)
§ 7-1 BATAVIA CODE § 7-2
7:2
reporting individual is not the intended target of the sexual harassment.
The foregoing includes offensive comments, jokes, innuendoes or other
statements of a sexual or gender-based nature as well as favoritism between a
supervisor and subordinate based on an intimate/sexual relationship or desire
for the same.
(3)
B. Who can be the target of harassment? Harassment can occur between any
individuals, regardless of their sex, gender or other protected status. New York Law
protects employees, paid or unpaid interns, and non-employees, including
independent contractors, and those employed by companies contracting to provide
services in the workplace. Harassers can be a superior, a subordinate, a coworker or
anyone in the workplace including an independent contractor, contract worker,
vendor, client, customer or visitor.
C. Where can harassment occur? Unlawful harassment is not limited to the physical
workplace itself. It can occur while employees are traveling for business or at
employer sponsored events or parties. Calls, texts, emails, and social media usage
by employees can constitute unlawful workplace harassment, even if they occur
away from the workplace premises, on personal devices or during non-work hours.
D. Prohibited behavior and examples of harassment, including sexual harassment.
Specific forms of behavior the municipality considers harassment or sexual
harassment are set forth below. Every conceivable example cannot be delineated
herein, and thus the descriptions below should not be interpreted in any way as
being all-inclusive.
(1) Verbal: Abusive verbal language including jokes, comments, teasing or threats
related to an employee's protected characteristic, sexual activity and/or body
parts whether or not said in that person's presence including, but not limited
to: sexual innuendos; slurs; suggestive, derogatory, or insulting comments or
sounds; whistling; jokes; propositions; threats; comments on a person's
appearance that make the person feel uncomfortable because of his or her
protected characteristic; sex stereotyping, continuing to ask someone for dates
or to meet after work after the person has made it clear that he or she does not
want to go; comments about an employee's anatomy or protected characteristic
that are unwelcome, unreasonably interfere with an employee's work
performance, or create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment;
and unwelcome advances or demands based on someone's protected
characteristic.
(2) Nonverbal: Abusive written language showing or displaying pornographic or
sexually explicit objects or pictures; graphic commentaries based on a
protected characteristic; derogatory cartoons or caricatures; luring or obscene
gestures in the workplace; staring at a person's body in a sexually suggestive
manner; gestures or motions based on a protected characteristic; sending
material through the municipality e-mail system or other electronic
communication devices (e.g., voice mail) or using the municipality's mail,
computers or cell phones to view material that is demeaning or derogatory
based on one's protected characteristic.
(3) Physical: Unwelcome physical conduct, including but not limited to: hitting,
§ 7-2 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-2
7:3
§ 7-3. Policy.
pushing, shoving, slapping, petting, pinching, grabbing, holding, hugging,
kissing, tickling, massaging, displaying private body parts, coerced sexual
intercourse, rape or assault or attempts to commit these assaults, persistent
brushing up against a person's body, unnecessary touching and flashing or
other unwelcome physical conduct.
(4) Other: Hostile actions taken against an individual because of an individual's
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and the status of being transgender or
because of any other protected characteristic, such as: interfering with,
destroying or damaging a person's workstation, tools, or equipment, or
otherwise interfering with the individual's ability to perform the job;
sabotaging an individual's work; bullying, yelling, or name-calling.
E. Any employee who feels discriminated against or harassed should report so that any
violation of this policy can be corrected promptly. Any harassing conduct, even if a
single incident, can be addressed under this policy.
A. The municipality prohibits harassment and discrimination based on any
characteristic protected by applicable law and will not tolerate any form of unlawful
discrimination or harassment. The municipality will take all steps necessary to
prevent and stop the occurrence of unlawful discrimination and/or harassment,
including sexual harassment, in the workplace.
B. All employees, including but not limited to municipality officials and supervisory
personnel, are responsible for ensuring a work environment free from prohibited
harassment and discrimination. All employees will be held responsible and
accountable for avoiding or eliminating inappropriate conduct that may give rise to
a claim of harassment or discrimination. Employees are encouraged to report
violations to department head, one of the Compliance Officers listed in § 7-11 of
this policy in accordance with the complaint procedure set forth in this policy.
Department heads and/or Compliance Officers must take immediate and
appropriate corrective action when suspected instances of prohibited harassment
and/or discrimination come to their attention to assure compliance with this policy
as well as report the suspected misconduct to the municipality's designated
Compliance Officers. Furthermore, if any employee believes that any member of
management has violated this policy or has not properly responded to and/or
handled a report or concerns of discrimination or harassment, the employee should
immediately contact one of the municipality's designated Compliance Officers.
C. Each employee is assured, pursuant to § 7-6 of this policy, that retaliation against
an individual who makes a complaint or report under this policy is absolutely
prohibited and constitutes, in and of itself, a violation of this policy. Employees
who engage in retaliation against any employee for making a good faith complaint
of harassment or discrimination, for opposing in good faith any practices forbidden
by applicable anti-discrimination laws or for filing a good faith complaint with, or
otherwise participating in any manner in an internal workplace investigation or an
external investigation, proceeding or hearing conducted by any federal or state
agency charged with enforcing employment discrimination laws shall be subject to
discipline, up to and including termination of employment. Any employee who
§ 7-2 BATAVIA CODE § 7-3
7:4
§ 7-4. Policy enforcement.
believes he/she has been retaliated against in violation of this policy should report
violations to one of the Compliance Officers listed in § 7-11 of this policy in
accordance with the complaint procedure set forth in this policy.
D. Any questions regarding the scope or application of this policy should be directed
to one of the Compliance Officers listed in § 7-11 of this policy.
A. Complaint procedure for employees.
(1) Notification procedure. Prompt reporting of complaints or concerns is
encouraged so that timely and constructive action can be taken before
relationships become strained. Reporting of all perceived incidents of
prohibited discrimination and/or harassment is encouraged and essential,
regardless of the offender's identity or position. An employee or other
individual who feels aggrieved because of harassment or discrimination shall
contact his or her department head or a Compliance Officer listed in § 7-11 of
this policy, or another administrator. Likewise, anyone who witnesses or
becomes aware of instances of harassment or discrimination should report
such behavior to his or her department head or a Compliance Officer listed in
§ 7-11 of this policy, or another administrator.
(2) Making a complaint.
(a) Complaints are accepted orally and in writing. All employees are
encouraged to use the municipality's "Complaint of Alleged
Discrimination" form as prepared from time to time by the Town Clerk.
Additional complaint forms can be obtained from a Compliance Officer,
with no questions asked. Because an accurate record of the allegedly
objectionable behavior is necessary to resolve a complaint of prohibited
discrimination or harassment, the municipality encourages employees to
place complaints in writing, even if originally made orally. If an
employee has any questions or difficulty filling out the complaint form,
she/he can obtain assistance from any one of the Compliance Officers or
the department head to which he/she complained. All complaints should
include: the name of the complaining party, the name of the alleged
offender(s), date(s) of the incident(s), description of the incident(s),
names of witnesses to the incident(s) and the signature of the complaining
party.
(b) Once the complaining party has completed and dated a complaint, with
or without the assistance of one of the municipality's Compliance
Officers or a department head, the written complaint, or oral complaint as
the case may be, should be promptly forwarded to one of the
municipality's Compliance Officers.
(c) Complainants are expected to cooperate with the municipality's
investigation procedures by providing all relevant information relating to
the complaint, as are other supervisory and non-supervisory employees
having relevant or related knowledge or information.
§ 7-3 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-4
7:5
§ 7-5. Investigation procedures.
(3) Supervisory responsibilities.
(a) All department heads who receive a complaint or information about
suspected harassment or discrimination, observe what may be harassing
behavior or for any reason to suspect that harassment is occurring, are
required to report such suspected harassment or discrimination to one of
the municipality's Compliance Officers.
(b) In addition to being subject to discipline if they engaged in harassing
conduct themselves, department heads will be subject to discipline for
failing to report suspected harassment or otherwise knowingly allowing
harassment to continue.
(c) Department heads will also be subjected to discipline for engaging in any
retaliation.
B. Time for reporting a complaint. Prompt reporting of all complaints is strongly
encouraged. All employees should be aware that appropriate resolution of
complaints and effective remedial action oftentimes is possible only when
complaints are promptly filed.
C. Confidentiality and privacy. The municipality shall keep complaints as confidential
as is consistent with a thorough investigation, applicable collective bargaining
agreements, and other laws and regulations regarding employees. To the extent
complaints made under this policy implicate criminal conduct, the municipality
may be required by law to contact and cooperate with the appropriate law
enforcement authorities.
D. Acknowledgment of complaint. Upon receipt of an oral or written complaint, the
Compliance Officer should endeavor to contact promptly the complainant to
confirm that the complaint has been received. If the complainant does not receive
such confirmation promptly, she/he is encouraged to contact a Compliance Officer
or his/her department head to whom the complaint was made to ensure its receipt.
The purpose of this acknowledgment procedure is to ensure that all complaints are
received by authorized individuals, carefully processed and promptly investigated.
A. Timing of investigations. The municipality will promptly investigate all allegations
of discrimination and harassment prohibited by this policy. The municipality will
also attempt to complete investigations under this policy promptly. The length of
the investigation will depend upon the complexity and particular circumstances of
each complaint.
B. Method of investigation.
(1) Investigations will provide all parties due process, and reach reasonable
conclusions based on the evidence collected. Investigations will be conducted
by municipality Compliance Officers, municipality's legal counsel, and/or
other impartial persons designated by the municipality. The primary purposes
of all investigations under this policy will be to determine:
§ 7-4 BATAVIA CODE § 7-5
7:6
(a) Did the conduct complained of occur?;
(b) Did the conduct complained of violate this policy?; and
(c) What remedial measures or preventative steps, if any, shall be taken?
(2) Investigations will necessarily vary from case to case and may typically
include the following: fact-finding interviews, including of the accuser and the
accused; document request, review and preservation, depositions,
observations, or other reasonable methods. Municipality investigators should
pursue reasonable steps to investigate each complaint in a thorough and
comprehensive manner. Any notes, memoranda, or other records created by
municipality employees or agents conducting an investigation under this
policy shall be deemed confidential and privileged to the extent allowed by
law.
(3) Investigators will typically create a written documentation of the investigation
(such as a letter, memo or email), which contains the following:
(a) A list of all documents reviewed, along with a detailed summary of
relevant documents;
(b) A list of names of those interviewed, along with a detailed summary of
their statements;
(c) A timeline of events;
(d) A summary of prior relevant incidents, reported or unreported; and
(e) The basis for the decision and final resolution of the complaint, together
with any remedial actions.
C. Notification to complaining party and the accused party. The results of the
investigation shall be communicated in writing to both the person filing the
complaint and the accused party.
D. Remedial measures.
(1) This policy is intended to prevent all forms of unlawful discrimination and
harassment and put an end to any prohibited discrimination that is found to
have occurred. While disciplinary action may be appropriate in certain
instances, punitive measures are not the exclusive means for responding to
prohibited discrimination or harassment. During the pendency of any
investigation being conducted pursuant to this policy, remedial measures may
be taken if appropriate and necessary.
(2) Any individual who is found to have engaged in prohibited discrimination or
harassment or conduct which may be prohibited by this policy may receive
education, training, counseling, warnings, discipline, or other measures
designed to prevent future violations of this policy. Disciplinary action may
include: warnings, suspension, or discharge from employment or such
disciplinary action as may be permitted by applicable collective bargaining
agreements and law. Any third party found to have engaged in discrimination
§ 7-5 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-5
7:7
§ 7-6. Prohibition against retaliation and abuse of policy.
§ 7-7. Appeals.
or harassment of an employee may be barred from municipality property.
A. Unlawful retaliation can be any action that could discourage an employee from
coming forward to make a complaint or support a discrimination or harassment
claim. Adverse action need not be job-related or occur in the workplace to
constitute retaliation (e.g., threats of physical violence outside of work hours).
B. Retaliation is strictly prohibited by this policy and by law against anyone for
making a good faith complaint of harassment or discrimination, for opposing in
good faith any practices forbidden by applicable anti-discrimination laws or for
filing a good faith complaint with, or otherwise participating in any manner in an
internal workplace investigation or an external investigation, proceeding or hearing
conducted by any federal or state agency charged with enforcing employment
discrimination laws.
C. Even if the alleged harassment or discrimination does not turn out to rise to the level
of a violation of law, the individual is protected from retaliation if he/she had a good
faith belief that the practices were unlawful. However, the retaliation provision is
not intended to protect persons making intentionally false charges of harassment or
discrimination.
D. Complaints of retaliation should be brought directly to a Compliance Officer. Such
complaints will be promptly investigated. If retaliation is found, the person
retaliating will be subject to corrective action up to and including termination from
employment, or in the case of a non-employee, an appropriate remedy up to and
including termination of the business relationship.
A. Any complainant or accused party who wishes to appeal the conclusion which the
municipality reached in investigating a complaint filed under this policy may do so
within 10 calendar days of receipt of the appealing party's notification of the
investigation outcome. Untimely submissions shall not receive consideration. Such
appeal must be made in writing to the municipality's governing body. The appealing
party shall be entitled to present evidence in writing as to why the conclusion was
flawed, improper, or otherwise not supported by the evidence. The municipality's
consideration and review of any such appeal shall be conducted confidentially in
executive session. Following a review of that evidence, as well as the information
obtained in the investigation process and conclusions derived therefrom, the
municipality's governing body, or its designee, shall render a decision. That
decision shall be final. The appealing party shall be notified of the decision in
writing.
B. Nothing set forth in the appeal process above shall be construed to in any way
confer upon either the complainant(s) or the person(s) accused of violating this
policy any right to appeal the municipality's determination as to appropriate
disciplinary and/or corrective action to be taken on meritorious complaints. In this
regard, the municipality at all times retains sole discretion to determine the
appropriate disciplinary and/or corrective action to be taken with regard to a
§ 7-5 BATAVIA CODE § 7-7
7:8
§ 7-8. Recordkeeping.
§ 7-9. Legal protections and external remedies.
Discrimination and harassment based on protected characteristics, including sexual
harassment, are not only prohibited by the municipality but are also prohibited by
state, federal, and, where applicable, local law. Aside from the internal process at the
municipality, employees may also choose to pursue legal remedies with the following
governmental entities. While a private attorney is not required to file a complaint with a
governmental agency, you may seek the legal advice of an attorney. In addition to those
outlined below, employees in certain industries may have additional legal protections.
meritorious complaint.
A. The municipality shall maintain a written record of all complaints of discrimination
and/or harassment for a period of at least three years. The municipality shall also
document the steps taken with regard to investigations, as well as conclusions
reached and remedial action taken, if any. The municipality shall also maintain
these documents for, at a minimum, three years.
B. The municipality's records regarding alleged discrimination and harassment shall
be maintained separate and apart from personnel records in a secure and
confidential location.
A. State Human Rights Law (HRL).
(1) The Human Rights Law (HRL), codified as New York Executive Law, Art.
15, § 290 et seq., applies to all employers in New York State with regard to
sexual harassment and harassment based on other protected characteristics set
forth in this policy, and protects employees, paid or unpaid interns and nonemployees,
regardless of immigration status. A complaint alleging violation of
the Human Rights Law may be filed either with the Division of Human Rights
(DHR) or in New York State Supreme Court.
(2) Complaints with DHR may be filed any time within one year of the
harassment. Complaints of sexual harassment that accrue on or after August
12, 2020, may be filed with DHR at any time within three years of the alleged
sexual harassment. If an individual did not file at DHR, they can sue directly
in state court under the HRL, within three years of the alleged harassment,
including sexual harassment. An individual may not file with DHR if they
have already filed a HRL complaint in state court.
(3) Complaining internally to the municipality does not extend your time to file
with DHR or in court. The one year or three years is counted from the date of
the most recent incident of harassment.
(4) You do not need an attorney to file a complaint with DHR, and there is no cost
to file with DHR.
(5) DHR will investigate your complaint and determine whether there is probable
cause to believe that sexual or other illegal harassment has occurred. Probable
cause cases are forwarded to a public hearing before an administrative law
§ 7-7 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-9
7:9
§ 7-10. Questions.
Any questions by employees of the municipality about this policy or potential
harassment or discrimination should be brought to the attention of one of the
municipality's Compliance Officers.
§ 7-11. Compliance officers.
Town Supervisor
Batavia Town Hall
Batavia, New York 14020
judge. If sexual or other illegal harassment is found after a hearing, DHR
has the power to award relief, which varies but may include requiring your
employer to take action to stop the harassment, or redress the damage caused,
including paying of monetary damages, attorney's fees (in sex discrimination
and sexual harassment cases only) and civil fines.
B. Civil Rights Act of 1964.
(1) The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
enforces federal anti-discrimination laws, including Title VII of the 1964
federal Civil Rights Act (codified as 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.). An individual
can file a complaint with the EEOC anytime within 300 days from the
discrimination or harassment. There is no cost to file a complaint with the
EEOC. The EEOC will investigate the complaint, and determine whether there
is reasonable cause to believe that discrimination has occurred, at which point
the EEOC will issue a Right to Sue letter permitting the individual to file a
complaint in federal court.
(2) The EEOC does not hold hearings or award relief, but may take other action
including pursuing cases in federal court on behalf of complaining parties.
Federal courts may award remedies if discrimination is found to have
occurred. In general, employers must have at least 15 employees to come
within the jurisdiction of the EEOC.
(3) An employee alleging discrimination at work can file a "Charge of
Discrimination" with the EEOC.
(4) If an individual filed an administrative complaint with DHR, DHR will file the
complaint with the EEOC to preserve the right to proceed in federal court.
C. Local protections. Many localities enforce laws protecting individuals from sexual
harassment and discrimination. An individual should contact the county, city or
town in which they live to find out if such a law exists.
D. Contact the local police department. If the harassment involves unwanted physical
touching, coerced physical confinement or coerced sex acts, the conduct may
constitute a crime. Contact the local police department.
§ 7-9 BATAVIA CODE § 7-11
7:10
Secretary to the Supervisor
Town Hall
Batavia, New York 14020
§ 7-12. Policy dissemination.
The Town of Batavia shall ensure that this policy is adequately disseminated and
made available to all employees of the municipality. In addition, copies of this policy
and complaint form shall be maintained in the office of each department head and
Compliance Officer as well as the municipality's Code Book that is available at the office
of the Town Clerk.
§ 7-11 DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY § 7-12
7:11

Chapter 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN
§ 7-12 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN § 7-12
9:1

Chapter 11
ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment policy — See Ch. 20.
§ 11-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Town Board
of the Town of Batavia recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct for public
officers and employees which must be observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to
be obtained and if public confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local government.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the
officers and employees of the Town of Batavia. These rules shall serve as a guide for
official conduct of the officers and employees of the Town of Batavia. The rules of
ethical conduct of this chapter as adopted shall not conflict with but shall be in addition
to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other general or
special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and
employees. It is the further purpose of this chapter to create a Board of Ethics to render
advisory opinions to the town's officers and employees as provided herein.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer or
employee; the municipal officer's or employee's spouse, minor children and dependents;
a firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a member or
employee; a corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director, or
employee; and a corporation any stock of which is accrued or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee, unless the context otherwise requires.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Town of
Batavia, including members of an administrative board, commission or other agency
thereof, whether paid or unpaid, whether serving in a full-time, part-time or advisory
capacity. No person shall be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by
reason of being a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a chief engineer or
assistant chief engineer.
§ 11-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Town of Batavia shall be subject to and abide by the
following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or receive any gift
having a value of $25 or more, whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances
§ 7-12 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, CODE OF § 11-3
11:1
§ 11-4. Claims against town.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a present or former
municipal officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or suit against the Town of
Batavia, or any agency thereof, on behalf of himself or any member of his family arising
out of any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or
permitted by law.
in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him,
or could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of his official
duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his part.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information acquired
by him in the course of his official duties or use such information to further his
personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter into any
agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in
relation to any matter before any municipal agency of which he is an officer,
member or employee or of any municipal agency over which he has jurisdiction or
to which he has the power to appoint any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be
rendered in relation to any matter before any agency of his municipality, whereby
his compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency
with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the
fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof, a member
of the Town Board and any officer or employee of the Town of Batavia, whether
paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives official opinion to the
Town Board on any legislation before the Town Board shall publicly disclose on
the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other
private interest he has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold any
investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other
private transaction which creates a conflict with his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise to
accept private employment or render services for private interests when such
employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge of his
official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or employment
with such municipality, appear before any board or agency of the Town of Batavia
in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally
participated during the period of his service or employment or which was under his
active consideration.
§ 11-3 BATAVIA CODE § 11-5
11:2
§ 11-5. Distribution. [Amended 9-19-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
The Supervisor of the Town of Batavia shall cause a copy of this law to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the town within five days after the effective date of this
chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a
copy before entering upon the duties of his office or employment.
§ 11-6. Board of Ethics.
§ 11-7. Incorporation of the Code of Federal Regulations. [Added 9-19-2018 by
L.L. No. 5-20181]
The provisions of 2 CFR 200.318(c)(1), relating to conflicts of interest in certain federal
contracts, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference
into this chapter and made a part hereof.
§ 11-8. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who shall
knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this code may be fined,
suspended or removed from office or employment, as the case may be, in the manner
provided by law.
A. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting of three members to be
appointed by the Town Board and who shall serve without compensation and at the
pleasure of the Town Board. A majority of such members shall be persons other
than officers or employees of the Town of Batavia, but the Board shall include at
least one member who is an elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town
of Batavia.
B. The Board of Ethics shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law and shall render advisory opinions to the officers and
employees of the Town of Batavia with respect to Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law and any Code of Ethics adopted pursuant to such article, under such
rules and regulations as the Board may prescribe. In addition, the Board may make
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a Code of Ethics or
amendments thereto upon request of the Town Board.
1. Editor’s Note: This local law also renumbered former § 11-7 as § 11-8 and changed the title of this chapter from “Code
of Ethics” to “Code of Ethics and Conflicts of Interest.”
§ 11-5 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, CODE OF § 11-8
11:3

Chapter 14
FAIR HOUSING POLICY
§ 14-1. Adoption of policy.
The fair housing policy, which is included in § 14-2, is hereby adopted as the official
plan for compliance with Small Cities Community Development Block Grant.
§ 14-2. Fair housing policy.
The following is the policy of the Town of Batavia (hereinafter "Town") to provide legal
protection to prohibit housing choices from being restricted on the basis of race, color,
national origin, sex, religion, handicap or other protected class.
A. This fair housing policy represents the Town's commitment to actions to
affirmatively further fair housing in the Town of Batavia by endorsing positive
steps to ensure equal access to housing, employment, public facilities/services,
contracting and business opportunities, Community Development Block Grant
Program (CDBG) benefits/services and displacement protection. The primary
purpose of this policy is the maintenance of a positive fair housing environment in
the Town of Batavia.
B. In order to promote equal access to housing opportunities, the Town will actively
pursue federal and state funding sources that primarily assist low- and moderateincome
persons to achieve affordable housing opportunities. The Town will
carefully monitor the activities of agencies and contractors engaged in these
programs to ensure that the funds are primarily benefiting low- to moderate-income
persons and benefiting the target population of the program. The Town will require
agencies to report data and performance statistics to the Town as part of any
contract the Town enters into with an agency performing housing services as a
condition of receiving payment from the Town.
C. The Town shall have a representative at meetings of the Genesee Region Housing
Initiatives Committee to advocate for affirmatively furthering fair housing practices
in the community and require that the Housing Initiatives Committee take
affirmative steps to promote fair and equal access to housing, regardless of the type
of grant.
D. The Town will require contractors and/or agencies who the Town contracts with to
administer CDBG funded housing programs to:
(1) Demonstrate they afford equal employment opportunities to all persons.
(2) Take affirmative steps to ensure that all segments of the community regardless
of economic, racial or ethnic status are informed of grant opportunities.
(3) Demonstrate that their program benefits are not awarded in ways that
discriminate.
(4) Take affirmative steps to promote fair and equal housing.
§ 11-8 FAIR HOUSING POLICY § 14-2
14:1
(5) In addition to equal access, affirmatively further fair housing and accessibility
for persons with disabilities.
E. All CDBG funded projects for which the Town is the recipient whether it is for
housing, infrastructure, or economic development, attention to the civil rights, fair
housing and equal opportunity component for the CDBG project must be allinclusive,
from the project design phase to final progress report.
F. The Town shall incorporate and promote fair housing opportunities in the Town's
Comprehensive Plan.2
G. The Town shall notify local banks of fair housing activities and enlist their support
and active participation.
H. The Town shall notify local realtors of fair housing activities and enlist their
support and active participation.
I. The Town shall appoint a Fair Housing Officer. The Fair Housing Officer will be
responsible for the implementation of the Town's Fair Housing Policy. The Fair
Housing Officer will also receive complaints from Town residents who believe they
are an aggrieved person with regard to unfair housing practices by a local
municipality or bank or a realtor. The Fair Housing Officer will assist the aggrieved
person with filing a complaint with the proper federal office. The Fair Housing
Officer shall file a copy of the complaint with the regional or field office of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Fair Housing
Officer is delegated to investigate the allegations of any complaint, including
requesting a response from the entity charged in the complaint. Following
completion of the investigation, the Fair Housing Officer will issue a final
investigative report to the Town.
2. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Town offices.
§ 14-2 BATAVIA CODE § 14-2
14:2
Chapter 15
FUND BALANCE POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment policy — See Ch. 20.
§ 15-1. Reserve funds.
§ 15-2. Government fund-type assignment (GASB 54).
The Town shall comply with the reporting requirements of Article 3 of General
Municipal Law of the State of New York and the Governmental Accounting Standards
Board (GASB) Statement Number 54, Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund
Types Definitions. The Board authorizes the Supervisor to complete the following
actions as necessary to comply with the requirements of GASB Statement No. 54:
A. Reserve funds (which essentially are a legally authorized savings account for
particular specific purposes) are an important component in the Town's financial
planning for specific expenses, future projects, acquisitions and other lawful
purposes. To this end, the Town may establish and maintain reserve funds in
accordance with New York State laws. The Town will also consider rules and/or
opinions issued by the New York State Comptroller when they are not in conflict
with law.
B. Town reserve funds must be properly established and maintained to promote the
goals of creating an open, transparent and accountable use of public funds. The
Town may engage independent experts and professionals, including but not limited
to auditors, accountants and other financial and legal counsel, as necessary to
monitor all reserve fund activity and prepare reports that the Town Board may
require.
A. Restricted fund balances. Restricted fund balances consists of amounts that are
subject to externally enforceable legal purpose restrictions imposed by creditors,
grantors, contributors, or laws and regulations of other governments; or through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
B. Committed fund balances. Committed fund balances consists of amounts that are
subject to a purpose constraint imposed by a formal action of the Town Board
before the end of the fiscal year, and that require the same level of formal action to
remove the constraint.
C. Assigned fund balances. Assigned fund balances consists of amounts that are
subject to a purpose constraint that represents an intended use established by the
government's highest level of decision-making authority, or by its designated body
or official. The Board authorized the Supervisor to make a determination of the
assigned amounts of fund balance. Assigned funds represent amounts intended to
§ 14-2 FUND BALANCE POLICY § 15-2
15:1
§ 15-3. Funding policy for restricted or committed and assigned fund balances.
The formal action of the government's highest level of decision-making authority that
restricts, commits or assigns fund balance to a specific purpose should occur prior to
the end of the reporting period, but the amount, if any, which will be subject to the
constraint, may be determined in the subsequent period.
§ 15-4. Spending policy for fund balances.
The Town Board will determine the composition of its ending fund balance by applying
its accounting policies regarding whether it considers restricted or unrestricted amounts
to have been spent when an expenditure is incurred for purposes for which both restricted
and unrestricted (committed, assigned, or unassigned) amounts are available. Similarly,
within unrestricted fund balance, the classification should be based on the government's
accounting policies regarding whether it considers committed, assigned or unassigned
amounts to have been spent when an expenditure is incurred for purposes for which
amounts in any of those unrestricted fund balance classifications could be used. If a
government does not establish a policy for its use of unrestricted fund balance amounts,
it should consider that committed amounts would be reduced first, followed by assigned
amounts, and then unassigned amounts when expenditures are incurred for purposes for
which amounts in any of those unrestricted fund balance classifications could be used.
§ 15-5. Periodic review and annual report.
be used for a specific purpose. Assigned fund balances require the same level of
authority to remove the constraint.
A. The Town Board and management will periodically review all restricted committed
and assigned fund balances. The Town will prepare and submit an annual report of
all restricted, committed and assigned funds for the Town Board. The annual report
shall include the following information for each reserve fund.
(1) The type and description of the reserve fund.
(2) The interest earned on each reserve fund.
(3) Capital gains of losses resulting from the sale of investments of the reserve
funds.
(4) The sum total increase and sum total decrease in the reserve funds.
(5) The ending balance in the reserve funds at fiscal year end.
(6) A summary statement of projected use and the need of the reserve funds.
B. The Board shall utilize the information in the annual report to discuss reserve fund
balances and to adequately maintain necessary funds for the Town's long-term
financial planning. The Board will be mindful of its role and responsibility as a
fiduciary of public funds when acting on reserve fund issues.
§ 15-2 BATAVIA CODE § 15-5
15:2
Chapter 17
HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBILITY POLICY
§ 15-5 HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBILITY POLICY § 15-5
17:1

Chapter 18
HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Plan — See Ch. 9.
§ 18-1. Adoption of plan.
The Town Board of the Town of Batavia hereby adopts the Genesee County
Multijurisdictional All - Hazard Mitigation Plan as this jurisdiction's all - hazard
mitigation plan, and resolves to execute the actions in the plan.3
3. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the Town offices.
§ 15-5 HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN § 18-1
18:1

Chapter 20
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11.
§ 18-1 INVESTMENT POLICY § 18-1
20:1

ARTICLE I
Enactment
§ 20-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "A Local Law Establishing an Investment Policy for the
Town of Batavia."
§ 20-1 INVESTMENT POLICY § 20-1
20:3

ARTICLE II
Investment Policy
§ 20-2. Rules and regulations.
The text of the Investment Policy for the Town of Batavia shall be as follows:
A. Scope. This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any other entity or
individual.
B. Objectives. The primary objectives of the local government's investment activities
are, in priority order:
(1) To conform to all applicable federal, state and other legal requirements (legal);
(2) To adequately safeguard principal (safety);
(3) To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements (liquidity);
and
(4) To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
C. Delegation of authority. The governing board's responsibility for administration of
the investment program is delegated to the Supervisor, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with these
investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate internal control
structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability, based on a database of
records incorporating description and amounts of investments, transaction dates,
and other relevant information, and regulate the activities of subordinate
employees.
D. Prudence.
(1) All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly as
custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that might impair
public confidence in the Town of Batavia to govern effectively.
(2) Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the safety of the principal as well as the probable income to be
derived.
(3) All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment
program or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions.
E. Diversification. It is the policy of the Town of Batavia to diversify its deposits and
investments by financial institution, by investment instrument, and by maturity
scheduling.
F. Internal controls.
§ 20-2 INVESTMENT POLICY § 20-2
20:5
(1) It is the policy of the Town of Batavia for all moneys collected by any officer
or employee of the government to be deposited within three days of collection,
or within the time period specified in law, whichever is shorter. All said
moneys collected for the month must be transferred to the Chief Fiscal Officer
by the fifth of the following month.
(2) The Supervisor is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that
deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use
or disposition and that transactions are executed in accordance with
management's authorization and recorded properly and are managed in
compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
G. Designation of depositories. The banks and trust companies authorized for the
deposit of moneys up to the maximum amounts are and pursuant to this policy shall
be established and reviewed annually and amended from time to time by Town
Board, by resolution.
H. Collateralizing of deposits. In accordance with the provisions of General Municipal
Law § 10, all deposits of the Town of Batavia, including certificates of deposit and
special time deposits, in excess of the amount insured under the provisions of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be secured:
(1) By a pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value as provided
by General Municipal Law § 10, equal to the aggregate amount of deposits
from the categories designated in Appendix A to the policy.4
(2) By an eligible irrevocable letter of credit issued by a qualified bank other than
the bank with the deposits in favor of the government for a term not to exceed
90 days with an aggregate value equal to 140% of the aggregate amount of
deposits and the agreed-upon interest, if any. A qualified bank is one whose
commercial paper and other unsecured short-term debt obligations are rated in
one of the three highest rating categories by at least one nationally recognized
statistical rating organization or by a bank that is in compliance with
applicable federal minimum risk-based capital requirements.
(3) By an eligible surety bond payable to the government for an amount at least
equal to 100% of the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed-upon
interest, if any, executed by an insurance company authorized to do business
in New York State, whose claims-paying ability is rated in the highest rating
category by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations.
I. Safekeeping and collateralization.
(1) Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by the
depository and/or a third-party bank or trust company subject to security and
custodial agreements.
(2) The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being pledged
to secure local government deposits together with agreed-upon interest, if any,
4. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 20-2 BATAVIA CODE § 20-2
20:6
and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of such deposits upon
default. It shall also provide the conditions under which the securities may
be sold, presented for payment, substituted or released and the events which
will enable the local government to exercise its rights against the pledged
securities. In the event that the securities are not registered or inscribed in the
name of the local government, such securities shall be delivered in a form
suitable for transfer or with an assignment in blank to the Town of Batavia or
its custodial bank.
(3) The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank or trust
company, or agent of and custodian for the local government, will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or trust
company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with or become
part of the backing for any other deposit or other liabilities. The agreement
should also describe that the custodian shall confirm the receipt, substitution
or release of the securities. The agreement shall provide for the frequency of
revaluation of eligible securities and for the substitution of securities when a
change in the rating of a security may cause ineligibility. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a perfected
interest in the securities.
J. Permitted investments.
(1) As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the Town of Batavia authorizes
the Supervisor to invest moneys not required for immediate expenditure for
terms not to exceed its projected cash flow needs in the following types of
investments:
(a) Special time deposit accounts.
(b) Certificates of deposit.
(c) Obligations of the United States of America.
(d) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of America
where the payment of principal and interest is guaranteed by the United
States of America.
(e) Obligations of the State of New York.
(f) Obligations issued pursuant to Local Finance Law § 24.00 or § 25.00
(with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality, school
district or district corporation other than the Town of Batavia.
(g) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the general
state statutes governing such entities or whose specific enabling
legislation authorizes such investments.
(h) Certificates of participation (COPs) issued pursuant to General Municipal
Law § 109-b.
(i) Obligations of this local government, but only with any moneys in a
§ 20-2 INVESTMENT POLICY § 20-2
20:7
reserve fund established pursuant to General Municipal Law § 6-c, 6-d,
6-e, 6-g, 6-h, 6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m or 6-n.
(2) All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the
Town of Batavia within such times as the proceeds will be needed to meet
expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were provided and, in the case
of obligations purchased with the proceeds of bonds or notes, shall be payable
or redeemable at the option of the Town of Batavia within two years of the
date of purchase.
K. Authorized financial institutions and dealers. The Town of Batavia shall maintain a
list of financial institutions and dealers approved for investment purposes and
establish appropriate limits to the amount of investments which can be made with
each financial institution or dealer. All financial institutions with which the local
government conducts business must be credit worthy. Banks shall provide their
most recent Consolidated Report of Condition (Call Report) at the request of the
Town of Batavia. Security dealers not affiliated with a bank shall be required to be
classified as reporting dealers affiliated with the New York Federal Reserve Bank,
as primary dealers. The Supervisor is responsible for evaluating the financial
position and maintaining a listing of proposed depositories, trading partners and
custodians. Such listing shall be evaluated at least annually.
L. Purchase of investments.
(1) The Supervisor is authorized to contract for the purchase of investments:
(a) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an authorized
trading partner.
(b) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5G of the General
Municipal Law where such program meets all the requirements set forth
in the Office of the State Comptroller Opinion No. 88-46 and the specific
program has been authorized by the governing board.
(c) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized trading
partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the governing board.
(2) All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of the
local government, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held in the
custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be purchased, sold
or presented for redemption or payment by such bank or trust company only in
accordance with prior written authorization from the officer authorized to
make the investment. All such transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the
Town of Batavia by the bank or trust company. Any obligation held in the
custody of a bank or trust company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law § 10.
(3) The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank or trust
company, as agent of and custodian. for the local government, will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or trust
company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with or become
§ 20-2 BATAVIA CODE § 20-2
20:8
part of the backing for any other deposit or other liabilities. The agreement
shall describe how the custodian shall confirm the receipt and release of the
securities. Such agreement shall include all provisions necessary to provide the
local government a perfected interest in the securities.
M. Repurchase agreements. Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a master repurchase
agreement.
(2) Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to do
business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
(3) Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United States of America and
obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of America.
(4) No substitution of securities will be allowed.
(5) The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
§ 20-2 INVESTMENT POLICY § 20-2
20:9

ARTICLE III
Severability of Provisions
§ 20-3. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as declared by the valid
judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, shall not affect
the validity or enforceability of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 20-3 INVESTMENT POLICY § 20-3
20:11

Chapter 29
NOTIFICATION OF INFORMATION SECURITY BREACHES
§ 29-1. Authority; purpose.
This policy is consistent with the State Technology Law § 208 as added by Chapters 442
and 491 of the Laws of 2005. This policy requires notification to affected New York
residents and nonresidents. New York State values the protection of private information
of individuals. The Town of Batavia is required to notify an individual when data, which
is maintained by the municipality and contains the individual's private information, has
been, or is reasonably believed to have been, compromised.
§ 29-2. When notification required.
The municipality, after consulting with the State's Office of Cyber Security and Critical
Infrastructure Coordination (CSCIC) to determine the scope of the breach and
restoration measures of its compromised data, must notify an individual when it has been
determined that there has been or is reasonably believed to have been a compromise of
the individual's private information through unauthorized disclosure.
§ 29-3. "Compromise of private information" defined.
A compromise of private information means the unauthorized acquisition of unencrypted
computerized data with private information.
§ 29-4. Applicability to encrypted data.
If encrypted data is compromised along with the corresponding encryption key, the data
is considered unencrypted and thus falls under the notification requirements.
§ 29-5. Delay of notification.
Notification may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines that the notification
impedes a criminal investigation. In such case, notification will be delayed only as long
as needed to determine that notification no longer compromises any investigation.
§ 29-6. Method of notification.
The municipality will notify the affected individual directly by one of the following
methods:
A. Written notice;
B. Electronic notice, provided that the person to whom notice is required has expressly
consented to receiving notice in electronic form and a log of each notification is
kept by the municipality that notifies affected persons in such form;
C. Telephone notification, provided that a log of each notification is kept by the
municipality that notifies affected persons; or
D. Substitute notice, if the municipality demonstrates to the State Attorney General
§ 20-3 NOTIFICATION OF INFORMATION SECURITY § 29-6
29:1
§ 29-7. Notification of CSCIC.
The municipality must notify CSCIC as to the timing, content and distribution of the
notices and approximate number of affected persons.
§ 29-8. Notification of Attorney General and Consumer Protection Board.
The municipality must notify the Attorney General and the Consumer Protection Board,
whenever notification to a New York resident is necessary, as to the timing, content and
distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected persons.
§ 29-9. Contents of notification.
Regardless of the method by which notice is provided, the notice must include contact
information for the municipality making the notification and a description of the
categories of information that were, or are reasonably believed to have been, acquired by
a person without valid authorization, including specification of which of the elements of
personal information and private information were, or are reasonably believed to have
been, so acquired.
§ 29-10. Applicability to third-party information.
This policy applies not only to information maintained by the municipality itself, but
also to information maintained on behalf of the municipality by a third party.
§ 29-11. Notification of consumer reporting agencies.
When more than 5,000 New York residents must be notified at one time, then the
municipality must notify the consumer reporting agencies as to the timing, content and
distribution of the notices and the approximate number of affected individuals. This
notice, however, will be made without delaying notice to the individuals.
§ 29-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY — Any person which, for monetary fees, dues,
or on a cooperate nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice
of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on
consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and which
that the cost of providing notice would exceed $250,000, that the affected class
of persons to be notified exceeds 500,000, or that the municipality does not have
sufficient contact information. The following constitute sufficient notice:
(1) E-mail notice when the municipality has an e-mail address for the subject
persons;
(2) Conspicuous posting of the notice on the municipality's web site page, if the
municipality maintains one; and
(3) Notification to major statewide media.
§ 29-6 BATAVIA CODE § 29-12
29:2
uses any means or facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or
furnishing consumer reports. The State Attorney General is responsible for compiling
a list of consumer reporting agencies and furnishing the list upon request to the
municipality.
DATA — Any information created, stored (in temporary or permanent form), filed,
produced or reproduced, regardless of the form or media. Data may include, but is
not limited to, personally identifying information, reports, files, folders, memoranda,
statements, examinations, transcripts, images, communications, electronic or hard copy.
INFORMATION — The representation of facts, concepts, or instructions in a
formalized manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or processing by human
or automated means.
PERSONAL INFORMATION — Any information concerning a natural person which,
because of name, number, personal mark or other identifier, can be used to identify such
natural person.
PRIVATE INFORMATION —
THIRD PARTY — Any nonmunicipal employee such as a contractor, vendor,
consultant, intern, other municipality, etc.
Personal information in combination with any one or more of the following data
elements, when either the personal information or the data element is not encrypted
or encrypted with an encryption key that has also been acquired:
(1) Social security number; or
(2) Driver's license number or non-driver identification card number; or
Account number, credit or debit card number, in combination with any
required security code, access code, or password which would permit access
to an individual's financial account.
(3)
A.
Private information does not include publicly available information that is lawfully
made available to the general public from federal, state, or local government
records.
B.
§ 29-12 NOTIFICATION OF INFORMATION SECURITY § 29-12
29:3

Chapter 34
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204. Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 29-12 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 29-12
34:1

ARTICLE I
Attendance, Training and Removal
[Adopted 3-20-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
§ 34-1. Title.
This article shall be titled "A Local Law to Provide Minimum Requirements for Meeting
Attendance and Training for Members of the Town of Batavia Planning Board and Town
of Batavia Zoning Board of Appeals."
§ 34-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PLANNING BOARD — Planning Board of the Town of Batavia.
TOWN — Town of Batavia.
TOWN BOARD — Town Board of the Town of Batavia.
TOWN CLERK — Town Clerk of the Town of Batavia.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Batavia.
§ 34-3. Findings and purpose.
§ 34-4. Minimum attendance at meetings.
§ 34-5. Minimum training requirements.
A. The Town Board finds that appropriate attendance at meetings and training of
Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board members is essential.
B. The State of New York has recognized the importance of both meeting attendance
and training in its recent amendments to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals statutes (§§ 271 and 267, respectively, of the Town Law).
C. It is the purpose of this article to encourage Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning
Board members to attend their respective Board meetings and to obtain training to
enhance their ability to carry out their duties under law. The Town Board is
prepared to pay the costs associated with meeting attendance and such training as
provided for in the town's budget.
D. It is also the purpose of this article to establish required minimum meeting
attendance along with training and continuing education course requirements for
such members.
A. All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board shall be required
to attend a minimum of 75% of their Board meetings scheduled within a calendar
year.
B. Noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to attendance at meetings
shall be deemed a proper cause for removal from office.
§ 34-1 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 34-5
34:3
§ 34-6. Approved training courses.
Training sessions which relate to the duties of members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
and members of the Planning Board may include programs offered by the New York
State Department of State, New York State Association of Towns, New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, the Genesee County Planning Department,
the New York State Planning Federation, and other such entities, as well as in-house
updates of seminars. The Town Board, after discussion with the Chairpersons of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board, shall annually designate such seminars,
workshops, or continuing education courses which may be offered within a reasonable
distance and which may be helpful to or of assistance to the Zoning Board of Appeals
and/or Planning Board in carrying out its functions in a timely, fair and lawful manner.
§ 34-7. Lack of training not to affect validity of member's actions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the failure of a member of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals to attend the required percentage of meetings or obtain such
training shall not affect said person's appointment to serve on such Board, to entertain
applications, and to vote on such applications, or the validity of such member's actions.
§ 34-8. Procedure for removal of members.
The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Chairperson of the Planning
Board shall notify the Town Board in writing on or about December 1 in any year of any
member who fails to comply with the minimum requirements for meeting attendance
and/or training in any calendar year. In the event a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or Planning Board has failed to complete the minimum attendance and/or
training requirements set forth in §§ 34-4 and 34-5, respectively, then the Town Board
may remove such member for cause as herein provided.
A. All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board shall be required
to attend a minimum of four hours in relevant training courses within one year from
the date of their initial appointment to such Board, attend training sessions of not
less than four hours every one year thereafter and provide proof of attendance to the
Town Clerk. [Amended 8-15-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
B. Noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to training shall be deemed a
proper cause for removal from office.
C. The costs of such seminars, workshops or continuing education courses so
designated shall be a town charge. Members shall also be reimbursed for travel and
meal expenses according to town policies. Such training sessions shall be approved
in advance by the Town Board.
A. Notice. Such member shall be mailed a written notice specifying the nature of the
failure of such member to meet the minimum requirements of § 34-4 and/or 34-5
above.
B. Public hearing. Such notice shall specify a date, not less than 10 or more than 30
days from the date of mailing such notice, when the Town Board shall convene and
hold a public hearing on whether or not such member should be removed from
§ 34-5 BATAVIA CODE § 34-8
34:4
§ 34-9. Removal for cause.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict the Town Board's authority
to remove a member from the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board for cause
(i.e., for other than the reasons enumerated herein). The procedural provisions of § 34-8,
Procedure for removal of members, shall govern any hearing to remove a member for
cause.
§ 34-10. Applicability.
service on such Board. Such notice shall also specify the time and place of such
hearing.
C. Public notice. Public notice of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general
circulation within the town at least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
D. Conduct of hearing. The public hearing on the charges shall be conducted before
the Town Board. The member shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and
to call witnesses to refute the charges. A record of such hearing shall be made. The
decision of the Town Board shall be reduced to writing, together with specific
findings of the Town Board with respect to each charge against such member.
Findings shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office and mailed to the member within
five business days of such filing by certified mail, return receipt.
E. Action by the Town Board. Following the hearing and upon a finding that such
member has not met the minimum meeting attendance and/or training established
by this article, the Town Board may:
(1) Remove such member from the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board
by majority vote of the entire Town Board;
(2) Issue a written reprimand to such member without removing such member
from such Board; or
(3) If the Town Board shall find that the reasons for failing to meet the minimum
meeting attendance and/or training requirements are excusable because of
illness, injury or other good and sufficient cause, the Town Board may elect to
take no action.
A. This article shall apply to all members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning
Board regardless of the date of their appointment to such Board.
B. Prospective members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board shall be
notified of the requirements of this article prior to their appointment to such Board.
§ 34-8 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 34-10
34:5

ARTICLE II
Alternate Members
[Adopted 2-14-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 34-11. Purpose.
This article is enacted by the Town Board of the Town of Batavia pursuant to the
provisions of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law to establish alternate member
positions for the Town of Batavia Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
The purpose of these alternate member positions is to substitute an alternate for a regular
member in the event such regular member is unable to participate at a meeting for any
reason (i.e., conflict of interest, injury, illness, unavailability due to conflicts such as
work, vacation or other personal reasons).
§ 34-12. Title.
This article shall be known as "A Local Law Establishing Alternate Member Positions
for the Town of Batavia Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals."
§ 34-13. Appointment.
Alternate members of the Town of Batavia Planning Board and the ZBA shall be
appointed by resolution of the Batavia Town Board to serve a term of office of two
years. All provisions of New York State statutes, rules and regulations, the Town of
Batavia Zoning Ordinance and all other town rules, regulations and laws applicable
to regular members of the Planning Board and the ZBA, including, but not limited
to, training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest, compensation,
eligibility, vacancy in office, removal and service on other boards, shall also apply to
the alternate member(s) of each respective Board. Only two alternate member positions
shall be permitted for each Board.
§ 34-14. Designation by Chairperson and service.
The Chairperson, or Vice-Chairperson in his or her absence, of the Planning Board or
the ZBA may designate an alternate member to substitute for a regular member when
such member is unable to participate for any reason. When so designated, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such regular member of the
Board. The designation of such alternate member shall be entered into the minutes of the
initial meeting at which the substitution is made.
§ 34-15. Supersession of state law.
All applicable statutes, laws and local ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
article, including, but not limited to, §§ 267 and 271 of New York State Town Law, are
hereby superseded to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
§ 34-11 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 34-15
34:7

Chapter 38
PROCUREMENT POLICY
§ 38-1. Evaluation of purchase.
Every prospective purchase of goods or services shall be evaluated to determine the
applicability of General Municipal Law § 103.
§ 38-2. Formal bids required.
All purchases of supplies or equipment which will exceed $10,000 in the fiscal year or
public works contracts over $20,000 shall be formally bid pursuant to General Municipal
Law § 103.
§ 38-3. Method of obtaining quotes.
§ 38-4. Award to lowest responsible proposal or quote; exception.
The lowest responsible proposal or quote shall be awarded the purchase or public works
contract unless the purchaser prepares a written justification providing reasons why it is
in the best interest of the Town and its taxpayers to make an award to other than the low
bidder. If a bidder is not deemed responsible, facts supporting that judgment shall also
be documented and filed with the record supporting the procurement.
A. All estimated purchases of:
(1) Less than $10,000 but greater than $3,000 require a written request for a
proposal (RFP) and written/fax quotes from three vendors.
(2) Less than $3,000 but greater than $1,000 require an oral request for the goods
and oral/fax quotes from two vendors.
(3) Less than $1,000 but greater than $250 are left to discretion of the purchaser.
B. All estimated public works contracts of:
(1) Less than $20,000 but greater than $10,000 require a written RFP and fax/
proposals from three contractors.
(2) Less than $10,000 but greater than $3,000 require a written RFP and fax/
proposals from two contractors.
(3) Less than $3,000 but greater than $500 are left to the discretion of the
purchaser.
C. Any written RFP shall describe the desired goods, quantity and the particulars of
delivery. The purchaser shall compile a list of all vendors from whom written/fax/
oral quotes have been requested and the written/fax/oral quotes offered.
D. All information gathered in complying with the procedures of this section shall be
preserved and filed with the documentation supporting the subsequent purchase or
public works contract.
§ 34-15 PROCUREMENT POLICY § 38-5
38:1
§ 38-5. Inability to obtain proposals or quotes.
A good-faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of proposals or
quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the required number of proposals or
quotations, the purchaser shall document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In
no event shall the inability to obtain the proposals or quotes be a bar to the procurement.
§ 38-6. Exemptions.
Except when directed by the Town Board, no solicitation of written proposals or
quotations shall be required under the following circumstances:
§ 38-7. Consideration in the solicitation of bids.
The Town requires that consideration in the solicitation of bids or quotes for services,
supplies or contracts be given to:
A. Acquisition of professional services.
B. Emergencies.
C. Sole source situations.
D. Goods purchased from agencies for the blind or severely handicapped.
E. Goods purchased from correctional facilities.
F. Goods purchased from another governmental agency.
G. Goods purchased at auction.
H. Goods purchased for less than $250.
I. Public works contracts for less than $500.
A. Small and/or locally owned businesses, with priority to businesses owned by or
which employ low- or moderate-income persons, as defined by HUD; and
B. MBEs and/or WBEs,5 when appropriate. Solicitation may be undertaken via
advertisements in local publications or advertisements in minority publications or
direct outreach by letter or email to identified state-certified M/WBEs. The Town's
established purchase/contracting thresholds will apply. In an effort to affirmatively
increase procurement and contracting opportunities for minority- and womenowned
business enterprises, the M/WBE must be certified by Empire State
Development (ESD) through the Division of Minority and Women Business
Development (DMWBD).
C. For federally funded projects or activities subject to Section 3 of 24 CFR Part 135
of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended, the Town will,
to the extent feasible, facilitate participation of Section 3 residents and Section 3
businesses in the procurement of goods and services pursuant to its Section 3
Participation Plan. Solicitation may be undertaken via advertisements in local
5. Editor's Note: "MBE" refers to minority-owned businesses; "WBE" refers to woman-owned businesses.
§ 38-5 BATAVIA CODE § 38-7
38:2
§ 38-8. Verification of vendors.
In accordance with Office of Management and Budget (OMB) guidance in 2 CFR 180,
Debarment and Suspension, the Town must verify vendors for purchases of more than
$25,000 worth of goods or services during the year with the Excluded Parties List
System (EPLS) government website, verifying that the vendor has not been suspended
or debarred and retaining documentation as evidence of the Town's verification.
§ 38-9. Intention of policy.
The intention of this policy is to comply fully with the Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, codified
in CFR Part 200 at 200.317 through 200.326 (the "Federal Regulations"), which are
incorporated by reference into this policy and made a part hereof. A complete and
current copy of the Federal Regulations are on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
Where there is inconsistency between this policy and the Federal Regulations, the
Federal Regulations shall control.
§ 38-10. Annual review.
This policy shall be reviewed annually by the Town Board at its organizational meeting
or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
publications encouraging Section 3 participation, or direct outreach by letter or
email to identified Section 3 businesses or individuals included on the Department
of Housing and Urban Development's Section 3 Businesses Registry. The Town's
established purchase/contracting thresholds will apply.
§ 38-7 PROCUREMENT POLICY § 38-10
38:3

Chapter 45
REMOTE WORK POLICY
§ 45-1. Purpose.
This policy outlines guidelines, terms, and conditions for employees who work from
a location other than our offices and provides an agreement between remote work
employees and their department head. Its purpose is to ensure that employees, the Town
of Batavia, and the public that we serve will all benefit from these arrangements.
§ 45-2. Guidelines, terms, and conditions.
A. Eligibility.
(1) All remote work must receive prior approval from your department head using
a form developed from time to time by the Town and maintained in the offices
of the Town Clerk (the "Remote Work Agreement"). To ensure that employee
performance will not suffer in remote work arrangements, the following
should be considered by the employee and their department head when
determining eligibility for remote work:
(a) Can duties be met through basic hardware and software?
(b) Does the remote work location have a reliable internet connection that is
adequate for the job?
(c) Will the remote work location be reasonably quiet and distraction free?
(d) Has the employee proven to be trustworthy, disciplined, and selfmotivated?
(2) A probationary period where work is completed in the Town Office may be
required before approval is given to work remotely.
(3) Not all positions are appropriate or feasible for remote work and an employee's
remote work capability will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Remote work
eligibility will be re-assessed from time to time based on job needs and
employee performance.
B. Work expectations. Work expectations remain the same regardless of whether an
employee works in the Town offices or from a remote location. Employees are
expected to:
(1) Work their full work schedule as determined by their department head;
(2) Dedicate their full attention to their job duties during working hours;
(3) Be accessible by phone and/or email while working, responding to
correspondence within a reasonable amount of time;
(4) Adhere to all conditions in the Employee Handbook and all Town policies
(e.g., conduct, confidentiality, cybersecurity, this Employee Remote Work
§ 38-10 REMOTE WORK POLICY § 45-2
45:1
Policy, Remote Work Agreement, etc.); and
(5) Present themselves in a professional manner whenever working with coworkers
and the public, including observing the dress code during in-person or
video meetings.
C. Schedule. While some flexibility is allowed, the employee must agree to work set
hours as much as possible. These hours will be determined by the department head,
through discussions with the employee. Scheduled work hours should overlap with
the scheduled work hours of team members for as long as is necessary to complete
job duties effectively. Meal and rest breaks as established in the Employee
Handbook should be observed. Schedules may include a mix of remote work and
work with Town Offices.
D. Equipment.
(1) The Town will provide remote employees with equipment and software that is
essential to their jobs (e.g., laptops and cell phones). This equipment will be
listed in the Remote Work Agreement. Any equipment that is provided is
Town property. The Town of Batavia retains control over the property and
reserves the right to monitor said property. Town provided property is to be
used for Town purposes only and the employee is responsible for providing
reasonable measures of keeping the equipment safe from damage or theft,
including the intellectual information contained on the equipment.
(2) Upon termination of employment, all Town property shall be returned to the
Town of Batavia.
E. Insurance, liability, compensation, and benefits.
(1) Remote work does not change the terms and conditions of your employment
with the Town of Batavia. Employees working remotely will still receive full
benefits as outlined in the Employee Handbook, including leave time, health
insurance, and worker's compensation.
(2) Only equipment owned by the Town and on loan to the employee is covered
by the Town's chosen insurer. All other equipment is to be covered by the
employee's personal insurance provider.
(3) No changes will be made to an employee's salary if said employee works from
home. Salaries will increase according to Town policy and successful
performance reviews. Employees working remotely remain eligible for
promotion and skills development programs.
§ 45-2 BATAVIA CODE § 45-2
45:2
Chapter 47
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Manager — See Ch. 60.
§ 45-2 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 45-2
47:1

ARTICLE I
Town Manager
[Adopted 1-29-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
§ 47-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to eliminate the requirement that an individual be an elector
or reside in the Town of Batavia, New York, in order to accept and/or hold the position
of Town Manager.
§ 47-2. Statutory requirements modified.
In the Town of Batavia, Genesee County, the provisions of Public Officers Law § 3,
Subdivision 1, and Town Law § 23 requiring a person to be a resident or elector of the
Town of Batavia shall not prevent a person from holding the office of Town Manager
provided that such person resides in the State of New York.
§ 47-1 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 47-2
47:3

ARTICLE II
Building Inspector and Deputy Building Inspectors
[Adopted 4-15-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 47-3. Residency in Genesee County or adjoining county authorized.
Notwithstanding the provisions of New York State Town Law § 23, Subdivision 1,
and Public Officers Law § 3, Subdivision 1, a person may hold the position of Town
Building Inspector or Deputy Town Building Inspector of the Town of Batavia, New
York, provided that such person resides in the County of Genesee or in any adjoining
county within the State of New York.
§ 47-3 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 47-3
47:5

ARTICLE III
Town Engineer
[Adopted 4-19-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 47-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the County of Genesee in the State of New
York as the residence required of any person who may be appointed and/or serve in the
position of Town Engineer for the Town of Batavia.
§ 47-5. Residency requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of New York State Town Law § 23, Subdivision 1, and
Public Officers Law § 3, Subdivision 1, a person may be appointed and hold the position
of Town Engineer of the Town of Batavia, New York, provided that such person, at the
time of appointment and through his/her term, resides in the County of Genesee within
the State of New York. The Town Engineer of the Town of Batavia, at the time of
appointment and throughout his/her term of office, need not be an elector of the Town
of Batavia, provided he/she is a resident of the County of Genesee of the State of New
York.
§ 47-4 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 47-5
47:7

Chapter 51
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 51, Sexual Harassment Policy, adopted 4-17-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019,
was repealed 8-19-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020. See now Ch. 7, Discrimination and
Harassment Policy.]
§ 47-5 (RESERVED) § 47-5
51:1

Chapter 54
SMOKE-FREE AND SUBSTANCE-FREE POLICY
§ 54-1. Purpose.
This policy has been established to protect and promote the health and well-being of
employees and visitors. Tobacco use is responsible for the premature deaths of over
430,000 Americans each year. Secondhand smoke is responsible for over 50,000 deaths
among non-smokers each year. This policy will help to reduce the death and disease
caused by tobacco and substance use such as heart attacks, lung cancer, oral cancer and
other serious and costly diseases and illnesses. The Town of Batavia has an obligation
to its employees and the public to take action known to protect peoples' health. The
use of tobacco products by employees or visitors compromises the mission of the Town
of Batavia providing a safe and healthy place to conduct business. The policy set forth
below is effective September 1, 2011 for Town of Batavia.
§ 54-2. Tobacco-free and substance-free areas.
The workplace and Town properties are now tobacco-free, alcohol-free and illegalsubstance-
free, without exception: specifically, the buildings and grounds, parks and
recreational areas, and Town-of-Batavia-owned vehicles at all times, and any vehicles
on the property.
§ 54-3. Sign requirements.
Signs stating the policy will be clearly posted on the perimeter of the property, at all
entrances, and other prominent places. No ashtrays or other collection receptacles for
tobacco trash will be placed on the property.
§ 54-4. Compliance.
Compliance with the smoke-free and substance-free policy is mandatory for all
employees and persons visiting, with no exceptions. Enforcement of this policy is the
shared responsibility of all Town of Batavia personnel. All employees are authorized and
encouraged to communicate this policy with courtesy, respect, and diplomacy, especially
with regard to visitors. If difficulties arise with compliance of this policy, notify a
department head. Incidents of smoking, tobacco use, and substance use by employees are
to be documented for supervisor follow-up, as well as evaluated for trends and patterns
of noncompliance.
§ 54-5. Tobacco and substance cessation opportunities.
The Town of Batavia encourages all employees who use tobacco and/or substances to
quit. The Town of Batavia Employee Assistance Program offers support for employees
who are trying to quit smoking or chewing tobacco. Tobacco cessation information
is also available from Royal Employer Services, the Town of Batavia EAP, toll-free
number 1-888-244-0680, or by contacting the EAP Program Coordinator at
lpfalzer@gcasa.org.
§ 47-5 SMOKE-FREE AND SUBSTANCE-FREE POLICY § 54-6
54:1
§ 54-6. Questions.
Any questions regarding the tobacco-free and substance-free property policy should be
directed in writing to the Batavia Town Clerk's Office.
§ 54-6 BATAVIA CODE § 54-6
54:2
Chapter 59
TOWN ENGINEER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11. Residency requirements — See Ch. 47, Art. III.
§ 59-1. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of the Town Engineer in the Town of Batavia.
§ 59-2. Appointment; term of office.
The position of Town Engineer shall be filled by resolution of the Town Board. In
accordance with § 24 of the New York State Town Law, said Town Engineer shall
hold his/her office until the first day of January next succeeding the first biennial Town
election held after the time of appointment.
§ 59-3. Powers and duties; compensation.
The Town Engineer shall be compensated at a rate established by the Town Board for
the following services:
A. To oversee the construction of all Town of Batavia projects performed under
contract, such as public buildings, recreational facilities, parking lots, traffic lights
and controlled studies of waste disposal facilities, water projects, drainage projects,
and dedication of new Town highways;
B. To direct review for site plans and recommend acceptance or revision of
subdivision layouts;
C. To assist with the Town of Batavia's investigations and compliance with the State
Environment Quality Review Act;
D. To supervise engineering activities performed by consultant on roads, bridges and
drainage structures;
E. To assist in investigation of complaints relative to roads, grading, drainage, water
and sewer, as requested;
F. To conduct surveys to establish lines and grades in engineering projects;
G. To provide engineering, planning and related advice to the Town Board and Town
Highway Superintendent and Town agencies;
H. To negotiate and make recommendations to the Town Board regarding contracts for
the provision of engineering and related services to the Town;
I. To oversee development and implementation of inspection and permitting plans and
§ 54-6 TOWN ENGINEER § 59-3
59:1
standards as determined by the Town Board;
J. To oversee and, as necessary or directed by the Town Board, assist with building
inspections or certifications, building code enforcement, and Highway Department
functions;
K. To assist in development and implementation of the Town of Batavia's long-term
capital plans;
L. To oversee the Town's water and sewer systems and new construction and/or
extensions of the water and sewer system;
M. To oversee the Town's Water and Sewer Department and maintenance and
operations of Town facilities and to supervise Town employees in connections
therewith;
N. To attend and participate in meetings as necessary; and
O. To perform such other engineering-related professional services as may, from time
to time, be directed by the Town Board of the Town of Batavia.
§ 59-3 BATAVIA CODE § 59-3
59:2
Chapter 60
TOWN MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 47, Art. I.
§ 60-1. Office established.
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 3-B of the New York State Town Law, there is
hereby established the office of Town Manager in the Town of Batavia, New York.
§ 60-2. Appointment; term of office.
Said position shall be filled by appointment by the Batavia Town Board by a majority
vote of the voting strength of said Board. Said Town Manager shall serve at the pleasure
of the Town Board.
§ 60-3. Powers and duties.
The Town Manager of the Town of Batavia, New York, shall be the chief administrative
officer of the town and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Serve in a confidential and policy advisory position to the Town Board in
connection with all town business and affairs.
B. Research and provide to the Town Board such materials and information, including
reports, as may be necessary to provide the Board with information upon which it
can make decisions.
C. Assist the Town Board in identifying its financial, personnel and material needs and
problems.
D. Undertake studies of town needs and operations and make recommendations to the
Board concerning the same.
E. Assist in the preparation of the agenda for Town Board meetings.
F. Attend all regular and special Board meetings and participate in the same.
G. Consult with and assist the Town Attorney and Town Engineer in the preparation
of any resolutions, ordinances or local laws requiring their services.
H. Prepare suggested or recommended resolutions for Town Board action.
I. Make preliminary review of budget requests and make recommendation concerning
them to the Town Board.
J. Assist the Town Supervisor in the preparation and administration of the town
§ 59-3 TOWN MANAGER § 60-3
60:1
budget.
K. Assist the Town Supervisor in the preparation and maintenance of such fiscal
reports, records and analyses as may be requested.
L. Preliminarily review for Town Board action all invoices received by the town.
M. Assist the Town Board in all billings and collections to the extent allowed by law.
N. Review and make recommendations to the Town Board concerning all purchases to
be made prior to Town Board approval and assist appropriate town officials in the
preparation of bid forms and in the purchase of all materials and supplies as directed
by the Town Board.
O. Keep knowledgeable of state and federal aid programs and evaluate and report to
the Town Board concerning the feasibility of obtaining public grants and aid.
P. Assist the Town Board in making applications under federal and state aid programs.
Q. Make continuing review and reports to the Town Board of all existing and proposed
capital projects.
R. Make organizational studies using such techniques as work distribution, workflow
charting, task analysis, random sampling, work measurement studies, statistical
analysis and system analysis.
S. Evaluate the effectiveness of operating programs in achieving organization
objectives.
T. Make recommendations to develop and maintain sound organization structures, to
improve management methods and procedures and to the effective use of
manpower, money and materials.
U. Develop liaison and cooperative arrangements with other governmental bodies,
with regional organizations, with local institutions and with private organizations;
attend all meetings of the Town Zoning Board of Appeals and such Town Planning
Board meetings as he may choose or as requested by the Town Board; and report
pertinent matters to the Town Board.
V. Gather, assemble and analyze facts, draw conclusions and propose solutions to
problems assigned to him by the Town Board.
W. Prepare for approval of the Town Board and other town agencies informational
releases of significant action as well as other communications to town residents, the
public or other public agencies where and when directed to by the Town Board.
X. Perform such other powers and duties as may be prescribed, modified or revoked
from time to time by the Town Board by resolution.
§ 60-3 BATAVIA CODE § 60-3
60:2
Chapter 70
ZONING LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 70-1. Summary publication authorized.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Town Law §§ 264 and 265, the Town of Batavia may,
pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, enact zoning laws and amendments thereto
without publishing after enactment the full text thereof, provided that publication is
made of summaries of the substantive provisions of such zoning laws and amendments.
§ 70-2. Effect on other laws.
Insofar as the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other
local law or act, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
§ 60-3 ZONING LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 70-2
70:1

Part II, General Legislation
§ 70-2 ZONING LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 70-2
70:3

Chapter 76
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 169.
§ 70-2 ANIMALS § 70-2
76:1

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 12-15-2010 by L.L. No. 4-20106]
§ 76-1. Title.
The title of this article shall be "Dog Control Law of the Town of Batavia."
§ 76-2. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York, together with any future modifications thereof. All provisions of
said Article 7 are applicable and incorporated herein except where modified hereby.
The relevant portions of the Conservation Law and Public Health Law also apply, and
enforcement of this article is intended by application of the Penal Law.
§ 76-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and well-being of persons,
property, wildlife, and dogs by imposing restrictions on the keeping and running at large
of dogs within the Town. This article is being enacted because the running at large and
other uncontrolled behavior of dogs has caused physical harm to persons and damage to
property and created a nuisance within the Town.
§ 76-4. Definitions.
All terms defined in § 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall have the same
meaning as used herein unless specifically modified. For the purpose of this article, the
terms as hereinafter used are defined as follows:
AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS LAW — The Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York in effect during the life of this article.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility operated by a veterinarian or certified animal care
persons for the purpose of treating sick or injured animals.
CONFINED — A dog is securely confined or restrained when it is kept on the owner's
premises either within a building, kennel or other suitable enclosure or securely fastened
on a chain, wire, or other effective tether of such length and so arranged that the animal
cannot reach or endanger any person on any adjacent premises or on any public street,
way or place; or, if the animal is being transported by the owner, it is securely confined
in a crate, on a tether or in another container or so restrained within an enclosed vehicle
in a safe manner consistent with the dog's good health so that it cannot be expected
to escape therefrom. (See Agriculture and Markets Law §§ 353 and 356, cruelty to
animals.)
DOG — Male and female, licensed or unlicensed, members of the species
Canisfamiliaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any person authorized, by the Town Board, county or
state legislature from time to time, directed or permitted to enforce the provisions of this
6. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Article I, Dog Control, adopted 12-27-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989.
§ 76-1 ANIMALS § 76-4
76:3
article or the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
DOG OWNER —
PUREBRED BREEDER — A purebred breeder is a person, firm, association or
corporation who raises dogs for show, competition or sale as certified by the Town
Clerk.
RECREATIONAL AREA — Any real property owned by the Town, county or state
located in the Town which is used for recreational purposes by the public, including but
not limited to parks or playgrounds.
RUN AT LARGE—To permit dogs freedom to run in a public place or on private lands
without the knowledge, consent and approval of the owner of such lands, or running on
any public highway.
TOWN — Any designated area within the boundary lines of the Town of Batavia.
§ 76-5. Licensing; fees.
The person, persons, firm, association or corporation who or which:
(1) Purchased the license for the dog and is the registered owner;
(2) Professes ownership of the dog;
(3) Has custody or control of the dog;
(4) Harbors or is otherwise responsible for the dog;
Is the parent, guardian or head of household of any minor under 18 years of
age who owns or harbors the dog; or
(5)
(6) Brings into or permits the dog to come into the town.
A.
For proof purposes, any person harboring, possessing or controlling a dog for a
period of one week prior to the filing of any complaint charging a violation of this
article or the Agriculture and Markets Law shall be held and deemed to be the
owner of such dog for the purposes of this article. Parents, guardians or heads of
household, as mentioned above, shall be deemed to have custody and control of
dogs owned or harbored by minors and shall be responsible for compliance with
this article and the Agriculture and Markets Law in the Town.
B.
A. All dogs in the Town of Batavia of the age of four months or older must be licensed
with the Town Clerk and are required to present a current certificate of rabies
vaccination at the time of licensing or renewal of an existing license.
B. All dog licenses will be for a period of one year and will expire at the end of the
month one year from the date of issue. If an owner has multiple dogs, he/she may
request to have all licenses expire at the same time as a previously issued license
(not subject to prorating).
C. Fees for licensing of dogs:
(1) The fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be set by the Town Board by
resolution. It shall include a state assessment pursuant to § 110-3 of the New
§ 76-4 BATAVIA CODE § 76-5
76:4
§ 76-6. Change of ownership or address; lost, stolen or dead dogs.
York State Agriculture and Markets law, and additional funds for enumeration
as provided for by § 110-4(a) of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
(2) The fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be set by the Town Board by
resolution. It shall include a state assessment pursuant to § 110-3 of the New
York State Agriculture and Markets Law, and additional funds for
enumeration as provided for by § 110-4 (a) of the Agriculture and Markets
Law.
(3) Enumeration fee. When the Town Board determines the need for a dog
enumeration, a fee set by the Town Board by resolution shall be assessed to all
dogs found unlicensed or not renewed at the time enumeration is conducted.
(4) Seniors. For dog owners 65 years of age or older, one half of the fee retained
by the Town will be waived.
(5) Purebred licenses. The fee for purebred licenses shall be set by the Town
Board by resolution. It shall include a state assessment pursuant to § 110-3 of
the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, and additional funds for
enumeration as provided for by § 110-4(a) of Agriculture and Markets Law.
(6) Service dogs. The Town of Batavia requires licenses for all dogs living or
harbored within the Town; however, the Town fee for licensing of all types of
service dogs listed in § 110-2 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, including
but not limited to, guide dogs, service dogs, hearing dogs, and detection dogs,
is waived.
(7) Shelters. The Town of Batavia does not allow the licensing of dogs by a
shelter.
(8) Replacement tag. For lost tags, a replacement fee will be set by the Town
Board by resolution for the replacement of any lost tag.
(9) Late fee. There may be a late fee set by the Town Board by resolution for any
license 60 days past due.
(10) Impoundment fees shall be set by resolution by the Town Board, with
minimum amounts as set forth in § 117 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
D. Fees listed in Subsection C above, that are in addition to those required by § 110 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law, shall become the property of the Town.
A. Change of ownership or address. In the event of a change in the ownership of any
dog which has been assigned an official identification number or in the address of
the dog owner of record, the dog owner of record shall, within 10 days of such
change, file with the Town Clerk a written report of such change. Such owner of
record shall be liable for any violation of Subdivision 1 of § 112 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law or this article until such filing is made or until the dog is licensed
in the name of the new owner.
B. Lost or stolen dog. The owner of any dog which has been assigned an official
§ 76-5 ANIMALS § 76-6
76:5
§ 76-7. Dog Control Officer.
The Town Board will, by special resolution, maintain the appointment of a Town
Dog Control Officer as required by § 113 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, setting
compensation therein. Such officer shall have authority as set forth in Subdivision 4 of
§ 113 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and shall be responsible for enforcing the
Agriculture and Markets Law and this article of the Town Code. The Town Dog Control
Officer is hereby authorized to issue an appearance ticket pursuant to § 150.20 of the
Criminal Procedure Law, to serve a summons and to serve and execute any other order
or process in the execution of the provisions of this article as specified in Subdivision
4 of § 113 and Subdivision 2(c) of § 124 of the Agriculture and Markets Law. The Dog
Control Officer shall maintain all reports required by Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law, specifically Subdivisions 5 and 6 of § 113. By agreement, the Town may
appoint a Dog Control Officer used by Genesee County or one shared with any other
municipality.
§ 76-8. Dog enumeration.
The Town will complete a Town dog enumeration every three years, and dog owners
discovered to be in violation of the Agriculture and Markets Law or this article will
be served or posted a ten-day notice of delinquency requesting the owner to come
into compliance. Thereafter, should the dog owner fail to come into compliance within
the ten-day period, the Dog Control Officer will initiate prosecution of such act as a
violation under the Penal Law in accordance with § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law and this article. Completed dog enumeration reports will be kept on file with the
Town Clerk.
§ 76-9. Night quarantine.
The Town adopts the same night quarantine of dogs invoked by the Genesee County
Legislature on April 9, 1980, in Resolution No. 89, which resolution requires that all
dogs within the County shall be securely confined by dog owners (see Section 10,
Subdivision B for exception) between sunset and one hour after sunrise. Violations of
this quarantine shall be punishable in accordance with the Agriculture and Markets Law
and this article, and dogs may be seized or destroyed as authorized by Agriculture and
Markets Law § 123. (See attached copy of Genesee County Legislature Resolution No.
identification number and has been lost or stolen shall, within 10 days of the
discovery of such loss or theft, first contact the Genesee County Animal Shelter and
then file with the Town Clerk a written report of such loss or theft and shall comply
with Subdivision 2 of § 112 of the Agriculture and Markets Law. In the case of a
loss or theft, the dog owner of record shall not be liable for any violation of this
article committed after such report is filed.
C. Dog's death. The dog owner of record shall notify the Town Clerk of the dog's death
either prior to renewal of the license or upon the time of such renewal as set forth
in Subdivision A of § 109 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and shall otherwise
comply with Subdivision 3 of § 112 of the Agriculture and Markets Law. Failure to
so notify the Town Clerk of the death of a dog as required herein shall constitute a
violation of this article and the dog owner of record shall be held liable.
§ 76-6 BATAVIA CODE § 76-9
76:6
89 of 1980.7
§ 76-10. Restrictions.
§ 76-11. Seizure of dogs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any dog owner in the town to permit or allow a dog to:
(1) Violate the county night quarantine noted in § 76-9 above;
(2) Run at large unless the dog is restrained by an adequate leash or unless it is
accompanied by its owner or a responsible person able to control it by
command, or on its owner's property. For the purpose of this article, a dog or
dogs hunting in the company of a hunter or hunters shall be considered as
accompanied by their owner.
(3) Engage in habitual loud howling, barking, crying or whining or conduct itself
in such a manner so as to unreasonably or habitually disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons other than the owner of such dogs.
(4) Uproot, dig into, upset or otherwise damage any vegetables, lawns, flowers,
garden beds, garbage containers or other property not belonging to the owner
of such dog.
(5) Chase, jump upon or at or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as to
reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury except when such person may be on the
owner's private property without said owner's consent.
(6) Habitually chase, run alongside or bark at motor vehicles, cyclists and/or
pedestrians while on a public street or highway or upon public or private
property other than property of the owner or harborer of said dog.
(7) Create a nuisance by defecating, urinating or digging on public or private
property other than the property of said owner.
(8) Allow a female dog to be off the owner's premises when in heat except when
transporting such dog to a veterinarian's office or when involved in a
formalized, controlled breeding program.
(9) Run at large on any school premises or recreational areas or the sidewalks
adjacent thereto.
B. Establishment of the fact or facts that a dog has committed any of the acts
prohibited by this article shall be presumptive evidence against the dog owner that
he/she has failed to properly confine, leash or control his/her dog.
A. Town, county and state Dog Control Officers and/or police officers may seize any
dog found:
(1) Not to be identified and not on the owner's property, or not to be licensed
7. Editor's Note: County Resolution No. 89 of 1980 is on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 76-9 ANIMALS § 76-11
76:7
§ 76-12. Holding periods and impoundment fees.
Following seizure of a dog pursuant to this article it shall be impounded pursuant to
§ 117 of Agriculture and Markets Law, and the fees will be as set forth in § 76-5C(10)
of this article. Impoundment fees shall be paid to the Town of Batavia.
§ 76-13. Forfeiture, adoption and euthanization.
All dogs seized pursuant to this article will be subject to forfeiture, adoption and
euthanization as set forth in § 117 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and the County
Animal Shelter rules and regulations. The Town hereby encourages that all dogs adopted
following seizure pursuant to this article be spayed or neutered before or after release
from impoundment as the County Animal Shelter might require. (See § 117, Subdivision
7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.)
§ 76-14. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by either the Town Dog Control Officer, county or state
Dog Control Officers and/or police officers.
§ 76-15. Penalties for offenses.
whether on the owner's property or not (see Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 117); or
(2) Running at large in violation of the above quarantine or restrictions.
B. To effect seizure, officers may only use such degree of force as shall be necessary
to gain control over the dog without intentionally injuring or harming the dog, and
such dog shall be impounded and disposed of pursuant to § 117 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law. Officers are not authorized hereby to enter a building in order to
seize a dog without permission of the building owner. When permission is not given
and probable cause exists to believe that a dog is in the building and is in violation
of the Agriculture and Markets Law or this article, then an officer can proceed
before a court of law to obtain a warrant to enter the building to seize the dog by
application of Criminal Procedure Law Article 690. The Town Dog Control Officer
will maintain records of seized, impounded, forfeited and adopted dogs as required
by § 117 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and by the Genesee County Animal
Shelter.
C. The seizure of any dog shall not relieve any owner from any violation provided for
by the Agriculture and Markets Law and this article.
D. No liability for damages or otherwise shall be incurred on account of the seizure,
euthanization or adoption of any dog seized pursuant to this article on the part of
the Town, county or state Dog Control Officers or police officers. (See Agriculture
and Markets Law § 117, Subdivision 11.)
A. It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in § 118 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law, for:
(1) Any dog owner to fail to license any dog;
§ 76-11 BATAVIA CODE § 76-15
76:8
§ 76-16. Dangerous dogs.
Dogs believed to be dangerous to human beings or domesticated or protected animals
will be proceeded against pursuant to § 123 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 76-17. Disposition of fines, penalties and/or bail.
All money collected by the Town Court as a fine, penalty and/or bail forfeiture pursuant
to this article or Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall become the property
of the Town.
§ 76-18. Complaints.
(2) Any dog owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by Agriculture
and Markets Law § 111;
(3) Any dog owner to violate the night quarantine noted above;
(4) Any dog owner to knowingly affix any false or improper identification tag; or
(5) Any dog owner to violate any of the restrictions listed in this article.
B. Upon a violation of this article, the Town Dog Control Officer, county and state
Dog Control Officers and/or police officers may proceed in accordance with § 118
of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
C. Fines and penalties for any violation of this article will be in amounts set forth in
§ 118, Subdivision 2(a) of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
D. Violations of this article shall be prosecuted pursuant to the Penal Law (see § 118,
Subdivision 2, of the Agriculture and Markets Law).
E. The Town Dog Control Officer may serve appearance tickets personally upon
violating dog owners as required by law.
A. Any person who observes a dog in violation of this article may file a complaint with
the Town Dog Control Officer, county or state Dog Control Officers and/or police
officers specifying the nature of the violation, the date thereof, a description of the
dog and the name and address, if known, of the owner of the dog.
B. Upon receipt by the Town Dog Control Officer, county or state Dog Control
Officers and/or police officers of any such complaint, they may investigate said
complaint or they may summon the alleged owner to appear in person before the
Town Justice for a hearing, at which both the complainant and owner shall have an
opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present evidence. If, after such
hearing, the Town Justice decides that further action is warranted, he/she may
order:
(1) The dog to be declared a vicious or dangerous dog to be restrained by collar
and leash at all times whether on or off the owner's property; and/or
(2) Such other remedy as may be warranted by the circumstances in such case
(including euthanasia).
§ 76-15 ANIMALS § 76-18
76:9
C. A violation of any order issued by a Town Justice under the provisions of this
section shall be an offense punishable, upon conviction thereof, as provided in
§ 76-15 of this article.
§ 76-18 BATAVIA CODE § 76-18
76:10
Chapter 83
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 122.
§ 83-1. Conduct authorized; restrictions.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of
bingo within the territorial limits of the Town of Batavia, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and Article 19-B of the Executive
Law, and the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than an authorized
organization licensed under the provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted to
conduct such games.
B. No bingo game shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased
premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a
percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game.
C. The entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful
purpose of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
D. Not more than $1 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any room or
place in which any game or games of chance are to be held, operated and conducted
under any license issued under this chapter, which admission fee, upon payment
thereof, shall entitle the person paying the same to a card entitling him to participate
without additional charge in all regular games of chance to be played under such
license on such occasion, and no charge in excess of $1 shall be made for a single
opportunity to participate in all special games to be played under such license on
such occasion.
E. No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this chapter
shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be or has been played, or
the prizes awarded or to be awarded by means of newspapers, radio, television or
sound trucks or by means of billboards, posters or handbills or by any other means
addressed to the general public, except that one sign not exceeding 60 square feet
in area may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be
played, and an additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises
where the prize or prizes are displayed, and additional signs may be displayed upon
any fire-fighting equipment belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer fire
company or upon any first-aid or rescue squad equipment belonging to any licensee
which is a first-aid or rescue squad, in and throughout the community or
communities served by such volunteer fire company or such first-aid or rescue
§ 76-18 BINGO § 83-1
83:1
§ 83-2. When effective.
This chapter is to be a part of the general ordinance of the Town of Batavia, Genesee
County, New York, and shall take effect immediately upon adoption, publication and
posting and after having been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the
Town of Batavia, and it shall become effective the day following such approval by the
electors.8
squad, as the case may be.
F. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250.
G. No series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $1,000.
H. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in
the management or operation of such game.
I. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or
operation of such game.
J. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of any
provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor.
K. No games of bingo shall be conducted under any license issued by the Town of
Batavia on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved 6-10-1958.
§ 83-1 BATAVIA CODE § 83-2
83:2
Chapter 89
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Inspector — See Ch. 47, Art. II.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 93.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Sewer use — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 89-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code) and the State Energy
Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in this Town. This chapter is
adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise
provided in the Uniform Code, other state law, or other section of this chapter, all
buildings, structures, and premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Town of Batavia as
appointed by the Town Board, who shall have all qualifications, duties and powers to
administer and enforce all of the provisions in this chapter in the same manner as the
Code Enforcement Officer.[Added 12-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 89-4 of this chapter. The term
"building permit" shall also include a building permit which is renewed, amended or
extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY or CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 89-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer appointed
pursuant to § 89-3B of this chapter. Whenever the term "Code Enforcement Officer"
appears in this chapter, it shall be interpreted to mean "and/or the Building
Inspector."[Amended 12-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer, all
inspectors; and all Building Inspectors.[Amended 12-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
COMPLIANCE ORDER—An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to § 89-15A of this chapter.
§ 83-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-2
89:1
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as currently in
effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 89-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT—A permit issued pursuant to § 89-10 of this chapter. The term
"operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is renewed, amended or
extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited
partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association, or any other legal or commercial
entity of any kind or description.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board
established by the Uniform Code to hear appeals from determinations of the Code
Enforcement Officer made pursuant to the Property Maintenance Code.[Added
2-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 89-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 89-7D of this
chapter.
TOWN — The Town of Batavia.
UNIFORM CODE—The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 89-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code and this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits, certificates of
occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance
inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all
other inspections required or permitted under any provision of this chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
§ 89-2 BATAVIA CODE § 89-3
89:2
§ 89-4. Building permits.
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 89-15A, Compliance orders, of this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To direct applicants to the Town Clerk for payment of fees as established by
the Town Board of this Town;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Town's attorney, to pursue such legal actions and
proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code and this chapter, or to abate or correct conditions not in compliance with
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred upon the
Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by Town Board. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience related to building
construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain
such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and other
training as the State of New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and
the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as such for any
reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Town Board to serve as Acting Code
Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term
of his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Town Board to act under the
supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code
Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties
conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New York shall
require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and
the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors shall be fixed
from time to time by the Town Board of this Town.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this
section, a building permit shall be required for any work which must conform to the
Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including, but not limited to, the
construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, relocation or
§ 89-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-4
89:3
demolition of any building or structure or any portion thereof, and the installation
of a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is required without
first having obtained a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the following
categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures associated with
one- or two-family dwellings or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) which are used for tool and storage sheds, playhouses or similar
uses, provided the gross floor area is less than 144 square feet (13.38 square
meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated with a oneor
two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family dwelling
or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where such pools are
designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches and are installed entirely
above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure surrounding a
swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a surcharge or
impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a one- or twofamily
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine inches in
height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or
cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not alter the
equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the equipment's original
specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or portion
thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which affects egress;
§ 89-4 BATAVIA CODE § 89-4
89:4
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any building
system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection system for any
period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work. The
exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for work in any
category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not be deemed an
authorization for work to be performed in violation of the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit shall be made
in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Town Board. The
application shall be signed by the owner of the property where the work is to be
performed or by an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include
such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit a
determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended work complies
with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code. The
application shall include or be accompanied by the following information and
documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where the work is
to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in accordance
with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or specifications)
which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed
professional engineer where so required by the Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of the work
proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and
proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location of any existing
or proposed well or septic system, the location of the intended work, and
the distances between the buildings and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted as part of an
application for a building permit unless they satisfy the requirements set forth in
Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction documents which are accepted as part
§ 89-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-4
89:5
of the application for a building permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction
documents shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at
the work site so as to be available for use by the Code Enforcement personnel.
However, the return of a set of accepted construction documents to the applicant
shall not be construed as authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that
a building permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall be
examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy Code. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the proposed work is in
compliance with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly displayed at the
work site and shall remain visible until the authorized work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which were submitted
with and accepted as part of the application for the building permit. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify
the Code Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that such change warrants a new or amended building permit,
such change shall not be made until and unless a new or amended building permit
reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized work is
commenced within six months following the date of issuance. Building permits
shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A building permit which has
become invalid or which has expired pursuant to this subsection may be renewed
upon application by the permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval
of the application by the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her sole discretion for
good cause shown, provided that a minimum of only two such extensions may be
granted for periods not exceeding three months each.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that a building permit was issued in error because of incorrect,
inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for which a building permit
was issued violates the Uniform Code or the Energy Code, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall revoke the building permit or suspend the building permit until such
time as the permit holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code and all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 89-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the time of submission of an
§ 89-4 BATAVIA CODE § 89-4
89:6
§ 89-5. Construction inspections.
§ 89-6. Stop-work orders.
application for a building permit, for an amended building permit, or for renewal of
a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible and exposed
until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer or by an inspector
authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer. The permit holder shall notify the
Code Enforcement Officer when any element of work described in Subsection B of
this section is ready for inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the construction
process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit has been
completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as
satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to where the
work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code. Work not in
compliance with any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy Code
shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected,
and found satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 89-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior to or at the time of each
inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue stop-work
orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a stopwork
order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be contrary
§ 89-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-6
89:7
§ 89-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy Code, without
regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been
issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to whether such
work is or is not work for which a building permit is required, and without
regard to whether a building permit has or has not been issued for such work;
or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being performed
without the required building permit, or under a building permit that has
become invalid, has expired, or has been suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be dated and
signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or reasons for issuance,
and if applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before work will be
permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the stopwork
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
(and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the permit holder) personally or by
certified mail. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required,
to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their
agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stopwork
order, personally or by registered or certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy
of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the owner of the
affected property, the permit holder and any other person performing, taking part in
or assisting in the work shall immediately cease all work which is the subject of the
stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be the exclusive
remedy available to address any event described in Subsection A of this section,
and the authority to issue a stop-work order shall be in addition to, and not in
substitution for or limitation of, the right and authority to pursue any other remedy
or impose any other penalty under § 89-15, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of
this chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for any work which is the
subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or portions thereof,
which are converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification
§ 89-6 BATAVIA CODE § 89-7
89:8
to another. Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance
if the work which was the subject of the building permit was completed in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code
and, if applicable, the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from
one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code. The Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer
shall inspect the building, structure or work prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance. In addition, where applicable, the following
documents, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by
such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code Enforcement
Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special
inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not applicable to an
entire structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to whether the
sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of the
building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of issuance.
§ 89-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-7
89:9
§ 89-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a property within
this Town shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any fire or explosion
involving any structural damage, electrical fire or damage, fuel-burning appliance,
chimney or gas vent.
§ 89-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Town shall be identified and addressed in
accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 93 of the Code of the Town of
Batavia, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 89-10. Operating permits.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a
temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a building or structure,
or a portion thereof, prior to completion of the work which is the subject of a
building permit. However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the
building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate,
may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection
equipment which has been installed is operational, and that all required means of
egress from the building or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement
Officer may include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and
intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be effective for a period
of time, not to exceed three months, which shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified
period of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code. For good cause show, in his
or her sole discretion, the Code Enforcement Officer may allow a maximum of two
extensions for periods not exceeding three months each.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of
the Code Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or
suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 89-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the time of submission of an
application for a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or for a
temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using the
§ 89-7 BATAVIA CODE § 89-10
89:10
categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities
exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or
2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and
incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible dust as
a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial
potential hazard to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted by
the Town Board of this Town.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of
building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to obtain an operating
permit prior to commencing such activity or operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating permit shall be
in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Town Board. Such
application shall include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that
quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of the Uniform
Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that tests or reports are
necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an
operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in
Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require a separate operating permit for each such activity, or the Code
Enforcement Officer may, in his or her discretion, issue a single operating permit to
apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for such period of
time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating permit issued for an area
of public assembly and not to exceed three years in any other case, as shall be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions.
The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon application to the
Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of such
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 89-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-10
89:11
§ 89-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that any activity or building for which an operating permit was issued
does not comply with any applicable provision of the Uniform Code, such operating
permit shall be revoked or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 89-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the time of submission of an
application for an operating permit, for an amended operating permit, or for reissue
or renewal of an operating permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings
and structures shall be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector
designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures
which contain an area of public assembly shall be performed at least once
every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures
being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at least once every 12
months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple dwellings not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all nonresidential buildings, structures,
uses and occupancies not included in Subsection A(1) and (2) shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A of
this section, a firesafety and property maintenance inspection of any building,
structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may also be performed by the
Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement
Officer at any time upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected
or an authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of
a written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer
of any other information, reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to
be reliable, giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; provided, however,
that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as permitting an inspection under
any circumstances under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection
is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this chapter
shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New
York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control ("OFPC") and the New York State
Fire Administrator under Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a building or structure which contains an area of
§ 89-10 BATAVIA CODE § 89-11
89:12
§ 89-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints which allege or
assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process
for responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code
Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 89-13. Recordkeeping.
public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of such building or structure at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a building or structure occupied as a dormitory if
OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such
building or structure at least once every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not included in Subsection
A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such multiple dwelling at intervals not exceeding
the interval specified in Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building, structure, use or
occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC
performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such
nonresidential building, structure, use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding
the interval specified in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 89-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior to or at the time each inspection
is performed pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not apply to inspections
performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to be in
violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected property and any
other person who may be responsible for the violation with notice of the violation
and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in
the manner described in § 89-15, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected, performing an
inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated or corrected, preparing a final
written report reflecting such abatement or correction, and filing such report with
the complaint.
§ 89-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-13
89:13
§ 89-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 89-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by all Code Enforcement personnel, including
records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by §§ 89-4
through 12, inclusive, of this chapter.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection during normal
business hours. All plans and records pertaining to buildings or structures, or
appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for at least the minimum time period so
required by state law and regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Town Board of this
Town a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including a report and summary of all
transactions and activities described in § 89-13, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and
a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of State, on
behalf of this Town, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the
activities of this Town relative to administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York State
Department of State, provide to the New York State Department of State, from the
records and related materials this Town is required to maintain, excerpts,
summaries, tabulations, statistics and other information and accounts of the
activities of this Town in connection with administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to order, in
writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure, or premises in violation of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the
§ 89-13 BATAVIA CODE § 89-15
89:14
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance order. The compliance order
shall be in writing; be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify
the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this
chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified condition or activity; specify
the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably
necessary for achieving compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within
the specified period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance order, or
a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property personally or by
registered or certified mail. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but
not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any
builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or
their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being performed
at the affected property personally or by registered or certified mail; provided,
however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector are
authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law, any person
who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter,
or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate
of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other
notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision
of this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day
or part thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties provided
by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the
Town of Batavia.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of this
Town, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct, or
abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not
by way of limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is in
violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or
any stop-work order, compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be commenced
in the name of this Town, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the
requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or
structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. No action
or proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Town Board of this Town.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be the
exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any violation described in this
§ 89-15 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-15
89:15
§ 89-16. Fees. [Amended 2-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Town Board of this Town.
Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution. The
fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee
schedule shall be charged and collected for the submission of applications, the issuance
of building permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits, certificates
of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits, fire
safety and property maintenance inspections, applications to the Property Maintenance
Board of Appeals, and other actions of the Code Enforcement Officer described in or
contemplated by this chapter.
§ 89-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Town Board of this Town may, by resolution, authorize the Town Supervisor of this
Town to enter into an agreement, in the name of this Town, with other governments to
carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such agreement does not violate any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR,
or any other applicable law.
§ 89-18. Property Maintenance Board of Appeals. [Added 2-20-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
The Property Maintenance Board of Appeals shall consist of three members appointed
by the Town Board. Terms of office shall be for three years, and shall be overlapping
with no two terms ending in the same year. The Town Board shall determine the
compensation of the members on an annual basis, and the acceptance of compensation
by any Board member shall not disqualify the member from serving on the Board under
any provision of the Uniform Code.
§ 89-19. Code-specific provisions. [Added 2-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
The following standards shall govern the application of the Uniform Code, unless
otherwise established by the Property Maintenance Code:
section, and each remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to,
and not in substitution for or limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified
in this section, in § 89-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section
of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in
this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in § 89-6,
Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this chapter, or in any
other applicable law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and
penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for
or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of the Executive
Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any
time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty
specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of the Executive Law.
A. Weeds. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of 10 inches.
§ 89-15 BATAVIA CODE § 89-19
89:16
B. Insect screens. Insect screens shall be supplied from May 1 to October 31 of each
year.
C. Heat supply. Heat shall be supplied from October 1 to May 31 of each year.
D. Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
during the period from October 1 to May 31 of each year.
§ 89-19 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 89-19
89:17

Chapter 93
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 93-1. Findings and purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Town of Batavia. Buildings
and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire, the elements, age or
general deterioration. Vacant buildings not properly secured at doorways and windows
also serve as an attractive nuisance for young children who may be injured therein,
as well as point of congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building
may also serve as a place of rodent infestation thereby creating a health menace to the
community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safety, health, protection
and general welfare of persons and property in the Town of Batavia by requiring such
unsafe buildings to be repaired or demolished and removed.
§ 93-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "A Local Law Regulating Unsafe
Buildings in the Town of Batavia, New York."
§ 93-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used for residential, business,
agricultural or industrial purpose.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code Enforcement Officer for the Town of Batavia or such other person
appointed by the Town Board to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
UNSAFE BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have any or all of the
following defects shall be deemed "unsafe buildings":
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle
to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside
of the middle third of its base.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
B.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which
the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe
for the purpose used.
C.
§ 89-19 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 93-3
93:1
§ 93-4. Inspection and report.
When in the opinion of the enforcement officer or upon receipt of information that a
building or structure is an unsafe building as defined § 93-3 hereof, the enforcement
officer shall cause or make an inspection of the same and report in writing to the
Town Board his findings and recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and
removal.
§ 93-5. Order to repair or demolish and remove.
The Town Board shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution determine, if in
its opinion the report so warrants, that such building is unsafe and dangerous and order
its repair, if the same can be safely repaired, or its demolition and removal and further
order that a notice be served upon the persons and in the manner provided herein.
§ 93-6. Notice; application to Supreme Court.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become
dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants
or the people of the Town of Batavia.
D.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary or
which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are
unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work
injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
E.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live
therein.
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having
insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of escape.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure
members of the public or property.
H.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the Town of Batavia.
I.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Chapter 235, Zoning, of this Code and
any other applicable law of the Town of Batavia.
J.
Any building or structure which remains vacant and unattended continuously for a
period of one year or longer without adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized
entry.
K.
A. The notice shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the premises;
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or dangerous;
§ 93-3 BATAVIA CODE § 93-6
93:2
§ 93-7. Service of notice.
Said notice shall be served personally upon the owner or some one of the owner's
executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested
or contingent interest in the property as shown by the records of the Batavia Town
Assessor, Town of Batavia Tax Collector or in the office of the Genesee County Clerk.
If no such person can be reasonably found, such notice shall be served by mailing both
by regular and certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner or
some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or other person
having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as shown by the above records. If such
notice is served by regular or certified mail, a copy of such notice is to be posted on the
premises.
§ 93-8. Filing of notice.
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of the Genesee
County Clerk, which notice shall be filed by such Clerk in the same manner as a notice
of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules and shall have
the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein provided. A notice so filed shall be
effective for a period of one year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may
be vacated upon the order of a judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent
of the Town Attorney. The County Clerk shall mark such notice and any record or
docket thereof as canceled of record upon the presentation and filing of such consent or
a certified copy of such order. In addition, copies of said notice and consent or certified
copy of such order shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Batavia.
§ 93-9. Hearing, determination and order.
(3) An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe and
secure or demolished and removed;
(4) A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall commence
within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be completed within 60
days thereafter, unless for good cause shown such time shall be extended; and
(5) A date, time and place for a hearing before the Town Board in relation to such
dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be scheduled not less than
15 business days from the date of service of the notice.
B. The notice shall further state that in the event of the refusal or neglect of the person
so notified to comply with the said order of the Town Board and after the hearing,
the Town Board may provide for the repairing and securing or demolition and
removal of such building either by town employees or by contract and that said
expenses will be assessed back against the owner in accordance with § 93-11 of this
chapter.
C. As an alternative, the Town Board may, in its discretion, elect to direct the
enforcement officer to apply to the Supreme Court of the State of New York for an
order directing that the building be repaired and secured or demolished and
removed.
§ 93-6 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 93-9
93:3
§ 93-10. Emergency cases.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent danger to the
life, safety or health of any person or property unless an unsafe building is immediately
repaired and secured or demolished, the Town Board may by resolution authorize
the Building Inspector to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe
building. The expenses of such repair or demolition shall be a charge against the real
property on which it is located and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided in
§ 93-11 herein.
§ 93-11. Assessment of expenses.
All expenses incurred by the town in connection with the proceedings to repair and
secure or demolish and remove an unsafe building or structure, including the costs of
actual removal of such building or structure, shall be assessed against the real property
on which such building or structure is located and shall be levied and collected in the
same manner as provided in Article 15 of the Town Law for the levy and collection for
a special ad valorem levy.
A. At the time and place specified in the notice issued pursuant to § 93-6 of this
chapter, the Town Board shall conduct a hearing to review the resolution and order
it adopted pursuant to § 93-5 hereof and to determine whether the person served
with the notice pursuant to § 93-7 hereof has refused or neglected to comply with
the order of the Town Board. The hearing shall be conducted informally, and oral
or documentary evidence pertinent to the facts and issues raised by the enforcement
officer or other interested parties may be received without regard to admissibility
under the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings.
B. At the close of the hearing, the Town Board shall by resolution confirm, modify or
rescind its initial decision and order and, if confirmed, further decide whether the
person served with the notice complied with the same.
C. If the Town Board finds that said order has not been complied with, the Town
Board may provide for the repairing and securing or demolition and removal of
such building either by town employees or by contract. Except in an emergency as
provided in § 93-10 hereof, any contract for the repairing and securing or
demolition and removal of a building in excess of the monetary limits set forth in
§ 103 of the General Municipal Law shall be awarded by the Town Board through
competitive bidding.
D. If the town modifies its initial decision and order, it may determine by resolution
that said building is unsafe and dangerous and order that a new notice be served and
processed following the procedures set forth in § 93-5 and following of this chapter.
§ 93-9 BATAVIA CODE § 93-11
93:4
Chapter 106
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 106-1. Purpose.
The Town of Batavia, by enactment of Local Law No. 2 of the year 1984, has provided
for enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,9
and, recognizing that said code in Parts 850 and 1030.1 provides minimum parameters
for the design, installation and location of electrical wiring, systems and equipment
operating on 50 volts or more, wishes to more fully implement the aforesaid provisions
and facilitate enforcement of the same.
§ 106-2. Installations to conform to National Electrical Code.
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code, except when the provisions of this chapter
or any other local law, ordinance or building code of the town provide otherwise, in
which event compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance or building
code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this chapter. The requirements of the
National Electrical Code shall be those known as "National Fire Protection Association
Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and adopted by the American Standards Association.
§ 106-3. Inspections; report of violations; certificate of compliance.
A. The Building Inspector of the Town of Batavia shall be and is hereby authorized to
appoint and deputize as agents of the Town of Batavia, for the purpose of making
inspections and reinspections at reasonable times and places and upon reasonable
notice of all electrical installations regulated and covered by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and to approve or disapprove said
installations, such persons, agencies or organizations as, in the opinion and
discretion of the Building Inspector, shall be qualified to conduct the same. In no
event shall the cost or expense of such inspections or reinspections be a charge
against the Town of Batavia.
B. It shall be the duty of such person, organization or agency duly appointed and
deputized as provided in this chapter to report in writing to the Building Inspector
of the Town of Batavia all violations of or deviations from the provisions of the
National Electrical Code and of all local laws and the building code insofar as any
of the same shall apply to electrical wiring, systems and equipment covered by this
chapter. Such deputized inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of
electrical installations in and on properties in the Town of Batavia upon the written
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Art. II.
§ 93-11 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 106-3
106:1
§ 106-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any installation or alteration of an electrical system or electrical wiring that is covered
and regulated by the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the National Electrical Code, or a local law of the Town of Batavia
without the issuance of a certificate of compliance as hereinabove provided shall be a
violation of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all penalties and remedies provided
by Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of New York as the same pertains to
violations of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 106-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations in mines,
ships, railway cars, or automotive equipment, or the installations or equipment employed
by railway, electrical or communication utilities in the exercise of their function as
a utility, and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. This
chapter shall not apply to any work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or
repair of electrical machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as his or its principal business. It shall
not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the government of
the United States of America or the State of New York.
§ 106-6. No waiver or assumption of liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the liability of any person
owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, devices, appliances,
or equipment for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by any defect
therein, nor shall the Town of Batavia, its Building Inspector, or the deputized electrical
inspector be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection
made pursuant to this chapter.
request of the Town of Batavia Building Inspector.
C. It shall be the duty of such appointed and deputized electrical inspector to issue a
certificate of compliance only when electrical installations and equipment are found
to be in conformity with the provisions of the National Electrical Code and this
chapter. He shall direct a copy of the certificate of compliance or the official denial
thereof to the Building Inspector of the Town of Batavia.
§ 106-3 BATAVIA CODE § 106-6
106:2
Chapter 110
FACILITIES, TOWN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 169.
§ 110-1. Application required.
§ 110-2. Permitted uses of facilities.
The Town will permit the use of the Town's facilities and its grounds, when not in use for
Town business, by outside organizations (hereinafter "users") for any of the following
purposes:
§ 110-3. Exits; occupancy.
The Town and users shall keep all exits clear at all times, and the authorized maximum
occupancy posted shall be strictly observed. All users shall inform participants of the
location of exits and emergency response equipment.
§ 110-4. Premises to be kept clean.
Users shall keep the grounds and facilities clean and neat, and users shall be responsible
for any loss or damage to the demised premises and its equipment as well as the avenues
of ingress and egress thereto. Upon completion of the use of the grounds or facilities
by the user, the same are to be returned to the same condition as existed prior to the
occupancy by the user.
§ 110-5. Responsibility for lost or stolen articles.
The Town of Batavia will not be held responsible for any articles lost or stolen during
the occupancy of the user.
A. Any and all usage of the Town of Batavia buildings by outside organizations not
affiliated with the Town of Batavia shall be permitted upon written application filed
with the Town Clerk, subject to compliance with the requirements of this policy.
B. Applications for use shall be made no sooner than 60 days prior to the applied-for
date of occupancy.
A. For instruction in any branch of education, learning or the arts.
B. For meetings of community organizations, volunteer or otherwise, which serve
Town residents.
C. For meetings of other federal, state and local governments, including veterans'
organizations.
§ 106-6 FACILITIES, TOWN § 110-6
110:1
§ 110-6. Maintenance of order.
The user assumes the responsibility for keeping and maintaining order while occupying
Town grounds and/or facilities. The user shall immediately vacate the grounds or
facilities upon a violation of any law or this policy, the purpose of which is to preserve
the public peace and good order, by the user and/or its participants, guests or invitees.
§ 110-7. Procedures, rules and fees.
Fees, deposit requirements, procedures and rules for the use of Town facilities pursuant
to this policy shall be set and/or amended from time to time by the Town Board, by
resolution.
§ 110-8. Costs and damages to be charged to applicant.
All costs resulting from the user's failure to clean or return the premises to its
preoccupancy condition as required by § 110-4 of this policy, or resulting from damage
to the premises by the user or its participants, guests or invitees, shall be charged against
the security deposit. If the deposit is not sufficient to cover all such costs, the user shall
reimburse the Town for same within 30 days after demand by the Town. Failure of the
user to reimburse the Town after due demand will result in immediate termination of
the user's right to use the premises, and the Town may commence an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction to recover monetary losses resulting from the user's failure
to reimburse the Town. In the event the Town must sue the user as above, the user
agrees to be responsible for all costs of the action, including but not limited to reasonable
attorneys' fees.
§ 110-9. Garbage and trash; carry in and carry out.
All garbage and trash created by users shall not be left behind, dumped or disposed of on
Town property.
§ 110-10. General liability insurance required.
Users shall obtain, at said user's expense, general liability insurance in form, content and
amount satisfactory to the Town of Batavia, for protection against claims of personal
injuries, including death or damage to property arising out of the use of any Town
facility. Said insurance shall be issued by a reputable insurance company, authorized
to do business in the State of New York, and said policy shall also name the Town
of Batavia as an additional insured. The policy shall provide that in the event of
cancellation or modification the insurer shall provide the Town with at least 10 days'
written notice of such cancellation or modification. In no event shall such liability
insurance exclude from coverage any municipal operations or municipal property.
§ 110-11. Indemnification of Town.
The user agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Batavia against any and all
liability, loss, damage, suit, charge, attorneys' fees, judgment, expenses of whatever kind
or nature which the Town may directly or indirectly incur or be required to pay by reason
or in consequence of the wrongful or negligent act or omission of the user, its agents,
employees or contractors. If a claim or action is made or brought against the Town for
§ 110-6 BATAVIA CODE § 110-11
110:2
which the users may be responsible hereunder in whole or in part, then the user shall be
notified and shall handle and assume the defense of same.
§ 110-12. Applicability.
This policy shall apply to Town facilities, including the Town Hall and the appurtenant
real property; highway garage; and any other Town-owned property, with the exception
of public parks, which are specifically excluded from the application of this policy.
§ 110-13. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as declared by the valid
judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, shall not affect
the validity or enforceability of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 110-11 FACILITIES, TOWN § 110-13
110:3

Chapter 112
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 89.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Sewer use — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 112-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Batavia finds that the potential and/or actual damages
from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Town of Batavia and
that such damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage
to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human
life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and
objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 112-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
§ 112-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights
or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective
barriers which are involved in accommodation of floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 110-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-3
112:1
§ 112-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL—A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE
or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or the "onehundred-
year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT—That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
§ 112-3 BATAVIA CODE § 112-4
112:2
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18 inches
or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated
floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel,
concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior
grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top of
the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zone V1-V30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated
above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls
parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the
federal standards.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a
regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance
Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and determination
of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or
an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
§ 112-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-4
112:3
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but no flood
elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)—An official map of a community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD OR FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA—Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING—Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair facilities. The term does not include longterm
storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a)
above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
on the National Register;
(1)
§ 112-4 BATAVIA CODE § 112-4
112:4
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the code enforcement officer,
building inspector or employee of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the
basement or cellar. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not
include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL—For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)—As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 112-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-4
112:5
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value,
excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood
Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 112-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and means
the initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of a project or physical
alteration of the property, and shall include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms. It also
includes the placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages and sheds), storage trailers and building materials. For manufactured
homes, the actual start means affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent
site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
The term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
(4)
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
§ 112-4 BATAVIA CODE § 112-4
112:6
§ 112-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Batavia.
§ 112-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 112-7. Interpretation; conflicts with other laws.
§ 112-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days,
or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (multiple panels) Index No. 2, 4, 5, 12, 15, whose
effective date is January 17, 1985.
(2) A scientific and engineering report titled "Flood Insurance Study, Town of
Batavia, New York, Genesee County" dated July 17, 1984.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through
November 1, 1989, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose
of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety
and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the
most restrictive or that imposing the highest standards shall govern.
§ 112-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-8
112:7
herein contained shall prevent the Town of Batavia from taking such other lawful action
as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied
for and received an approved variance under §§ 112-19 and 112-20 will be declared
noncompliant, and notification shall be sent to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 112-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Batavia, any
officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 112-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Town of Batavia Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 112-11. Floodplain development permit.
§ 112-12. Application information.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate. Additional
information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this
community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards
and ensuring that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
§ 112-6, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include but
not be limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by
an application fee to be determined by the Town Board by resolution. In addition,
the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Batavia for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The
local administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these
additional costs.
§ 112-8 BATAVIA CODE § 112-12
112:8
§ 112-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located in
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH or Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon
completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator
the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon
completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permittee shall submit
to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a
professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility
floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 112-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in
§ 112-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional
engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment
will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the documents
enumerated in § 112-6, when notified by the local administrator, and must pay any
fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream
segment will be maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the local
administrator, which shows whether proposed development to be located in an area
of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources, base
flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured
home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following
permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit. The
local administrator shall:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements
of § 112-12, Application information, and for compliance with the provisions
and standards of this chapter.
§ 112-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-13
112:9
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks, to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an
area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the applicable standards of §§ 112-14 through
112-18 and, in particular, § 112-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream bank
erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may require
the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may result in
physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 112-14 through 112-18, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise
the application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse
effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or federal
law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of
special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas are
designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source,
including data developed pursuant to § 112-12G, as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed development
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may
use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as historical
data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for
the purposes of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Regional
Director, Region II, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
§ 112-13 BATAVIA CODE § 112-13
112:10
are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the local
administrator shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must
also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway
use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall
review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stopwork
order for the project unless immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect
shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in compliance with the
requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stop-work order for
any floodplain development found ongoing without a development permit.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the penalties
described in § 112-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stop-work order for
any floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this
law and/or the conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop-work
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 112-8 of this
chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in
§ 112-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local
administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon
satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as
prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any certified elevations,
hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment
§ 112-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-13
112:11
§ 112-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially
improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map designated in § 112-6:
analyses which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and make available
for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certificates of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures required pursuant
to Subsection D(1) and (2) and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and whether
or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 112-19 and 112-20; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new subdivision
proposals and other proposed development in areas of special flood hazard
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and
subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
shall be located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no
new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including
fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any location; or
(b) The Town of Batavia agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA
approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Town of Batavia for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Batavia for all costs related to the final map revision.
§ 112-13 BATAVIA CODE § 112-14
112:12
§ 112-15. Standards for all structures.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 112-6, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development in the floodway
(including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows that
such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Batavia agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway
revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Town of
Batavia for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse
the Town of Batavia for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of
special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zone
A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are
available, new and substantially improved structures shall have fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
§ 112-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-15
112:13
§ 112-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 112-14A, Subdivision
proposals, § 112-14B, Encroachments, and § 112-15, Standards for all structures, apply
to structures located in areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
§ 112-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial, industrial
and other nonresidential structures, in addition to the requirements in § 112-14A,
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) Machinery and equipment servicing a building must either be elevated to or
above the base flood level or designed to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during a flood. This includes heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning equipment, hot-water heaters, appliances,
elevator lift machinery and electrical junction and circuit breaker boxes. When
located below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer's or architect's
certification of the design is required;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage
systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall
be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's
exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are
available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to two feet or more above the base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high
as the depth number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 112-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
§ 112-15 BATAVIA CODE § 112-17
112:14
Subdivision proposals, § 112-14B, Encroachments, and § 112-15, Standards for all
structures.
§ 112-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 112-14, General standards, and
§ 112-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard
to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special
flood hazard:
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are
available, new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the
base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight to below the base flood level
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in
Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for
construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall be provided to
the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest floor
(including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, A-E and AH shall
either:
§ 112-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-18
112:15
§ 112-19. Appeals board.
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections B, D and
E.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones A1-A30,
AE and AH that is on a site either outside of an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision as herein defined, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision
as herein defined, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision as herein defined or in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision as herein defined on which a manufactured home has incurred
substantial damage as the result of a flood shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated two feet or more above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Elevation on piers
consisting of dry-stacked blocks is prohibited. Methods of anchoring may include
but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
C. A manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in Zones A1-A30, AE
and AH in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that is not to be
placed on a site on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
shall be:
(1) Elevated in a manner such as required in Subsection B; or
(2) Elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above the lowest adjacent grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry-stacked
blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the
manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height
above the lowest adjacent grade and are securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Elevation on piers consisting of dry-stacked blocks is prohibited.
E. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 112-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). Elevation
on piers consisting of dry-stacked blocks is prohibited.
§ 112-18 BATAVIA CODE § 112-19
112:16
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by Town of Batavia shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such
decision to the Supreme Court, pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain
management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting
search and rescue operations during periods of flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including search and rescue operations and maintenance and repair
of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of this chapter,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
§ 112-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-19
112:17
§ 112-20. Conditions for variances.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
provided that the items § 112-19D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public
safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor
below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature of a
community official that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.10
§ 112-19 BATAVIA CODE § 112-20
112:18
10. Editor's Note: Attachment A, Model Floodplain Development Application Form, and Attachment B, Sample Certificate
of Compliance, are on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 112-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 112-20
112:19

Chapter 116
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 116-1. Town to exercise regulatory authority.
Pursuant to § 24-0501 of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act (Article 24 of the
New York Environmental Conservation Law), the Town of Batavia shall fully undertake
and exercise its regulatory authority with regard to activities subject to regulation under
the Act in freshwater wetlands, as shown on the Freshwater Wetlands Map, as such
map may from time to time be amended, filed by the Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to the Act, and in all areas adjacent to any such freshwater
wetland up to 100 feet from the boundary of such wetland. Such regulatory authority
shall be undertaken and exercised in accordance with all of the procedures, concepts and
definitions set forth in Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law and
Title 23 of Article 71 of such law relating to the enforcement of Article 24, as such law
may from time to time be amended.
§ 116-2. When effective.
This chapter, adopted on August 31, 1976, shall take effect upon the filing with the
Clerk of the Town of Batavia, New York, of the final Freshwater Wetlands Map by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of
the Freshwater Wetlands Act applicable to any or all lands within the Town of Batavia,
New York.
§ 112-20 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 116-2
116:1

Chapter 122
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 83.
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Town of Batavia, New
York."
§ 122-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — An authorized organization as defined in
Subdivision 4 of § 186 of the New York State General Municipal Law.
TOWN — The Town of Batavia, New York.
§ 122-3. Conduct authorized.
Authorized organizations may, upon obtaining a license from the Clerk of the town,
conduct games of chance within the town, as provided in Article 9-A of the New York
General Municipal Law. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with
said Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, together with the rules and regulations
of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and other applicable general state
law.
§ 122-4. General restrictions.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject to the
restrictions set forth in § 189 of the New York State General Municipal Law, the rules
and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board, this chapter, and
all other applicable state and local statutes, ordinances, local laws, rules and regulations
now or hereinafter in effect.
§ 122-5. Sunday games.
Games of chance authorized by this chapter may be conducted on the first day of the
week, commonly known as Sunday, as provided for in § 195 of the New York State
General Municipal Law.
§ 122-6. Age restriction.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any game or games of
chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this chapter. Persons under the
§ 116-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 122-6
122:1
age of 18 years may be permitted to attend games of chance at the discretion of the
games of chance licensee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to
operate any game of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this chapter
or to assist therein.
§ 122-7. Enforcement.
The chief law enforcement officer of the County of Genesee shall exercise control over
and supervision of all games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license.
Such officer shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of the New
York State General Municipal Law.
§ 122-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the New York State
Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule
Law, following its approval by a majority of qualified voters voting thereon at a general
election held pursuant to the provisions of § 23 of said Municipal Home Rule Law on
November 5, 1991.
§ 122-6 BATAVIA CODE § 122-8
122:2
Chapter 127
HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Mobile home communities — See Ch. 150.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 161.
Traffic in parks — See Ch. 169.
Sheraton Downs — See Ch. 194.
Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 223.
§ 122-8 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 122-8
127:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 127-1. Definitions.
§ 127-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Highway Superintendent shall install and maintain traffic control devices when and
as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the provisions of this
chapter, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as the Town
Board may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of
that law.
§ 127-3. Implementation of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be implemented by the adoption of regulations by the
Town Board or an officer or agency authorized by it pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
§ 127-4. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision of this
chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more
than 45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and, where applicable, Article 1 of the Town
Law and Highway Law of the State of New York.
B. In addition, the following words shall also have the following meanings:
HIGHWAY(S) — A public highway(s) within the Town of Batavia, other than the
New York State Thruway.
HIGHWAY SUPERINTENDENT—The Highway Superintendent of the Town of
Batavia.
TOWN — The Town of Batavia.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Batavia.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Batavia.
TOWN HIGHWAY(S) — A highway(s) under the control of the Town of Batavia,
including streets dedicated to the town within subdivisions.
§ 127-1 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-5
127:3
§ 127-5. When effective.
A. Except for those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, this chapter and any orders,
rules and/or regulations adopted and/or issued hereunder shall take effect as
provided by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any orders, rules and/or regulations adopted
and/or issued hereunder which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall not take effect until after the day on
which approval in writing is received from the New York State Department of
Transportation.
§ 127-5 BATAVIA CODE § 127-5
127:4
ARTICLE II
Injurious Substances on Highway
§ 127-6. Deposit prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway or highway right-of-way within
the town any glass bottles or other glass substance, nails, tacks, wire, cans, snow, ice,
manure, stones, mud, or any other substances likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle upon such highway. Any person who drops, places, throws, or permits such
matter to be dropped, placed or thrown about such highway or highway right-of-way
shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
§ 127-6 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-6
127:5

ARTICLE III
Posts in Right-of-Way
§ 127-7. Grouping of posts.
Persons residing in the town shall be permitted to group together, at one location along
a highway, mailboxes, newspaper tubes, or similar objects attached to posts, which
grouping shall be located at least six feet from the edge of the highway pavement. No
such posts shall be more than four inches in width, and no such posts or grouping of
posts shall be allowed closer than six feet to the edge of the highway pavement without
prior written permission of the Highway Superintendent.
§ 127-8. Violation.
A violation of § 127-7 of this chapter shall occur where a property owner does not
comply with a written notice of violation from the Highway Superintendent within 10
days after it is mailed to the property owner or then occupant of the noncomplying
property.
§ 127-7 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-8
127:7

ARTICLE IV
Location and Construction of Driveway Entrances and Exits on Highways
§ 127-9. Permit required.11
No property owner shall cause, permit or allow the construction or location of any
driveway entrance or exit onto a highway in the Town of Batavia without first having a
written permit to do so from the Superintendent of Highways in charge of such highway.
§ 127-10. Application for permit.
§ 127-11. Town highways.
A. Before commencing the construction of a driveway entrance or exit onto a highway
in the town, the property owner shall both make an application for a permit to do so
to the appropriate Superintendent of Highways in charge of the highway involved
and obtain such permit.
B. Article VI, § 127-19 sets forth the form of the application for a driveway permit to
be used for town highways. Permits for Genesee County highways shall be obtained
from the Highway Superintendent for Genesee County. Permits for state highways
shall be obtained from the New York State Department of Transportation.
A. The property owner shall furnish all pipes required to meet the conditions of the
permit issued by the Highway Superintendent.
B. No alteration or addition shall be made to any driveway entrance or exit after it is
constructed, nor shall any such driveway entrance or exit be relocated without first
securing a new permit from the Highway Superintendent.
C. No more than two driveway cuts shall be allowed on any one highway for a
residential, commercial, industrial or other use.
D. The maximum width to be allowed for a driveway cut, including a single combined
entrance and exit, shall be 50 feet.
E. The angle of any driveway entrance or exit with respect to the pavement of the
highway shall not be less than 45°.
F. No driveway entrance or exit shall be permitted within 30 feet of any public or
private highway intersection boundary line.
G. A detailed plan of the proposed driveway entrance and/or exit shall be attached to
the application for driveway permit.
H. Any culvert pipe required to be installed at a driveway entrance or exit shall be of
corrugated steel or of equal substance satisfactory to the Highway Superintendent,
and it shall be of a length and diameter as determined by the Highway
Superintendent.
I. No head walls shall be permitted above the surface of the driveway entrance or exit.
11. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 235, Zoning, § 235-50.
§ 127-9 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-11
127:9
§ 127-12. County highways.
The standard driveway requirements for county highways shall be as determined by
Genesee County and/or the County Superintendent of Highways.
§ 127-13. State highways.
The standard driveway requirements for state highways shall be as determined by the
State of New York, New York State Department of Transportation and/or the resident
engineer of the New York State Department of Transportation having authority over the
Town of Batavia.
§ 127-14. Driveway permit required prior to issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued in the Town of Batavia involving real property not
having a previously approved driveway entrance and/or exit onto a highway within the
town until such driveway permit is obtained by the property owner.
J. No concrete surface shall be permitted for driveway entrances or exists within the
bounds of the highway right-of-way.
K. Any culvert pipe shall be installed so as to allow it to run full without spilling out
onto the highway right-of-way and pavement on either the high or low side of said
culvert pipe.
L. Where a driveway entrance or exit is on an incline or decline from the highway
pavement, the change of grade is to be at the ditch line so that a uniform shoulder
can be maintained.
§ 127-11 BATAVIA CODE § 127-14
127:10
ARTICLE V
Excavation or Construction in Highway Rights-of-Way
§ 127-15. Permit required.
No property owner or other person, including but not limited to public service companies
such as Empire Telephone, GTE, Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation and
municipalities, shall conduct any excavation or construction within or under the rightof-
way of a town highway without first obtaining a permit from the Highway
Superintendent. In issuing such permit, the Highway Superintendent may impose such
conditions and require the posting of such bond as the Highway Superintendent deems
appropriate for the work to be performed.
§ 127-16. Application for permit.
Article VI, § 127-20 sets forth the form of the application for a highway construction
permit to be used for town highways.
§ 127-17. County highways.
Permits for excavation and construction within or under Genesee County highway
rights-of-way shall be obtained from the Genesee County Superintendent of Highways.
§ 127-18. State highways.
Permits for excavation and construction under New York State highway rights-of-way
shall be obtained from the New York State Department of Transportation.
§ 127-15 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-18
127:11

ARTICLE VI
Forms
§ 127-19. Driveway permit. [Amended 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
Applications for driveway permits required under Article IV herein shall be submitted to
the Highway Superintendent for approval using the driveway permit form as approved
from time to time by the Town Board.
§ 127-20. Highway construction permit. [Amended 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
Applications for highway construction permits required under Article IV herein shall be
submitted to the Highway Superintendent for approval using the highway construction
permit form as approved from time to time by the Town Board.
§ 127-19 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-20
127:13

ARTICLE VII
Traffic Regulations
§ 127-21. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule 1 herein are hereby designated as stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be erected by the Highway Superintendent as
indicated.
§ 127-22. No-passing zones.
No vehicle shall overtake or pass any other vehicle or drive to the left on parts of certain
town highways as described in Schedule 2 herein.
§ 127-23. Truck exclusions and regulations. [Amended 4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
§ 127-24. Temporary weight limits.
A. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations are hereby excluded from the
town highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule 3 herein.
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of the maximum gross
weights described in Schedule 4 herein are excluded from these town highways, or
parts thereof, described in Schedule 4 herein.
C. This requirements of Subsections A and B of this section shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along the Town
highways from which such trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations are
otherwise excluded.
D. Except for state highways, no motor vehicle shall be operated on any highway
within the Town in a manner which utilizes an engine compression braking system,
also known as a "jake brake."
A. Upon recommendation of the Highway Superintendent, the Town Board may, by
resolution, exclude from any portion of a town highway vehicles with a gross
weight of over four or more tons or any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of any
designated weight on any wheel, axle, any number of axles, or per inch width of tire
when, in its opinion, such highway would be materially injured by the operation of
any such vehicle thereon.
B. Such exclusion shall take effect upon the erection by the Highway Superintendent
of weight limit signs along those sections of town highways from which such
vehicles are to be excluded. In addition, a notice of such exclusion shall be
published in the Batavia Daily News by the Town Clerk within 10 days after said
weight limit signs are erected. The exclusion shall remain in effect until said weight
limit signs are removed per resolution of the Town Board.
C. Upon written application from any owner or operator of a vehicle subject to the
provisions of this section, the Town Board may issue a permit fully or partially
exempting such vehicle from the provisions of this section if it is deemed by the
§ 127-21 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-24
127:15
Town Board that the vehicle is performing an essential local pickup or delivery
service and that failure to grant such permit would create a hardship. Such permit
shall designate the route to be traversed by the vehicle and may include other
restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the Town Board. Such permit shall
be in effect for the time period stated on said permit, and it shall be carried in the
vehicle to which it refers and shall be available for inspection by any peace officer,
acting pursuant to his special duties, or police officers generally.
§ 127-24 BATAVIA CODE § 127-24
127:16
ARTICLE VIII
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 127-25. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer,
police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 127-26. No parking at any time.
The parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times upon the town highways, or parts
thereof, described in Schedule 5.
§ 127-27. Night parking.
No vehicle shall be parked within the right-of-way of highways within the town between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the period beginning November 1 and ending
April 30 of each year.
§ 127-25 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-27
127:17

ARTICLE IX
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 127-28. Authority to remove and impound vehicles.
Any vehicle parked or abandoned on any highway in the town during a snow storm,
flood, fire or other public emergency or found unattended where it constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, or any vehicle parked or abandoned on any highway in the town
where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited by this chapter, or otherwise, may be
removed by or under the direction of the Town Board or any officer or employee of the
town.
§ 127-29. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in § 127-28 herein, such vehicle shall be stored
in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner, or the person in charge of
the vehicle, may redeem the same upon payment to the Town Clerk of the amount of
all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, such removal
charges not to exceed $50, together with any charges for storage, such storage charges
not to exceed $10 per day or a fraction thereof, the date of removal and the date of release
or delivery being each regarded as a separate day. Such parking or abandonment shall
also constitute a traffic infraction.
§ 127-30. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, upon notification of a vehicle removal, to
ascertain the name of the owner of such vehicle or person having the same in charge and
to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which
will be required to redeem the vehicle.
§ 127-28 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-30
127:19

ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 127-31. Schedule 1, Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of Article VII, § 127-21, the following intersections
are designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Batavia-Oakfield Town
Line Road
East and west Downey/South Pearl/ Batavia-
Oakfield Town Line Road
Bennett Heights North North Bennett Heights
Black Oak Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North Red Oak Lane
Black Oak Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
South Laurel Oak Way
Cherry Bark Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North Red Oak Lane
Dana Way East Stringham Drive
Dana Way West Violet Lane
Donahue Road South Rose Road
Downey Road North Batavia-Oakfield Town Line Road
Downey Road South Galloway Road
East Bennett Heights North North Bennett Heights
East Bennett Heights South South Bennett Heights
Edgewood Drive North Woodland Drive
Harloff Road East Kelsey Road
Kelsey Road North Galloway Road
Laurel Oak Way [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
East Cherry Bark Lane
Laurel Oak Way [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
West Red Oak Lane
Lear Road East Upton Road
Miller Road South Stegman Road
North Bennett Heights West State Street Road
Park Road North Veterans Memorial Drive
§ 127-31 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-31
127:21
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pin Oak Circle [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North Red Oak Lane
Pin Oak Circle [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
South Red Oak Lane
Red Oak Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
South NYS Route 5
Red Oak Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North Seven Springs Road
Rose Road East and west Wortendyke Road
Rose Road West Upton Road
School Street West Read Road
Shepard Road South Batavia-Bethany Town Line Road
South Bennett Heights West Bennett Heights
South Bennett Heights West State Street Road
State Street Road North Batavia-Elba Town Line Road
State Street Road South State Street Road
Stegman Road East and west Powers Road
Sunset Terrace North and south Sunset Terrace
Upton Road West Rose Road
Valle Drive East Woodland Drive
Valle Drive West Fairway Drive
White Oak Court [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
South Red Oak Lane
Cherry Bark Lane [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North Red Oak Lane
Woodland Drive West Circular Woodland Drive
Wortendyke Road North and south Rose Road
§ 127-32. Schedule 2, No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of Article VII, § 127-22, the following town
highways, or parts thereof, are designated as no-passing zones:
§ 127-31 BATAVIA CODE § 127-32
127:22
Name of Highway From To
Batavia-Oakfield Town
Line Road
Route 63 Downey Road
Kelsey Road Galloway Road Pratt Road
Park Road Route 98 Route 63
Read Road Route 5 Route 33
Seven Springs Road Route 33 Route 5
Veterans Memorial Drive Park Road Route 63
§ 127-33. Schedule 3, Truck Exclusions.
In accordance with the provisions of Article VII, § 127-23, all trucks, tractors and
tractor-trailer combinations are hereby excluded from the following town highways, or
parts thereof: (Reserved).
§ 127-34. Schedule 4, Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of Article VII, § 127-23, all trucks, tractors and
tractor-trailer combinations in excess of the indicated maximum gross weights are
hereby excluded from the following town highways, or parts thereof:
Name of Highway Weight From To
Galloway Road 10 tons Downey Road McCumber Road
Rose Road 10 tons Wortendyke Road Route 98
Wortendyke Road 10 tons Route 33 Rose Road
§ 127-35. Schedule 5, No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of Article VII, § 127-26, no person shall park a vehicle
upon the following town highways, or parts thereof:
Name of Highway From To
Barrett Drive [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
Dead end NYS Route 5
Commerce Drive [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
Federal Drive Federal Drive
Federal Drive [Added
4-18-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
NYS Route 98 Dead end
Harloff Road Kelsey Road End of Harloff Road
Park Road [Amended
1-16-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
Route 63 Route 98
§ 127-32 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-35
127:23
Name of Highway From To
Veterans Memorial Drive
[Added 4-18-2018 by L.L.
No. 2-2018]
Lewiston Road Park Road
Wortendyke Road 300 feet south of railroad
crossing for a distance of 1,850
feet
§ 127-36. Schedule 6, Yield Intersections.
The following intersections are designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Fotch Road West Batavia-Stafford Town Line Road
§ 127-35 BATAVIA CODE § 127-36
127:24
ARTICLE XI
Crosswalks
[Added 8-17-2005]
§ 127-37. Establishment.
The following crosswalks are hereby established, to be marked and maintained by the
Town of Batavia Highway Department and to be enforced pursuant to the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law:
A. A thirty-seven-foot-wide crosswalk on Park Road, to be measured as follows:
starting at the intersection of the curbline with the east boundary of Lewiston Road;
thence running northeast along the edge of Park Road a distance of 853 feet to the
westerly edge of said crosswalk; and running a distance of 890 feet from the starting
point to the easterly edge of said crosswalk.
B. (Reserved)12
C. A ten-foot-wide crosswalk on State Street, to be measured as follows: starting at the
point where the boundary of the City/Town line intersects the east side of State
Street; thence running north along the edge of State Street a distance of 420 feet to
the south edge of said crosswalk; and running a distance of 430 feet from the
starting point to the north edge of said crosswalk.
12. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, which pertained to the establishment of a ten-foot-wide crosswalk on Park Road,
was repealed 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018.
§ 127-37 HIGHWAYS; VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-37
127:25

Chapter 131
INFORMATION BUREAUS
§ 131-1. Building required.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall maintain or operate a
public information bureau or engage in providing information service in the Town of
Batavia, Genesee County, New York, except from and within a building, which building
shall conform to all of the provisions of the Building Code and Zoning Ordinance,13 if
any, of said town.
§ 131-2. Permit required; application for permit.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall use or permit any building
in the Town of Batavia to be used for the aforesaid purposes unless a permit authorizing
such use shall previously have been issued to the owner or lessee of such building.
Application for such permit shall be made on forms provided by the Town of Batavia,
and the application shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 131-3. Issuance of permit.
The Town Clerk, with the approval of the Town Board, shall issue a written permit after
certification by said Board, or its duly authorized representative, that said building and
the prospective use thereof comply with all the requirements of this chapter, the Building
Code and Zoning Ordinance, if any, of the Town of Batavia and the laws of the State of
New York.
§ 131-4. Permit fee; expiration of permit.
The fee for such permit shall be the sum of $100 for each calendar year or part thereof
during which said permit is in effect, and all permits under this chapter shall expire on
the first day of January following the date of issuance.
§ 131-5. Signs.
No signs, except those permitted by the ordinances of the Town of Batavia,14 shall be
erected or maintained on or about the premises with respect to which a permit has been
issued.
§ 131-6. License required for attendants and employees.
No person, other than an individual owner or lessee of a building with respect to which
a permit has been issued as hereinbefore provided, shall act as an attendant or employee
of such public information bureau or service unless such person shall previously obtain
a license to be issued upon written application therefor filed with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Batavia.
13. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and Ch. 235, Zoning, respectively.
14. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning, § 235-39, Signs.
§ 127-37 INFORMATION BUREAUS § 131-6
131:1
§ 131-7. Restrictions.
§ 131-8. Conditions of permit or license.
A permit or license issued in accordance with this chapter shall not be transferable and
shall be valid only so long as the holder thereof shall comply with all the provisions of
this chapter. All permits and licenses shall be revocable at any time by the Town Board
of the Town of Batavia after conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 131-9. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall be construed and is
hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by imprisonment for not
more than six months or by a fine of not more than $250, or both, for each offense or
violation.
A. The Town Clerk, with the approval of the Town Board, may issue a license upon
satisfactory proof that such person is a fit and proper individual to engage in such
business and upon payment of a fee of $25 for each calendar year or part thereof
during which such license is in effect. All licenses so issued shall expire on the first
day of January next succeeding the date of issuance.
B. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by two recent photographs of
the applicant, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued.
C. No permit or license shall be issued to any person unless such applicant is a citizen
of the United States, of good moral character, and who has not been previously
convicted of a felony.
A. No person to whom a permit or license has been issued shall solicit the public to
obtain or receive information concerning travel routes, business establishments,
tourist accommodations or other matters from any point or place outside of the
building in which the public information bureau or service is conducted.
B. No person to whom a permit or license has been issued under this chapter shall wear
any uniform or display any badge or insignia indicating that he is a constable, police
officer, employee or official of the Town of Batavia, nor shall he represent himself
to be acting in that capacity.
C. No person to whom a permit or license has been issued as herein provided shall
give false or misleading information concerning travel routes, business
establishments, tourist homes or other tourist accommodations or as to the rates,
facilities or services of the same.
§ 131-6 BATAVIA CODE § 131-9
131:2
Chapter 138
JUNKYARDS
§ 138-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Batavia recognizes that the proper storage or disposal
of unregistered, abandoned, dismantled or partially dismantled automobiles, as well as
other large scrap objects, is in the overall best interests of the residents of the Town of
Batavia in order to avoid potential health hazards or nuisances, protect property values in
the community and provide for a pleasing visual landscape. The purpose of this chapter
is to provide for the uniform regulation of junkyards and used material collection or
processing operations. It is not intended to prevent the operation of such a business or to
be interpreted to impose unrealistic restrictions on any other type of business; rather, it
seeks to allow such uses of land to exist in harmony with surrounding land uses and to
be of service and assets to the community.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DISMANTLING FOR REPAIR — Dismantling operations necessary to repair, as well
as the actual repair itself, of the vehicle, machine or equipment of the customer of a
junkyard operator.
DISMANTLING FOR SALVAGE — Dismantling operations performed on a machine,
vehicle or piece of equipment in which the components of the vehicle or machine are
removed and used (or stored) for their own intrinsic value rather than as a part of the
entire vehicle, equipment or machine. The operations render the vehicle, equipment or
machine, as a whole, inoperable and are performed solely because of the value of the
parts or components, rather than of the whole.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, including buildings thereon, on or in which metal,
automobiles, waste paper, rags, household debris, tin cans and other materials are
collected, stored, processed, dismantled and/or sold.
JUNKYARD OPERATOR — The owner of land upon which a junkyard is located, his
tenant, associates or assignees responsible for the operations and conduct of business in
the junkyard.
PERSON — A title owner, including a corporation, of real property, including a mobile
home park within the Town of Batavia, New York.
STACKED — Piling two or more vehicles, machines, pieces of equipment or other
materials on top of one another to make use of vertical space rather than horizontal space.
TENANT — A person, firm or corporation leasing real property from a person.
§ 138-3. Conditions constituting junkyard.
The following are conditions constituting a junkyard:
A. The storage or abandonment of waste paper, rags, scrap metal and/or discarded
materials or the collection, storage, salvage or abandonment of machinery or
§ 131-9 JUNKYARDS § 138-3
138:1
§ 138-4. Conditions not constituting junkyard.
The following conditions are hereby excluded from the definition of a junkyard.
§ 138-5. Application and granting of special use permits.
vehicles not in operable condition by any person.
B. The allowance, with or without permission, by a person of the storage or
abandonment of waste paper, rags, scrap metal and/or discarded materials for the
collection, storage, salvage or abandonment of machinery or vehicles not in
operable condition on real property owned by the person's tenant or other
leaseholder of real property.
C. The storage or deposit of more than two unregistered, disabled, dismantled or partly
dismantled vehicles (whether or not dismantled for repair), equipment, machines or
material or comparable volume not stored in a completely enclosed structure shall
constitute a junkyard.
A. Unlicensed vehicles in operating condition stored by or for the owner while the
owner is:
(1) A full-time student of the immediate family attending a school, college or
university.
(2) A member of the United States Armed Forces.
(3) Suffering from an injury or illness requiring hospitalization or confinement to
a bed.
B. Seasonal vehicles or machinery during their off-season if kept in a location not
visible from any road, street or highway, when practicable; otherwise, the same
must be stored in a neat and orderly fashion.
C. Vehicles or machinery used on the premises for the purpose of conducting a
business or industry.
D. Operable vehicles by an approved auto or comparable agency in business or
industrial districts.
E. Maximum of two customized or modified vehicles in operable condition. (All
modifications must be performed in a fully enclosed structure.)
F. By-products or waste generated in the natural course of running an on-site operation
which is a necessary part of the business being conducted and which is being
temporarily stored (for a maximum of six months) for future disposal in a sanitary
manner as determined by the Genesee County Health Department and/or the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
A. Junkyards shall only be located in General Industrial Use Districts (MR Districts)
with the issuance of a special use permit.
B. The operator of a junkyard shall be issued a special use permit by the Town Board
of the Town of Batavia according to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-3 BATAVIA CODE § 138-5
138:2
§ 138-6. Hearing.
A hearing on the application shall be held by the Town Board not less than two nor more
than four weeks from the date of the receipt of the completed application record from the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and
shall be published once in the official newspaper of the town, which publication shall be
not less than seven days before the date of the hearing.
§ 138-7. License requirements.
At the time and place set for the hearing, the Town Board shall hear the applicant and
all other persons wishing to be heard on the special use permit to operate, establish
or maintain the junkyard. In considering such application, it shall take into account
the suitability of the applicant with reference to his ability to comply with the fencing
requirements and all other requirements of this chapter, to any record of convictions
for any type of larceny or receiving of stolen goods and to any other matter within the
purposes of this section.
§ 138-8. Location requirements.
At the time and place set for the hearing, the Town Board shall hear the applicant and
all other persons wishing to be heard on the application for a special use permit on the
C. Application for a special use permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer of the Town of Batavia by the landowner on whose land a
junkyard is proposed to be located. If someone other than the owner is desirous of
obtaining said permit, the landowner shall join in said application indicating in
writing his consent to the intended use of said property.
D. In applying to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for said permit, the applicant shall
furnish the Zoning Enforcement Officer with proof of payment of fees as provided
by § 138-11, an aerial photograph on a scale of one inch equals 660 lineal feet (or
on such other scale as shall be approved by the town's Zoning Enforcement Officer)
of the proposed site on which the boundaries of the tract to be used as a junkyard
are clearly delineated, a written description of the land to be included within the
junkyard and shall specify in writing in map form the proposed location by street or
road, required setbacks, fire lanes and all adjoining property owners. The map
required shall be drawn on a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. In
addition, the applicant may supply any written statements he wishes to accompany
said other documents. The aerial photograph, written description of the land and
accompanying maps and statements shall then become part of the application
record.
E. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall then review the application to be certain that
the proposed location is not within an established district restricted against such use
or otherwise contrary to the prohibitions of the Town of Batavia Zoning Ordinance.
He shall also examine the aerial photographs, written description of the land to be
included within the junkyard, map, statement and application to be certain that they
conform to the requirements of this chapter. Upon being satisfied that the
application is in proper order, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refer the matter
to the Batavia Town Board for a public hearing.
§ 138-5 JUNKYARDS § 138-8
138:3
location of the junkyard. In passing upon the same, it shall take into account, after proof
of legal ownership and right to such use of the property by the applicant, the nature
and development of surrounding property, such as the proximity of churches, schools,
homes, hospitals, public buildings or other places of public gathering, and whether or not
the proposed location can be reasonably protected from affecting the public health and
safety by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors, smoke or other causes.
§ 138-9. Aesthetic considerations.
At the hearing regarding location of the junkyard, the Town Board shall take into
account the clean, wholesome and attractive environment which is hereby declared to
be of vital importance to the continued general welfare of its citizens by considering
whether or not the proposed location can be reasonably protected from having an
unfavorable effect thereon. In this connection the Town Board may consider collectively
the type of road servicing the junkyard or from which the junkyard may be seen, the
natural or artificial barriers protecting the junkyard from view, the proximity of the
proposed junkyard to established residential and recreational areas or main access routes
thereto, as well as the reasonable availability of other suitable sites for the junkyard.
§ 138-10. Grant or denial of special use permit.
A. After hearing the Town Board shall, within 45 days, make a finding as to whether
or not the application should be granted, giving notice of its finding to the applicant
by mail, postage prepaid, to the address given on the application. If approved, the
special use permit shall be forthwith issued by the Batavia Town Board, to remain
in effect until the following July 1. Approval shall be personal to the applicant and
not assignable or transferable.
B. Special use permits shall be renewed thereafter on the first day of July of each year
upon payment of the annual special use permit fee as follows:
(1) An application for renewal in the form of an original application under
§ 138-5C of this chapter shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer
indicating whether or not any changes in operation or location have taken
place since the permit was last renewed or initially issued, as the case may be.
(2) If there are no changes indicated on the renewal application or determined by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer to exist, the Town Board shall issue a renewal
permit valid until the following July 1, provided all provisions of this chapter
were complied with during the immediately previous special use permit
period, the junkyard has not become a public nuisance under the common law
and the applicant has not been convicted of any type of larceny or the receiving
of stolen goods. No hearing shall be required by the Town Board under these
circumstances.
(3) If the application for renewal reveals changes or if the Zoning Enforcement
Officer reports them, or if the Town Board determines that the chapter has not
been complied with during the immediately previous special use permit
period, that the junkyard had become a public nuisance under the common law
or that the applicant had been convicted of any type of larceny or the receiving
of stolen goods, the applicant shall then be required to follow all of the
§ 138-8 BATAVIA CODE § 138-10
138:4
§ 138-11. Special use permit fees.
The annual special use permit fee shall be $25, to be paid to the Town Clerk at the time
the application is made and annually thereafter in the event of renewal.
§ 138-12. Fencing and setback requirements.
The applicant shall demonstrate his ability to comply with the following minimum
standards:
provisions of this chapter for renewal of his special use permit as if the same
were an initial rather than a renewal application.
A. Provide adequate screening of all operations and storage carried on in the junkyard
so as to maintain a reasonably pleasing visual landscape.
B. Provide sufficient distance of a minimum of 50 feet between the road right-of-way
and junkyard operations so as not to interfere with the flow of traffic.
C. Provide for adequate fire protection of the junkyard, as well as a buffer for adjacent
land uses.
D. All new buildings to be located on the site must be set back a distance of at least 50
feet from the right-of-way of any roadway.
E. All sides of a yard must be enclosed and permanently maintained with a fence and/
or sight barrier constructed of materials to be approved by the Town Board with a
suitable gate which shall be closed and locked except during the working hours of
such junkyard or when the applicant, his agents or employees shall be within. Said
fence and/or sight barrier shall be required to effectively screen the operations and
storage taking place within the yard from the view of passing motorists, pedestrians
and neighbors.
F. If a front fence is erected it must be set back a distance of at least 50 feet from the
right-of-way of the roadway. Living hedges and/or trees used as a sight barrier must
be established clear of any right-of-way.
G. The remainder of the site shall be enclosed by a fence or a sight barrier of
acceptable natural or man-made materials (natural to include stands of trees, brush,
a berm of dirt, etc.) to reasonably screen the operations and storage taking place
within the yard from the view of passing motorists, pedestrians and neighbors.
H. There shall be a fifteen-foot buffer zone around the entire site between the adjoining
property line and any fence or sight barrier. Said lane shall be free of debris and
excessive growth (trees, underbrush), except where the natural materials are part of
the fencing required.
I. No materials shall be stacked higher than 15 feet above a junkyard's ground surface.
Stacked materials shall have additional sight barriers around them if not otherwise
reasonably screened from general view.
J. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter, no person, firm or
corporation shall be issued a special use permit to operate such junkyard or any part
§ 138-10 JUNKYARDS § 138-12
138:5
§ 138-13. Operation of yard.
All operations constituting a junkyard shall be carried on within the area enclosed by the
fence or sight barrier.
§ 138-14. Nonconformance.
Those persons, firms and corporations legally operating or maintaining junkyards under
the ordinance of the Town of Batavia licensing dealers in used materials at the time
this chapter becomes effective shall be permitted to operate thereunder until current
licenses and certificates of approval expire on June 30, 1979. Thereafter, all applications
for permits shall be made under and pursuant to this chapter. Those junkyard operators
holding valid licenses under the town's present ordinance may be issued a permit under
this chapter effective July 1, 1979, upon making application as required hereunder, upon
demonstrating to the Town Board that substantial procedures to comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter have been undertaken prior to July 1, 1979, and that screening
of all sides of yards by fencing or planting of natural sight barriers has been completed
prior to said date. Holders of validly issued licenses and certificates of approval under
the town's present ordinance shall have until July 1, 1980, to fully comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall
result in the revocation, denial or nonrenewal of the operator's special use permit.
§ 138-15. Penalties for offenses.
§ 138-16. Enforcement.
thereof within 500 feet of any church, school, hospital, public building or place of
public assembly.
A. Persons, firms or corporations found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and shall be subject to the following penalties to the extent allowed by
law:
(1) First offense: fine of not more than $50 and/or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 15 days.
(2) Second offense: fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days.
(3) Third and each succeeding offense: fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$250 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days.
B. Each week the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense subject to
separate penalties. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Town Board, either
alone or in conjunction with the foregoing penalties, from maintaining an action or
proceeding in the name of the town in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of this
chapter.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Batavia shall enforce this
§ 138-12 BATAVIA CODE § 138-16
138:6
chapter. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation in
the manner hereinafter set forth for all violations of this chapter. The notice of
violation shall set forth the alleged violation or violations and shall state if the
same have not ceased and/or been rectified, as the case may be, within 30 days
of the date of service of said notice of violation, in the case of alleged violators
who hold validly issued special use permits issued by the town, and within 10
days of the date of service of said notice of violation in all other cases, that
formal enforcement proceedings under this chapter shall be instituted.
(2) Service of the notice of violation shall be sufficient if directed to the permit
holder or other person, firm or corporation operating in violation of this
chapter. Service of said notice of violation shall be made personally upon the
alleged violator, if possible; otherwise, said notice of violation shall be
sufficient if served by delivering the same to a person of suitable age and
discretion at the actual site of operation, dwelling place or usual place of abode
of the person allegedly operating the junkyard in violation of this chapter and
by mailing the notice to the person to be served at his last known residence;
or, where service cannot otherwise be made with due diligence, by affixing
said notice of violation to the door of the actual place of operation, dwelling
place or usual place of abode of said person to be served and by mailing said
notice to such person at his last known residence.
B. In the case of violations of § 138-3 of this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall provide, with the notice of violation, a list of valid junkyards and/or other
approved parties who may be willing to pick up or otherwise accept said scrap or
junk.
C. If a notice of violation has been served, and the alleged violator has not ceased and/
or rectified the alleged violation or violations within the time allowed under this
chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the option of scheduling a
hearing to determine whether the town shall, by either subcontractors or town
employees, have the property brought into conformance with this chapter.
(1) Notice of hearing. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that a hearing
is desired pursuant to Subsection C above, he shall cause a notification in
writing to be issued to the property owner setting forth specifically the
grounds, and reasons, for such action, and the time and place of a hearing
within the town to determine whether the town shall take such conformance
action on behalf of the property owner.
(2) Manner and time of service.
(a) The written notice provided for in Subsection C(1) hereof shall be served
in one of the following ways:
[1] By personal service of a copy thereof; or
[2] By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last
known address of the property owner of said premises. If said
certified mail is refused or returned, service upon the property owner
shall be made by mailing a copy of said notice by first class mail to
the address of the property owner in a post office or official
§ 138-16 JUNKYARDS § 138-16
138:7
depository under the exclusive care and custody of the United States
Postal Service within the State of New York.
(b) If said notice is served in accordance with Subsection C(2)(a)[1] above,
the same shall be served at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Service shall be deemed complete on the date the notice is personally
served upon the property owner.
(c) If said notice is served in accordance with Subsection C(2)(a)[2] above,
the same shall be served at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Service by certified or regular mail shall be deemed complete upon
depositing the same in a post office or official depository under the
exclusive care and custody of the United States Postal Service within the
State of New York.
(3) Conduct of hearing. At the time and place specified in the notice, a town
official designated by the Town Board, hereafter referred to as the "hearing
officer," shall conduct the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally
by the hearing officer, and oral or documentary evidence pertinent to the facts
and issues raised by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other interested parties
may be received without regard to admissibility under the rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings. The hearing officer shall require the
participants or spectators to conduct themselves in an orderly fashion. Failure
to comply with the directions of the hearing officer to obtain order may result
in exclusion from the proceedings or in a decision adverse to the interests of
the disorderly party and granting or denial of relief as requested. All parties to
the hearing shall be afforded a fair hearing providing the basic safeguards of
due process.
(4) Determination. At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer may direct that
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, either by subcontract or by town employees,
bring the property into conformance with the provisions of this chapter, or
other appropriate action as the hearing officer may determine. The cost and
expense for bringing property into conformance shall be billed by the town to
the property owner. If the property owner fails to pay the aforesaid cost and
expenses within 30 days of the billing, the cost and expenses can then be levied
against the property owner in his or her next real property tax issued by the
town.
(5) Appeal. Any party aggrieved by the action of the hearing officer shall have the
right to appeal to the Town Board. Such appeal shall be taken by the aggrieved
party by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within 14 days
after the original hearing and decision. The Town Board shall set a time and
place for the hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed
to the aggrieved party at his or her last known address by regular mail at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing. The Town Board shall, after
hearing all interested parties, either affirm or reverse the decision of the
hearing officer or make such other ruling as it deems appropriate. The decision
of the Town Board shall be final and conclusive.
(6) The decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer to proceed under § 138-3 of
§ 138-16 BATAVIA CODE § 138-16
138:8
§ 138-17. Repeal of prior enactments; preexisting uses.
It is the intention of this chapter to take the place of and supersede Town of Batavia
Local Law Nos. 1 of 1988 and 1 of 1991, as well as an ordinance amendment adopted by
the Batavia Town Board on May 29, 1991, all relating to the regulation of junkyards in
the Town of Batavia, New York; said repeal, however, shall not prevent any enforcement
of either of said local laws or ordinance that may be undertaken or in progress prior to the
adoption of this chapter. In addition, all persons, firms and corporations legally operating
or maintaining a junkyard under either of said local laws or ordinance amendment may
continue to do so in accordance with permits issued to them.
this chapter shall in no way preclude him from pursuing any other penalty or
remedy allowed under the other provisions.
§ 138-16 JUNKYARDS § 138-17
138:9

Chapter 144
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 144, Land Separation, adopted 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002, was
repealed 11-15-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017.
§ 138-17 (RESERVED) § 138-17
144:1

Chapter 150
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Road specifications — See Ch. 183.
Sewer use — See Ch. 191.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 150-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Any structural addition to the mobile home, which
includes awnings, cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets
and similar appurtenant structures.
BUILDING — A roofed structure erected for permanent use.
COMMON AREA — Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying
mobile home developments.
COMMUNITY SYSTEM (WATER OR SEWERAGE) — A central system which
serves all living units and is not publicly owned.
DENSITY — The number of mobile homes or mobile home stands per gross acre.
DRIVEWAY — A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile
home lot or for common access to a small group of lots or common facilities.
DWELLING — Same as "living unit."
EASEMENT — A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a
specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title
to the land.
ENFORCING AGENCY — The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Batavia
shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of this regulation.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The State Department of Health or its authorized
representative of the appropriate political subdivision.
HOUSING — Living units, dwellings and/or other structures that shelter or cover.
LICENSE — A written document issued by the enforcing agency allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home development under the provisions of this regulation.
LIVING UNIT — A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities
for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
§ 138-17 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-1
150:1
sanitation.
LOT AREA — The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a mobile
home.
LOT LINE — A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan.
MOBILE HOME — Manufactured relocatable housing.
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY — A body of people living in a mobile home
development.
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT — The person who owns or has
charge, care or control of the mobile home development.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous parcel of land which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME STAND—That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for the placement of a mobile home.
OCCUPIED AREA — That area of an individual mobile home lot which has been
covered by a mobile home and its accessory structures.
PERMANENT BUILDING — A building, except a mobile home accessory structure.
PERMIT — A written document issued by the enforcing agency permitting the
construction, alteration or expansion of a mobile home development.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or
corporation.
PLAT — Any map, plan, or chart of a city, town, section or subdivision indicating the
location and boundaries of individual properties.
PLOT — A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is
described by reference to a recorded plat or metes and bounds.
POWER SUPPLY ASSEMBLY — The conductors, including the grounding
conductors, insulated from one another, the connectors, attachment plug caps, and all
other fittings, grommets, or devices installed for the purpose of delivering energy from
the service equipment to the distribution panel within the mobile home.
PRIVATE STREET — A private way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting individual mobile home lots and auxiliary buildings.
PROPERTY — A plot with any buildings or other improvements located thereon.
PROPERTY LINE — A recorded boundary of a plot.
PUBLIC STREET — A public way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting properties.
PUBLIC SYSTEM (WATER OR SEWERAGE) — A system which is owned and
operated by a local governmental authority or by an established public utility company
which is adequately controlled by a governmental authority. Such systems are usually
existing systems serving a municipality, a township, an urban county or a water or sewer
§ 150-1 BATAVIA CODE § 150-1
150:2
district established and directly controlled under the laws of a state.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage
exists.
SERVICE BUILDING—A building housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as
may be required by this regulation.
SERVICE EQUIPMENT — The necessary equipment, usually consisting of a circuit
breaker or switch and fuses and their accessories, located near the point of entrance of
supply conductors to or in a building or mobile home and intended to constitute the main
control and means of cutoff for the supply to that mobile home or building.
SEWER CONNECTION — A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile home development.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to
the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.
SHALL — Indicates that which is required.
SHOULD — Indicates that which is recommended but not required.
SITE — A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is
described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
WATER CONNECTION — A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system
within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water supply system servicing the mobile
home development which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a
designated point at each mobile home lot.
§ 150-2. Mobile home development permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home
development within the limits of the Town of Batavia unless he holds a valid permit
issued by the enforcing agency in the name of such person for the specific
construction, alteration or extension proposed.
B. All applications for permits shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location and legal description of the mobile home development.
(3) Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed development
showing but not limited to the following:
(a) The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
(b) The number, location, and size of all mobile home lots;
(c) The location and width of roadways and walkways;
§ 150-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-2
150:3
§ 150-3. License required; penalties for offenses; application for license.
(d) The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(e) Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage
disposal facilities;
(f) Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed
within the mobile home development; and
(g) The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
C. Fees may be charged for permits and processing of applications for construction,
alterations, amendments or extensions of existing or proposed mobile home sites as
well as for site planning reviews, public hearings, consulting fees, engineering fees,
inspection fees, bad check charges, state environmental quality reviews, appeals,
variances, special use permits and other administrative actions. The fees shall be set
by the Town Board by resolution and may be changed from time to time in the same
manner. [Amended 5-18-1994]
D. When, upon review of the application, the enforcing agency is satisfied that the
proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter, a permit shall be issued.
E. Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been denied may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the enforcing agency
under the procedure provided by this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to administer any mobile home community
within the limits of Town of Batavia unless he holds a valid license issued annually
by the enforcing agency in the name of such person for the specific mobile home
community. All applications for licenses shall be made to the enforcing agency,
which shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who shall construct, alter or extend any mobile home
development without holding a valid permit or who shall administer any mobile
home community without holding a valid license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a prison term not in excess of one year or a fine not in excess of
$1,000, or both.
C. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the enforcing agency
within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of
interest in or control of any mobile home community. Such notice shall include the
name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such
mobile home community. Upon application in writing for transfer of license and
deposit of a fee of $50, the license shall be transferred if the mobile home
community is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
D. Application for license.
(1) Applications for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant,
accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application
and by deposit of a fee of $50, and shall contain the name and address of the
§ 150-2 BATAVIA CODE § 150-3
150:4
§ 150-4. Inspections; right of entry.
§ 150-5. Notices, hearings and orders.
applicant and the location and legal description of the mobile home
community showing all mobile home stands, structures, roads, and other
service facilities.
(2) Applications for renewal of annual licenses shall be made in writing by the
holders of the licenses, shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of $50 and
shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original license
was issued or the latest renewal granted.
E. Any person whose application for a license under this chapter has been denied may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the enforcing agency
under the procedure provided by § 150-5 of this chapter.
F. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home community, the enforcing agency
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of this chapter, the
enforcing agency shall give notice in writing in accordance with § 150-5A to the
person to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period of time, specified in the notice by the enforcing
agency, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period, the enforcing
agency shall reinspect such mobile home community and, if such conditions or
practices have not been corrected, shall suspend the license and give notice in
writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt
of notice of such suspension, such person shall cease administration of such mobile
home community except as provided in § 150-5B.
A. The enforcing agency or its delegated representative is hereby authorized and
directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory
compliance with this chapter.
B. The enforcing agency or its delegated representative shall have the power to enter
at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter.
C. The enforcing agency or its delegated representative shall have the power to inspect
the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home community.
D. It shall be the duty of every resident of a mobile home community to give the
management thereof or its designated agent access to any part of such mobile home
development at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter.
A. Whenever the enforcing agency determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the enforcing
agency shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit
or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
§ 150-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-5
150:5
§ 150-6. Exemptions; existing mobile home parks.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require, provided that
such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last
known address or when he has been served with such notice by any method
authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the enforcing agency, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the enforcing agency a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after the
notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of
the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under
Subsection D. Upon receipt of such petition, the enforcing agency shall set a time
and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At
such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed,
provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the enforcing agency may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period
when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for
such postponement.
C. After such hearing the enforcing agency shall make findings as to compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and shall issue an order in writing sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in
Subsection A(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing a notice, the license of the mobile home development affected by the
order shall be revoked.
D. Whenever the enforcing agency finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing,
issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as it may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the
suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition to the
enforcing agency, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of
Subsection C shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
A. Where the enforcing agency finds that compliance with the provisions of this
chapter would result in undue hardship, an exemption may be granted by the
§ 150-5 BATAVIA CODE § 150-6
150:6
§ 150-7. Design standards.
Mobile home parks shall be permitted in the Business Mobile Home Park (BMH)
District upon issuance of a special use permit provided the following standards and
requirements are complied with:
enforcing agency without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter.
B. Such period shall begin after the enforcing agency has given notice of a certain and
specific deviation from this chapter to the person to whom the permit or
certification was issued.
C. All mobile home parks within the Town of Batavia in use at the time of enactment
of this chapter shall not be subject to the provisions of said chapter and shall be
considered preexisting nonconforming uses and shall not be required to seek any
variance, including but not limited to use or zoning, in order to continue the use of
the respective property for operation as a mobile home park, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Any condition or practice existing in a mobile home park which violates any
health and/or safety laws of any town, county, state or federal government or
agency or department.
(2) Suitable screening of refuse and trash areas.
(3) Traffic (stop, yield, etc.) signs.
(4) Any nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, shall not revert to a
nonconforming use.
(5) Double access [see § 150-7C(1)].
(6) Annual licensing and fees (see § 150-3).
(7) Mobile home park plans and registration of mobile home park occupants (see
§ 150-8).
A. Size. The size of all mobile home parks shall be a minimum of 10 acres.
B. Construction and safety standards.
(1) All mobile homes within the park shall comply with current construction and
safety standards set forth by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
(2) Solid-fuel-burning devices shall not be permitted within any mobile home in a
mobile home park (exception: solid-fuel-burning fireplaces which meet New
York State Fire and Building Codes).
C. Layout and design.
(1) Double access. All mobile home parks containing 20 or more units shall have
access to a public highway at two points being separated by at least 100 feet.
This provision may be waived if the applicant's (mobile park owner's) proposal
§ 150-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-7
150:7
contains acceptable alternatives for emergency access.
(2) Buffer zone. The site shall be located and laid out so that no mobile home shall
be closer than 100 feet to any existing single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling or 35 feet to the park boundary line, whichever is greater. Additional
buffer areas may be required by the Planning Board if deemed necessary in
order to avoid potential conflicts with existing or planned land uses.
(3) Sales area. Commercial areas may be provided for the display and sale of
mobile homes within the confines of the mobile home park, except on the
frontage established in the buffer zone. Model units shall only be placed on
individual lots and are limited to one per lot. The Planning Board may adjust
or waive this rule.
(4) Other principal structures. A private conventional residence may be located
within the confines of the mobile home park. Lot location and minimum
distances shall be fixed by the Planning Board after due consideration in each
case.
(5) Interior roadways. The layout of interior roadways, driveways and walkways
shall be designed and maintained in such a manner to provide safe, efficient
and orderly vehicular and pedestrian traffic acceptable to the Planning Board.
(6) Roadway or driveway clear width. All roadways shall have a minimum clear
zone width of 40 feet which is completely clear of obstructions to a height of
12 feet.
(7) Roadway grades. The maximum roadway grade shall be 7%. Entrance
gradients shall be less than 3% for a distance of 75 feet from the edge of the
right-of-way of the public highway and must meet all New York State
Department of Transportation requirements.
(8) Minimum radius. The minimum radius of curvature for any street shall be 75
feet.
(9) Alignment. Roadways shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and in no case shall any angle or intersection be less than 75°.
Roadways in four-way intersections shall be directly across from one another
or offset a minimum of 125 feet.
(10) Roadways. Roadway or driveway pavement shall be located in the center of
the roadway clear zone and shall be at least 20 feet wide. If parking provision
is made within the roadway clear zone, such parking shall be off the pavement
and the clear zone shall be increased accordingly.
(11) Parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot to
meet the needs of occupants of the mobile home park and their guests without
interference with normal movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Such
parking may be in tandem. Each parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of at least 10 feet by 20 feet per vehicle and shall have an allweather
surfacing or alternate acceptable to the Planning Board.
(12) Auxiliary parking. Designated auxiliary parking areas for motor vehicles shall
§ 150-7 BATAVIA CODE § 150-7
150:8
be provided at a ratio of one parking space to every five mobile home units.
Additional auxiliary parking areas are to be provided for parking of
maintenance equipment, boat trailers, utility trailers and similar such
equipment and vehicles.
(13) Mobile home lot size. All lots shall be a minimum of 6,000 square feet and
shall have a minimum dimension of 60 feet across the lot. The absolute
minimum measurement in any one direction shall not be less than 50 feet.
(14) Walkways. Walkways shall be laid out so as to connect service buildings, dry
yards and storage lockers with roadways. Walkways shall also provide access
to recreation areas if such areas are not located adjacent to a road. Each
roadway shall have a walkway running parallel to it, separated from the
roadway by a minimum distance of seven feet. Additional walkways may also
be placed along the rear of each lot. All walkways shall be a minimum of three
feet wide and thickness of four inches and shall be provided with joints so
designed as to minimize cracking. All walkways shall be made of concrete,
blacktop or other similar material approved and acceptable to the Planning
Board. If requested, the Planning Board may waive this walkway subsection
after due consideration in each case.
(15) Recreation areas. Recreation areas shall be provided in central locations at an
amount equal to 10% of the total park area. Recreation areas should be
harmonious with the needs and age group of the park and need not necessarily
include equipment for recreation. Recreation areas must be reviewed with the
Planning Board and meet with Planning Board approval.
(16) Mailboxes. Mailboxes shall be located in compliance with United States Postal
Service regulations and shall not be placed in any location where they
constitute a safety hazard to pedestrians or to vehicles.
(17) Trees. All existing trees shall be preserved insofar as possible in the design of
the park.
D. Siting of mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be situated within the mobile home
park in conformance with the following:
(1) The following minimum distances shall be maintained when providing
specific locations of mobile homes as related to each other within the park.
(a) Laterally (side of mobile home facing the side of the next): 30 feet.
(b) Longitudinally (end to end of mobile home and/or building): 20 feet.
(c) Perpendicularly (end of one mobile home facing the side of another): 25
feet.
(2) In cases of irregularly shaped lots the Planning Board shall determine the
application of the above-listed provisions, but in no case shall any two mobile
homes be closer than 20 feet to one another.
(3) No mobile home shall be located less than 50 feet from any service building.
§ 150-7 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-7
150:9
(4) The minimum setback from the roadway line (clear zone rather than
pavement) shall be 15 feet. The minimum setback from all interior lot lines
shall be five feet.
(5) The percent of lot coverage for an individual mobile home lot shall be no
greater than 25%.
(6) Regarding guests of park residents, no occupied travel or vacation trailers or
other form of temporary living units shall be permitted in the mobile home
park without the park owner's permission.
E. Required improvements.
(1) Water and sewage systems. Water supply and sewage treatment facilities shall
be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the New
York State Health Department, Department of Environmental Conservation
and the Genesee County Health Department.
(2) Underground utilities. Electrical systems, gas piping systems, cable and
telephone wires shall be maintained in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Code.
(3) Artificial lighting.
(a) Artificial lighting shall be provided from dusk to dawn to illuminate
walks, driveways, roadways and parking spaces for the movement of
pedestrians and vehicles. Specifically, roadway lighting standards shall
be provided as follows: overhead roadway lighting standards shall be
placed no farther than 100 feet apart, have a minimum clearance above
the pavement of 12 feet and have a minimum capacity of 100 watts.
(b) The Planning Board, after specific request by the owner and/or developer,
may alter, change, modify or eliminate any or all of the items shown in
Subsection E(3)(a) above.
(4) Refuse disposal. It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to ensure that
garbage and rubbish shall be collected and properly disposed of outside the
park as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that garbage receptacles do
not overflow. The responsibility shall include either the provision of garbage
cans with tight-fitting covers to each unit or dumpsters which service a number
of units. Exterior property areas shall be maintained free from organic and
inorganic material that might become a health, incident or fire hazard. Suitable
screening shall be provided for all community refuse (dumpster) areas.
(5) Roadway paving. All roadways within the park shall be paved for a minimum
width of 20 feet in accordance with specifications approved by the Town of
Batavia Highway Superintendent.
(6) Parking area paving. Areas for motor vehicle parking and access driveways
shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other surface in specifications
approved by the Planning Board.
(7) Mobile home lot. Each mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand to
§ 150-7 BATAVIA CODE § 150-7
150:10
provide adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home.
The stand shall not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the
mobile home or other such forces. The material used in constructing the stand
should be durable and capable of supporting the expected load regardless of
the weather and shall be constructed in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Code. In addition, the footings and the load-carrying portion of the
ground anchors shall extend below the frost line, 42 inches minimum.
(8) Patios, decks, garages, awnings, and outbuildings. Mobile home lots may be
provided with any of the above mentioned. If installed each must conform to
distance separations, lot setbacks and percent of lot coverage requirements. A
permission letter must be secured from the park owner before any of the above
structures are built, and a town building permit is mandatory.
(9) Stormwater drainage. Mobile home parks shall have adequate facilities for
drainage of surface and subsurface water. The entire mobile home park shall
be graded to facilitate the safe and efficient drainage of surface water and
permit no ponding areas where water will stand for lengths of time so as to
constitute a health or other hazard. Drainage ditches shall be provided where
necessary to provide for the removal of surface drainage. Such ditches shall be
provided in such a way as not to constitute a hazard to pedestrians. Gutters,
culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary and shall be
acceptable for a size specified by the Town of Batavia Highway
Superintendent.
(10) Landscaping. Trees such as poplars, silver or soft maples, box elders, catalpas,
and horse chestnuts shall not be planted. The planting of elms is not
recommended. Shade trees are recommended in the buffer area between the
public highway and the adjacent mobile home lots. Due regard should be had
to the obstructive qualities of limbs and branches along mobile home
movement and access ways. Landscaping shall be optional to the owner/
developer with agreement and approval of the Planning Board.
F. Mobile home park owner obligations. In general, mobile home parks shall be
properly maintained so as to ensure the desirable residential character of the
property. Specifically, the following shall apply:
(1) Yard maintenance. Mobile home parks shall be maintained reasonably free
from holes and excavations, sharp protrusions and other objects or conditions
which might be a potential cause of personal injury. Walks, steps, driveways,
and roadways that contain holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired or
replaced as the need indicates. Trees or limbs of trees that constitute a hazard
shall be removed. Snow removal is the responsibility of the mobile home park
operator or owner. (This includes roads and common areas.)
(2) Noxious weeds. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of
any description.
(3) Accessory structures (owned by park owner). All accessory buildings or
structures shall be kept in good repair, free from health, fire and accident
hazards. They shall be of durable construction and appropriate for intended use
§ 150-7 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-7
150:11
§ 150-8. Registration of park occupants.
It shall be the duty of each mobile home park owner/operator to keep a register
containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park.
This register shall contain the information listed below. A copy of the below information
shall be filed annually with the Batavia Town Clerk on or before January 15 each year.
(This shall apply to all parks, including those which exist at the time this chapter is
enacted.)
and location. The exterior wood surface of all structures that are not inherently
resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating
or paint or other suitable preservative.
(4) Gravel areas. All areas surfaced with gravel shall be kept clear of all forms of
vegetation and treated properly to eliminate any dust problems.
(5) Infestation. Grounds and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for purposes of
extermination shall conform to generally accepted practice.
(6) Skirts. Skirts for individual mobile homes are required and shall conform to
the New York State Uniform Code. Such skirting shall be installed within 30
days of installation of the mobile home and must be maintained, mobile home
owner's responsibility.
A. The name and legal address of all occupants.
B. The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and a master chart or map
of the mobile home park layout.
C. The make, model, year, dimensions and serial number of each mobile home.
§ 150-7 BATAVIA CODE § 150-8
150:12
Chapter 155
MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 150-8 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 150-8
155:1

ARTICLE I
Enactment; Authorization; Title; Purpose
§ 155-1. Enactment; legislative authority.
The Town Board and the Town of Batavia does hereby ordain and enact the Town
of Batavia Municipal Building Energy Benchmarking Law pursuant to authority and
provisions of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 155-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Batavia Municipal Building Energy
Benchmarking Law."
§ 155-3. Purpose.
A. Buildings are the single largest user of energy in the State of New York. The
poorest performing buildings typically use several times the energy of the highest
performing buildings for the exact same building use. As such, this chapter will use
building energy benchmarking to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by
making available good, actionable information on municipal building energy use to
help identify opportunities to cut costs and reduce pollution in the Town of Batavia.
B. Collecting, reporting, and sharing building energy benchmarking data on a regular
basis allows municipal officials and the public to understand the energy
performance of municipal buildings relative to similar buildings nationwide.
Equipped with this information, the Town of Batavia is able to make smarter, more
cost-effective operational and capital investment decisions, reward efficiency, and
drive widespread, continuous improvement.
§ 155-1 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-3
155:3

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 155-4. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BENCHMARKING INFORMATION — Information generated by Portfolio Manager,
as herein defined, including descriptive information about the physical building and its
operational characteristics.
BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING — The process of measuring a building's
energy use, tracking that use over time, and comparing performance to similar buildings.
COVERED MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building or facility that is owned or
occupied by the Town of Batavia that is 1,000 square feet or larger in size.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Batavia Engineering Department.
ENERGY — Electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, fuel oil, or other
product for use in a building, or renewable on-site electricity generation, for purposes
of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water heating, or for powering or fueling other
end uses in the building and related facilities, as reflected in utility bills or other
documentation of actual energy use.
ENERGY PERFORMANCE SCORE — The numeric rating generated by Portfolio
Manager that compares the energy usage of the building to that of similar buildings.
ENERGY USE INTENSITY (EUI) — The kBTUs (1,000 British Thermal Units) used
per square foot of gross floor area.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total number of enclosed square feet measured between
the exterior surfaces of the fixed walls within any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
PORTFOLIO MANAGER — ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager, the Internet-based
tool developed and maintained by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to
track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings nationwide, or successor.
UTILITY — An entity that distributes and sells energy to covered municipal buildings.
WEATHER NORMALIZED SITE EUI — The amount of energy that would have been
used by a property under thirty-year average temperatures, accounting for the difference
between average temperatures and yearly fluctuations.
§ 155-4 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-4
155:5

ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 155-5. Applicability; exemption.
A. This chapter is applicable to all covered municipal buildings as defined in § 155-4
of this chapter.
B. The Town Engineer may exempt a particular covered municipal building from the
benchmarking requirement if the Town Engineer determines that it has
characteristics that make benchmarking impractical.
§ 155-5 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-5
155:7

ARTICLE IV
Benchmarking
§ 155-6. Benchmarking required for covered municipal buildings.
A. No later than December 31, 2017, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the
Town Engineer or his or her designee from the Department shall enter into Portfolio
Manager the total energy consumed by each covered municipal building, along with
all other descriptive information required by Portfolio Manager for the previous
calendar year.
B. For new covered municipal buildings that have not accumulated 12 months of
energy use data by the first applicable date following occupancy for inputting
energy use into Portfolio Manager, the Town Engineer or his or her designee from
the Department shall begin inputting data in the following year.
§ 155-6 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-6
155:9

ARTICLE V
Disclosures
§ 155-7. Disclosure and publication of benchmarking information.
A. The Department shall make available to the public, on the Internet, benchmarking
information for the previous calendar year no later than December 31, 2017, and by
September 1 of each year thereafter for covered municipal buildings.
B. The Department shall make available to the public, on the Internet, and update at
least annually, the following benchmarking information:
(1) Summary statistics on energy consumption for covered municipal buildings
derived from aggregation of benchmarking information; and
(2) For each covered municipal building individually:
(a) The status of compliance with the requirements of this chapter; and
(b) The building address, primary use type, and gross floor area; and
(c) Annual summary statistics, including site BUI, weather normalized
source BUI, annual GHG emissions, and an energy performance score
where available; and
(d) A comparison of the annual summary statistics [as required by
§ 155-7B(2)(c) of this chapter] across calendar years for all years since
annual reporting under this chapter has been required for said building.
§ 155-7 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-7
155:11

ARTICLE VI
Records
§ 155-8. Maintenance of records
The Department shall maintain records as necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter, including but not limited to energy bills and other documents received from
tenants and/or utilities. Such records shall be preserved by the Department for a period
of three years.
§ 155-8 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-8
155:13

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Administration
§ 155-9. Enforcement; administration regulations; reporting.
A. The Town Engineer or his or her designee from the Department shall be the Chief
Enforcement Officer of this chapter.
B. The Chief Enforcement Officer of this chapter may promulgate regulations
necessary for the administration of the requirements of this chapter.
C. Within 30 days after each anniversary date of the effective date of this chapter, the
Chief Enforcement Officer shall submit a report to the Town Board, including but
not limited to summary statistics on energy consumption for covered municipal
buildings derived from aggregation of benchmarking information, a list of all
covered municipal buildings identifying each covered municipal building that the
Town Engineer determined to be exempt from the benchmarking requirement and
the reason for the exemption, and the status of compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 155-9 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-9
155:15

ARTICLE VIII
Effective Date
§ 155-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Department of State.
§ 155-10 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-10
155:17

ARTICLE IX
Severability
§ 155-11. Provisions severable.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as declared by the valid
judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, shall not affect
the validity or enforceability of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, provision, or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 155-11 MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING § 155-11
155:19

Chapter 161
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Highways — See Ch. 127. Road specifications — See Ch. 183.
§ 161-1. Written notice required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the town or Town Superintendent of
Highways for damages or injuries to person or property sustained by reason of any
highway, bridge or culvert being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
unless written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of
such highway, bridge or culvert was actually given to the Town Clerk or Town
Superintendent of Highways and there was a failure or neglect, within a reasonable time
after the giving of such notice, to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of, but no such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to person
or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any
highway, bridge or culvert, unless written notice thereof, specifying the particular place,
was actually given to the Town Clerk or Town Superintendent of Highways and there
was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place
otherwise reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 161-2. Presentation of notices to Town Board.
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall transmit in writing to the Town Clerk,
within five days after the receipt thereof, all written notices received by him or her
pursuant to this chapter and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law. The Town
Clerk shall cause all written notices received by him or her pursuant to this chapter and
Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law to be presented to the Town Board within five
days of the receipt thereof or at the next succeeding Town Board meeting, whichever
shall be sooner.
§ 161-3. Portions of Town Law superseded.
This chapter shall supersede in its application to the Town of Batavia, New York,
Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 155-11 NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS § 161-3
161:1

Chapter 169
PARKS
§ 169-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Batavia Park Rules and Regulations Law."
§ 169-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public peace and good order on lands
operated as public parks by the Town of Batavia and to contribute to the safety and
enjoyment of park users by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of parks
maintained by the Town of Batavia.
§ 169-3. Word usage and definitions.
§ 169-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all parks under the control, supervision and jurisdiction of the
Town of Batavia.
§ 169-5. Dates and hours of operation.
§ 169-6. Use of park pavilions and reserved areas.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine and neuter, the singular number shall include the
plural, and the plural the singular.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows, unless
the context specifically indicates otherwise:
PARK — The land, including all buildings, waters and other property located
thereon and constituting a part thereof, which is designated as a park by the Batavia
Town Board and which is maintained, operated and controlled by the Town of
Batavia for public park purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association,
society, group or municipality.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn, whether or not by motorized power.
A. All parks shall open and close for the season as designated by resolution of the
Town Board.
B. No person or vehicle shall enter or remain in any park between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and sunrise or when closed for the season, except as otherwise provided by the
Town Board, by resolution.
C. In case of an emergency, any portion of a park may be closed to the public, to
vehicles or to designated persons.
§ 161-3 PARKS § 169-6
169:1
§ 169-7. Park rules and regulations.
The Town Board shall from time to time, by resolution, promulgate such further rules
and regulations for the use of Town park facilities as it deems necessary and appropriate
to preserve park improvements and the public's access thereto, and to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
§ 169-8. Enforcement.
This chapter and the park rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the Town
Board shall be enforced by the Town of Batavia through its constables, by the Genesee
County Sheriff's Department and by all other police agencies having jurisdiction within
the Town of Batavia.
§ 169-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found in violation of this chapter or the duly adopted park rules and
regulations shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $250 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 15 days, or both.
A. No person may reserve for use any park pavilion or other reserved areas without
first obtaining a permit for such use.
B. An application for a permit may be obtained from and must be filed with the
Batavia Town Clerk.
C. Each application for such permit shall be accompanied by a deposit to be set from
time to time by the Town Board, by resolution. Said deposit shall be for the purpose
of ensuring that the pavilion and/or reserved area is undamaged and free of debris
upon completion of use. Following use, said pavilion and/or reserved area shall be
inspected by the Town. If the same is undamaged and free of debris, said deposit
shall be returned. If said area is either damaged or not free of debris, said deposit
shall be forfeited to the Town to cover the cost of repair or cleaning. Nothing herein
shall prevent the Town from instituting legal proceedings against any person for the
recovery of damages caused by the use of any park or park pavilion.
D. Application for a permit shall be made at least 72 hours in advance of the time of
the reservation requested. In the event more applications are received than space is
available, such applications shall be considered in the chronological order received.
E. The Town Board may require applicants utilizing a park for a business or
organizational purpose to provide any appropriate certificates of insurance as the
Town Board deems necessary in its sole discretion.
F. The Town Board may require all applicants to execute indemnity agreements in
connection with applications for use of park facilities.
§ 169-6 BATAVIA CODE § 169-9
169:2
Chapter 173
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 173-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "A Local Law Regulating and Licensing Peddlers and
Solicitors within the Town of Batavia."
§ 173-2. Purpose and intent.
The Town Board finds that high-pressured and misleading, fraudulent, and threatening
activities have been associated with hawking, peddling and soliciting activities in the
Town of Batavia, and that it is the purpose and intent of this law to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town by regulating itinerant merchants.
§ 173-3. Definitions.
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which the person
transacts business and deals in the goods, wares and merchandise he hawks, peddles or
solicits for during regular business hours.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association
and any principal, agent or employee thereof and all other entities of any kind.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place, or house to house, or who
stands in any roadway or public place taking or offering to take orders for goods,
wares or merchandise, or for services to be performed in the future, or for making,
manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.
VENDOR, HAWKER or PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who,
from any vehicle or any public road or public place, or by going from house to house
or place of business to place of business, on foot or from any animal or vehicle, sells
or barters, offers for sale or barter, or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods,
wares or merchandise, including magazines and other publications, except as hereinafter
exempted.
§ 173-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless exempt from the provisions of this chapter,
within the limits of the Town of Batavia, to act as a vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor
without first having obtained and paid for, and having in force and effect, a license
therefor.
§ 173-5. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be held to apply to any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by
order of any court; to any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles; to farmers and truck gardeners who themselves or through their employers
vend, sell or dispose of products of their own farms and gardens; to dealers in milk,
§ 169-9 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 173-5
173:1
baked goods, heating oil and daily newspapers; to persons having an established place
of business within the County of Genesee or their employees soliciting orders from
customers and delivering the same; to any honorably discharged member of the armed
forces who has procured a license issued by the Genesee County Clerk as provided by
the General Business Law of the State of New York; or to persons soliciting or collecting
for any bona fide charitable organization, service, school or youth groups. This chapter
shall also not apply so as to unlawfully interfere with interstate commerce. Nonprofit
organizations and persons working for said organizations shall also be exempt.
§ 173-6. Application for license.
Any person desiring to procure a license under this chapter shall submit to the Town
Clerk a written application in duplicate, to be supplied by the Town Clerk, stating, under
oath, the following information:
A. Name of applicant;
B. Permanent home address;
C. Name and address of firm represented or sponsoring entity, if any;
D. Length of time for which the license is requested;
E. Social Security number;
F. Date of birth;
G. Physical description of the applicant;
H. The license number and kind of vehicle to be used by the applicant in carrying on
the business for which the license is desired;
I. The kind of goods, wares and merchandise desired to be sold or the kind of service
to be performed;
J. The method of distribution, if applicable;
K. For the firm represented, if any, names and addresses of all partners, if a
partnership, and the names and addresses of the principal officers, if a corporation,
and the name and address of a natural person upon whom a legal notice of process
may be served within the State of New York;
L. All felonies or misdemeanors of which the applicant has been convicted together
with the disposition date and court having jurisdiction thereof;
M. Two photographs of the applicant, full face on a white background, two inches by
two inches in size, taken within 30 days prior to the date of filing of the application;
N. Law enforcement background check from the county in which the applicant resides,
as well a law enforcement background check from Genesee County. Background
checks shall have been completed within the 30 days prior to the day of filing of the
application.
O. A certificate from the Genesee County Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying
§ 173-5 BATAVIA CODE § 173-6
173:2
§ 173-7. Employees/agents of principals.
A separate license shall be required for:
§ 173-8. Solicitor's bond.
An applicant for a license as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall file with the Batavia Town Clerk a
cash deposit or a bond executed by a surety company or insurance company licensed
to do business within the State of New York in the sum of $1,000, conditioned upon
making a final delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise ordered or services to be
performed in accordance with the terms of any order obtained or, failing therein, that the
advance payment on such order be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of any
licensed solicitor shall have the right by action on the bond for the recovery of money
or damages, or both. The bond shall remain in full force and effect, and, in case of cash
deposit, such deposit shall be retained by the Batavia Town Clerk for a period of three
months after the expiration of any such license, unless sooner released by the Batavia
Town Board for good cause shown.
§ 173-9. Issuance of license; conditions.
that all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant, if any, have
been examined and approved.
A. Each person, firm or entity represented or sponsoring the hawking, peddling or
soliciting activity.
B. Each person engaging in the activity in the Town and each person operating a
vehicle in support of such activity.
A. The Town Clerk, with assistance from such law enforcement agencies as she shall
deem necessary, shall investigate all applications and shall thereafter, with due
dispatch, issue or deny such license to the applicant. All licenses shall become
effective from the date thereof and shall continue in force for the term specified
therein but shall not be transferable. No license shall be issued for a longer term
than one year from the date thereof.
B. If, after investigation of any application, the Town Clerk shall deny the same, she
shall endorse on such application such disapproval and the reason for the same, and
the Town Clerk shall forthwith notify the applicant in writing of such denial and of
his right to appeal as hereinafter set forth. A license may be refused by the Town
Clerk if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which
in the judgment of the Town Clerk renders the applicant unfit or undesirable to
carry on the purpose for which the license is requested. In addition, the Town Clerk
may also refuse a license to any person who in her judgment shall be an undesirable
person or incapable of properly conducting the trade or business for which the
license has been requested.
C. Any licensee aggrieved by any action or determination of the Town Clerk
hereunder may appeal to the Batavia Town Board for the issuance of a license
within 14 days after notice of the action or determination complained of has been
§ 173-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 173-9
173:3
§ 173-10. License fees.
The license fee to hawkers, peddlers, or solicitors shall be $200 per year, or such other
fee as shall be established by the Town Board by resolution from time to time.
§ 173-11. Restrictions.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not:
mailed to his last known address by filing a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for appeal. The Town Board shall set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant's last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision and order
of the Town Board on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
D. After a public hearing thereon at which the licensee shall have an opportunity to be
heard, the Town Board may revoke any license issued under authority of this
chapter to any applicant whom the Town Board shall determine to be an undesirable
person or incapable of properly conducting the trade or business previously
licensed.
E. A license shall not be assignable.
F. The holder of a license shall not permit it to be used by any other person.
G. Whenever a license is lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or his agent or
employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the original application and bond, may
be issued by the Town Clerk upon the filing with her by the licensee of an affidavit,
under oath, setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has
been made for its recovery.
H. All licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper reference stubs
for that purpose, numbered in that order in which they are issued, and shall state
clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind of goods, wares and merchandise to
be sold or service to be rendered, the number of each license, the date of issuance
and expiration of the license, fee paid and the name and address of the licensee.
I. Such license shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying on the
business for which the person is licensed, unless such license shall otherwise
provide.
J. No license shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age.
K. Every licensee, while exercising his license, shall carry the license with him and
shall exhibit the same upon demand.
A. Enter upon private property for the purpose of peddling or soliciting before the hour
of 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, nor after the earlier of 1/2 hour before
sunset, Monday through Saturday or the hour of 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. No solicitation shall be permitted on Sundays or holidays.
B. Ring the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is painted or
otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any or all of the
§ 173-9 BATAVIA CODE § 173-11
173:4
§ 173-12. Orders where money is paid in advance.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive payment or deposit
of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing made in duplicate, stating
the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given to the
purchaser at the time the deposit is paid to the solicitor.
§ 173-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or entity who, individually or by his clerk, agent, servant or employee,
shall act as a peddler, hawker or solicitor, as herein defined, without a license, or who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall continue to act as a
peddler, hawker or solicitor subsequent to the revocation of his license, shall be deemed
to have committed a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York and,
upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment
for a period of not more than 15 days, or both. Each day on which such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. This chapter may also be enforced by
injunction.
§ 173-14. Signs.
Appropriate signs, as the Town Board of the Town of Batavia shall deem necessary,
shall be erected by the Highway Department of the Town of Batavia, at such places as
the Town Board directs, within the Town of Batavia, advising of the existence of this
chapter.
following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Agents," or other wording,
the purpose of which purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises. No
peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend or sell his or her goods or wares within 200
feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or private school or for school
purposes, nor shall be or she permit his or her car, wagon or vehicle to stand on any
public highway within said distance of such school property.
C. Falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article
offered for sale. No person shall, by any trick or device, or by any false
representation, obtain or attempt to obtain admission to the house, garage or barn of
any person, firm or corporation in the Town of Batavia.
D. Blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract attention to his
wares, or shout or cry out his wares.
E. Stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in any public place or
street for more than 10 minutes, or in front of any premises for any time if the owner
or any lessee of the premises objects.
F. Permit any vehicle used by him to stop or remain on any crosswalk.
G. Create or maintain any booth or stand or place any barrels, boxes, crates or other
obstructions upon any street or public place for the purpose of selling or exposing
for sale any goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 173-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 173-14
173:5

Chapter 183
ROAD SPECIFICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Highways; vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 127.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 161.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 173-14 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 173-14
183:1

ARTICLE I
General Design Standards
§ 183-1. Authorities having jurisdiction.
The individuals or groups listed below are those having jurisdiction over various aspects
of the functioning of the town in regard to planning, design and construction of roadways
within the Town of Batavia. They shall be consulted for necessary approvals, as
stipulated in the various portions of these specifications.
§ 183-2. Applicable standards. [Amended 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
All Town roads shall be constructed in accordance with current Town standard details,
which shall be on file in the offices of the Town Superintendent of Highways and Town
Engineer. In planning, designing, or constructing a roadway within the Town of Batavia,
the latest edition of the following publications shall be considered to be part of these
specifications and shall be adhered to unless otherwise stated in these specifications or
amended by the Town Planning Board with the approval of the Town Superintendent of
Highways and/or the town's Engineer:
Title of Publication Referred To As
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets, by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials
AASHTO
Standard Specifications: Construction and
Materials, by the New York State Department of
Transportation (NYSDOT) (see note)
Standard Specifications
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, by
the New York State Department of
Transportation
MUTCD
A. Town Board: the duly elected governing body of the Town of Batavia.
B. Town Planning Board: the appointed board with approval authority for all proposed
developments, subdivisions, roadways, etc., within the Town of Batavia.
C. Town Superintendent of Highways: the duly elected Superintendent of the Town of
Batavia Highway Department.
D. Town Engineer or Town Consulting Engineer: the appointed engineer, either an
individual or corporation, licensed to practice professional engineering in the State
of New York, representing the town, to be referred to as the "town's Engineer"
throughout these specifications.
E. Town inspector: an individual designated by the Town Planning Board as having
authority to inspect and regulate construction of roadways and infrastructure within
the Town of Batavia, who may be the Town Highway Superintendent, Town
Zoning Officer or the town's Engineer, or other town official.
F. Town Zoning Officer: the appointed Building and Zoning Officer of the Town of
Batavia.
§ 183-1 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-2
183:3
Title of Publication Referred To As
Standard Sheets, by the New York State
Department of Transportation
Standard Sheets
Highway Capacity Manual, by the Transportation
Research Board of the National Research Council
HCM
New York State Guideline for Urban Erosion and
Sedimentation Control, by the Empire State
Chapter, Soil and Water Conservation Society
[Added 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
NOTE: Where the town specifications refer to item numbers, such numbers shall be as
contained in the Standard Specifications.
§ 183-3. Other applicable legislation.
§ 183-4. Street arrangement.
A. It shall also be understood that all roadway design and construction within the town
shall conform to all required provisions of the state environmental quality review
(SEQR) statutory authority, Environmental Conservation Law, 6 NYCRR 617, and
other applicable federal, state, regional, county and local environmental legislation.
B. In situations where sidewalks and curbs are approved by the Town Planning Board,
sidewalk ramps shall be provided in accordance with the Federal Americans with
Disabilities Act, Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).
A. Street systems shall be designed with due regard to the need for convenient traffic
access and circulation; traffic control and safety; access for fire-fighting, snow
removal and street maintenance equipment; and stormwater drainage and sewage
disposal. Streets shall be designed to accommodate the prospective traffic and
arranged to separate through traffic from neighborhood traffic, insofar as it is
practicable.
B. All streets shall be coordinated to comprise a convenient system. Where a
subdivision adjoins undeveloped land, the subdivision's streets shall be laid out to
provide suitable future street connections with the adjoining land when the latter
shall be subdivided. A street thus temporarily dead-ended shall be constructed to
the property line and, if in excess of 200 feet in length, shall be provided with a
temporary turnaround of the same dimensions as for permanent dead-end streets. A
notation shall be made on the subdivision plat providing for temporary easements
for the turnaround until such time as the street is extended. These same
requirements shall apply at the discretion of the Town Planning Board in those
cases where the adjoining land is another section of the same subdivision and which
is not scheduled for development at the same time.
C. Streets shall be logically related to the topography, and all streets shall be arranged
so as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above the grades of
the streets. Grade(s) of street(s) shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. A combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be avoided.
§ 183-2 BATAVIA CODE § 183-4
183:4
§ 183-5. Dead-end streets.
Where a street does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation
is not needed for access to adjoining property, it shall be separated from such boundary
by a distance sufficient to accommodate a lot meeting the requirements of Chapter 235,
Zoning, of this Code. Reserve strips of land shall not be left between the end of a
proposed street and an adjacent piece of property. However, the Town Planning Board
may require the reservation of an easement for pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-desac
of a minimum right-of-way radius of 70 feet shall be provided at the end of any
permanent dead-end street and may be limited to six times the minimum lot width for
the zoning district, such length to be measured to the center point of the cul-de-sac.
§ 183-6. Standards for roadway design.
In addition to the provisions of § 183-2 of these specifications, all streets shall be
designed and constructed to conform to the requirements set forth in the following table
titled "Standards for Town Roadway Design."
Standards for Town Roadway Design1
Design Parameter Minor Streets
Collector4
Streets Major Feeders
Minimum width of rightof-
way (feet) [Amended
10-18-1995 by L.L. No.
1-1995]
50-66 66 As required, but not less
than 66
Minimum width of
pavement5 (feet)
[Amended 12-16-1998
by L.L. No. 2-1998]
22 24 As required, but not less
than 24
D. Where a subdivision abuts on or contains an existing or proposed major feeder or
other existing town, county, or state road, the Town Planning Board may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with or without rear
service alleys, or such other configuration(s) as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to provide separation of through traffic and
local traffic.
E. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed railroad rightof-
way or controlled access highway right-of-way, the Town Planning Board may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at
a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening lands, such as for
parkland use in residential districts or for business, commercial, or industrial
purpose in appropriate districts. Such distance shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
§ 183-4 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-6
183:5
Standards for Town Roadway Design1
Design Parameter Minor Streets
Collector4
Streets Major Feeders
Minimum radius of
horizontal curves2 (feet)
[Amended 12-16-1998
by L.L. No. 2-1998]
100 300 500
Minimum length of
vertical curves (feet)
100, but in no
case less than
20 for each 1%
difference in
grade
200, but in no
case less than
30 for each
1%
difference in
grade
300, but in no case less than
100 for each 1% difference
in grade
Minimum length of
tangents between
horizontal curves (feet)
100 200 200
Maximum grade 7% 5% 3%
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Maximum algebraic
difference in grade
10% 8% 6%
Minimum sight distance3
(feet)
200 300 300
NOTES:
1 Where strict imposition of these standards could result in excessive demands upon
the subdivider, they may be modified by the Town Planning Board, subject to the
approval of the Town Superintendent of Highways and/or the town's Engineer,
and necessary changes in the assumed operating conditions of the vehicles shall
be posted to the degree necessary to ensure safe vehicular operation. Standards
of the AASHTO shall govern in determining safe operating speeds, and signing
requirements shall be as required by the MUTCD. Sizes of roadways (i.e., the
number of lanes required) shall be as required by the HCM.
2 Radius of horizontal curves shall be measured to the center line of the street.
3 Sight distance shall be measured between two points along the center line of
the street on a straight line entirely within the street right-of-way and clear of
obstructions, one of the points to be six inches above the surface of the street and
the other three feet six inches above the surface.
4 Collector streets which do not service an area containing at least 150 dwelling
units, under ultimate area development, may be considered as minor streets for
purposes of design standards. The service area of a collector includes those
dwelling units on minor streets which feed into the collector.
5 "Pavement width" refers to driving lanes; this quantity does not include paved or
unpaved shoulders.
§ 183-6 BATAVIA CODE § 183-7
183:6
§ 183-7. Street intersections.
§ 183-8. Right-of-way, grading and shoulders. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998; 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
Areas within street rights-of-way shall be graded as necessary to eliminate any slopes
steeper than one foot vertical in three feet of horizontal distance. Street shoulders shall
not exceed a slope of 3/4 inch per foot (6%) at right angle to the street center line.
Shoulder widths shall be as shown on typical section diagrams shown in the Town
standard details.
§ 183-9. Street names and signs.
All streets shall be named and such names shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Planning Board. Street names in the Town shall be sufficiently different in sound and
spelling from other street names in the town and those of municipalities and post offices
contiguous to the town so as to avoid confusion. A street which is a continuation of
an existing street shall bear the same name. Relating street names to features of local
historical, topographical, or other natural interest(s) is encouraged. All street name signs,
stop signs, yield signs, and other required permanent signs shall be installed by the Town
Highway Department and paid for by the developer, prior to dedication.
§ 183-10. Monuments.
A. Intersections involving a major feeder shall be held to a minimum and spaced at
least 800 feet apart.
B. Intersections involving a collector street shall be a minimum of 800 feet apart.
C. Intersections involving two minor streets shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart and
shall not be cross (four-cornered) intersections insofar as possible.
D. Within 50 feet of an intersection, streets shall be approximately at right angles, and
in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 60° without additional
channelization. Minimum curb radii shall conform to AASHTO design procedures
and shall be based on the type(s) of expected vehicle use. Curb radii proposed shall
be subject to the approval of the town's Engineer.
E. Access streets into a subdivision shall have minimum curb radii of 20 feet. All
property corners at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of
20 feet or have comparable cutoffs or chords, as the Town Planning Board sees fit.
Within triangular areas formed by the intersecting street lines, for a distance of 75
feet from their intersection and the diagonals connecting the end points of these
lines, visibility for traffic safety shall be provided by exclusion of plantings or
structures and regrading as necessary.
F. Grades within the intersection should not exceed 2%. From 50 to 100 feet from the
center of the intersection, the grades should not exceed 3%.
G. Triangles, circles, or other traffic channeling islands may be required at
intersections where present or anticipated traffic conditions indicate their
advisability for traffic control or safety.
§ 183-7 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-10
183:7
§ 183-11. General street improvements.
In addition to the required improvements specifically referred to elsewhere in these
specifications, subdivision plats shall include provisions for all other customary
elements of street construction and utility service which may be appropriate in each
locality, as determined by the Town Planning Board upon consultation with the town's
Engineer. Such elements may include, but shall not be limited to, street pavement,
signalization, gutters, storm sewers, stormwater inlets, manholes, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting standards, water mains, fire hydrants, fire alarm signal devices, and
sanitary sewers. Underground utilities within the street right-of-way shall be located as
required by the Town Superintendent of Highways and/or town's Engineer; underground
service connections to the property line of each lot shall be installed before the street is
paved. All street improvements and other construction features of the subdivision shall
conform to town specifications (this specification and others) which may be established
from time to time and shall be subject to approval of design drawings, specifications,
and construction by the Town Highway Superintendent and the town's Engineer.
§ 183-12. Widening of existing street right-of-way.
Where a subdivision adjoins an existing street which does not conform to the rightof-
way standards given in the table titled "Standards for Town Roadway Design" (see
§ 183-6 of these specifications), the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way
width necessary to provide, on the subdivision side of the normal center line, a width
which is equal to at least 1/2 of the minimum standard width for the respective type of
street.
§ 183-13. Typical road section. [Amended 4-18-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
One of the typical road sections (and typical details, where appropriate or where
required) shown in the Town standard details shall be required for roadways which
are intended for dedication to the town. Alternative typical sections will be allowed to
A. Permanent survey monuments shall be set (only by a land surveyor licensed in the
State of New York) in the boundary of rights-of-way at intersecting streets, centers
of culs-de-sac, and point of curvature and point of tangency of horizontal curves
(though the point of intersection of short curves may be used instead), where such
is practical, at the discretion of the Town Superintendent of Highways and/or the
town's Engineer. Monuments shall be placed on one side of the street only and at
only one corner of intersecting streets. Adjacent monumented points shall be intervisible.
B. Monument locations shall be shown on the subdivision plat. Field notes of ties to
monuments or a tie sheet shall be submitted to both the Town Planning Board and
Town Highway Superintendent after installation of the monuments.
C. Monuments shall be of stone or concrete and not less than four inches in diameter
or square, and not less than 42 inches long or from the top of underlying rock.
Concrete monuments shall be reinforced with steel rods, and a plug, brass plate, or
pin shall serve as the point of reference. If stone, a drilled hole shall serve as the
point of reference and a magnetic rod or other suitable (ferrous) metal shall be
placed adjacent to the monument to assist field location.
§ 183-10 BATAVIA CODE § 183-13
183:8
fit special conditions only if approved by both the Town Planning Board and Town
Highway Superintendent, following consultation with the town's Engineer.
§ 183-14. Driveways. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 183-15. Drainage. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
A. Residential driveways. These specifications do not cover construction of private
residential driveways. Anyone wishing to make a curb cut on a town road will be
required to obtain a driveway permit from the Town Highway Superintendent, who
will stipulate the design criteria and conditions under which the curb cut
construction will be performed.
B. Commercial/industrial driveways. All driveways of this type shall conform to the
detail for commercial/industrial driveways included in the standard details.15 Any
submittal for a curb cut of this type shall include a design conforming to this
standard detail with a culvert or storm drainage design as appropriate. This design
shall be subject to review by the Town Highway Superintendent and Town
Engineer.
A. General. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to convey stormwater runoff
from within developments and from the upland watershed area along the natural
direction of drainage.
B. Design standards. Design of drainage facilities shall conform to the following
standards, supplemented and superseded by additional requirements as listed:
(1) ASCE Manual of Engineering Practice No. 37, Design and Construction of
Sanitary and Storm Sewers, by the American Society of Civil Engineers.
(2) Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, by the Soil
Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
(3) New York Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment Control by USDA Soil
Conservation Service.
(4) Manholes shall be spaced at intervals not greater than 300 feet.
(5) Minimum size of storm sewers shall be twelve-inch diameter pipe, except as
otherwise permitted by these standards.
(6) Minimum velocity in storm sewers shall be three feet per second when flowing
full.
(7) Storm sewers shall be designed with uniform grade and straight alignment
between manholes, outlets, and drop inlets.
(8) Drop inlets shall be located at intervals not greater than 300 feet, at low points,
and at street intersections.
(9) Drop inlet connections may be eight-inch diameter pipe and shall be connected
15. Editor's Note: See the diagrams included at the end of this chapter.
§ 183-13 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-15
183:9
to manholes.
(10) The minimum inside diameter of manholes shall be 48 inches for twelve-inch
through eighteen-inch sewers, 60 inches for twenty-one-inch through thirtyinch
sewers, and 72 inches for thirty-three-inch through forty-two-inch sewers.
(11) All three-way manholes shall be sixty-inch inside diameter or greater
depending on the size of storm sewers.
(12) Swales and turf-lined channels shall be designed with slopes of not less than
1.0%.
C. Hydrologic design. Storm sewers and other drainage facilities for drainage areas up
to 1,000 acres shall be based on a design flow with a minimum return interval of 25
years. The design of drainage facilities for larger natural watercourse channels shall
be based according to the following:
Drainage Area Return Interval
1,000 acres to 4 square miles 25 years
4 square miles to 20 square miles 50 years
20 square miles and above 100 years
D. Storm sewers and channels. Storm sewers and channels shall be designed to convey
the anticipated runoff from within the development as well as all future
development from the upstream or upland watershed area.
(1) For all drainage areas and major channels or piping systems conveying
stormwater, the design of conveyance systems shall be based on one of the
following runoff calculation methods: Soil Conservation Service Technical
Release 55 (TR55), Soil Conservation Service Technical Release 20 (TR20)
or Rational Method or Modified Rational Method. Other methodologies may
be acceptable upon approval by Town Engineer.
(2) Calculations for all stormwater conveyance systems shall be provided to the
Town Highway Superintendent and shall be subject to review by the Town
Engineer.
E. Open channels. Only natural drainage channels may be continued as open channels.
The Planning Board, after review of topographic conditions with the Highway
Superintendent and Town Engineer, shall make a determination whether storm
sewers will be required for a development. Unless otherwise allowed by the
Planning Board, street drainage systems for subdivisions shall be designed with
storm sewers.
F. Details of hydraulic structures. Complete and sufficient details of hydraulic
structures shall be submitted as part of the plans. This includes, but is not limited
to, cross sections of drainage channels, erosion control facilities, special manholes,
and all such other items as may be necessary to establish fully the methods and
materials to be followed in construction.
G. Surcharging of drainage facilities. Storm drainage systems shall be designed so that
surcharging will not cause backup or flooding of basements. The effect of a twenty-
§ 183-15 BATAVIA CODE § 183-15
183:10
§ 183-16. Stormwater detention and retention. [Added 12-16-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
Detention or retention ponds, sedimentation basins and related control measures shall be
provided where in the judgment of the town such facilities may be required for proper
drainage control. Detention or retention facilities shall be designed to control the runoff
from the developed project site to a rate not to exceed the runoff from the natural,
undeveloped site for all flow conditions. The town reserves the right to establish more
restrictive requirements if the proposed development site caused downstream flooding
even in its natural, undeveloped condition. The town may require an impoundment
area and storm sewers and culverts of sufficient size and type to correct the existing
downstream flooding conditions.
five-year storm shall be studied by calculating the high water elevation and
evaluating the operation of the storm drainage and detention facilities under such
flows.
A. Detention and retention pond requirements.
(1) The pond shall be designed to accept runoff from the design storm of
appropriate return interval based on the project site drainage area and to
provide the required detention or retention volume.
(2) Minimum freeboard above (design high water level to the top of embankment)
shall be two feet.
(3) Controlled overflow structures shall be provided for flows in excess of the
maximum design flow.
(4) Temporary settling basins or sediment sinks shall be provided as required by
the Highway Superintendent and Town Engineer.
(5) The outlet structure shall be designed to discharge flow as a continuous
function of head at a rate not to exceed runoff from the natural, undeveloped
site for all flow conditions, with maximum allowable flow occurring at
maximum pond depth.
(6) Trickle tube outlets shall include anti-vortex devices and trash racks.
(7) Controlled overflows using emergency spillways shall be with spillway crest
not less than two feet below top embankment and one foot above design high
water level.
(8) Pond embankments shall be designed with minimum side slopes of one on
three.
(9) Seepage control collars shall be provided on piping passing through
embankments.
(10) The bottom of ponds shall be designed with a minimum longitudinal slope of
0.5% to drain completely between storms.
B. Stormwater ground recharge.
§ 183-15 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-16
183:11
(1) In areas where positive surface stormwater disposal is not feasible, the town
may allow stormwater ground recharge. The developer shall retain a
geotechnical engineer to provide a detailed report and plan documenting the
ability of the aquifer to receive ground recharge. The report shall include soil
permeability data, geologic features, and soil sampling and exploration data.
Test pits and test borings shall be provided to define the limits of the aquifer
where recharge is proposed.
(2) The ground recharge facility shall include a retention facility to provide for
settling of sediment and for storage. Discharge to the recharge area shall use a
trickle tube or other discharge control. Additional information, including
details of infiltration piping and other facilities, useful life of system, and
operation and maintenance costs shall be provided by the developer.
§ 183-16 BATAVIA CODE § 183-16
183:12
ARTICLE II
Roadway Material and Construction
§ 183-17. General requirements.
All materials used in the work shall conform to the requirements of these specifications,
unless the same are altered by specific requirements under any itemized specification, or
upon the Town Planning Board's approval of modifying notes shown upon the submitted
plans. In the absence of specific references in these specifications to other standards,
the material to be incorporated into any project and the work performed are to conform
to the latest edition of the New York State Department of Transportation's Standard
Specifications, as determined by the town's Engineer.
§ 183-18. Basis of construction.
In order to assure the structural integrity of the subgrade and foundation course, the
following general rules shall apply:
§ 183-19. Roadway excavation.
All excavated or grubbed material shall be reused or disposed of as provided for in
Section 203 of the Standard Specifications or the appropriate town ordinance.
A. Underground utilities shall be constructed outside the pavement area.
B. Where crossover trenches are required for utility services, the trenches shall be
backfilled with Item 203.07, Select Granular Fill, compacted in accordance with
Section 203-3.15 of the Standard Specifications.
(1) Developers shall note that this requirement includes crossovers for gas mains
and other utilities and services.
(2) All utility crossings shall be installed prior to the installation of any stone base.
(3) All utility lines crossing the roadway shall have a minimum of twenty-fourinch
cover from the finished grade to the crown of the utility conduit; this
includes service laterals, gas, electric, and cable television.
C. After properly shaping and obtaining approval of the subgrade from the town
inspector, the foundation course may be placed. Refer to § 183-36 (Inspection) of
these specifications for further detail.
D. Foundation courses for permanent roads must not be used for access roads in wet
weather, or at such times when the subgrade could become pumped into the
foundation course.
E. Where pavements must be placed on an embankment, the entire embankment must
be constructed as required by the appropriate provisions of Section 203 of the
Standard Specifications. If required by the Town Highway Superintendent or the
town inspector, the developer and/or contractor shall provide results of certified
compaction tests undertaken by a competent soils testing laboratory approved by
the town's Engineer.
§ 183-17 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-20
183:13
§ 183-20. Preparing roadway subgrade.
§ 183-21. Roadway subbase.
A. Work. The contractor shall construct the roadway foundation to the designed
subgrade elevation. The subgrade width shall be 12 inches wider on each side than
the pavement and gutter width as shown on the typical road section.16
B. Once graded and rolled, the subgrade shall be inspected by the Town Highway
Superintendent or the town inspector for elevation, alignment, and stability. The
contractor shall make available at the time of inspection the following items: a
transit, the grading hubs used for roadway construction and a local benchmark. Any
unsuitable material found below subgrade shall be removed and replaced as
directed by the town inspector. If the fine grade becomes rutted, it shall be regraded
and rolled prior to placement of the base. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
C. If any unstable or unsuitable subgrade soils are encountered, they shall be removed
and replaced as follows:
(1) The entire soft area shall be undercut to an adequate depth and width as
determined by the Town Highway Superintendent to provide a firm surface.
[Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(2) Mirafi 600x geotextile fabric shall then be laid into the undercut area
overlapping two feet onto non-undercut area on each side.
(3) The undercut area shall be carefully backfilled and compacted in six-inch lifts
with backfill material approved by the town's Engineer.
(4) Mirafi 600x can be substituted only with an approved equal meeting or
exceeding a Mullen Burst test of 600 psi or greater.
A. Work. The contractor shall furnish and put in place a minimum of 12 inches base
of Item 304.03, Subbase Course Type 2, as shown on the typical standard road
section. Lifts shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical methods prior to
acceptance by the town.
B. Method. The subbase shall be placed on a graded, crowned, and compacted
subgrade, free of ruts and disturbed earth as follows:
(1) Where underdrains are required, as shown on the typical sections, after proper
rolling and grading of the subgrade, the three-foot-wide by twelve-inch-deep
underdrain wedge shall have four-inch diameter perforated PVC underdrain
pipe installed into the channel invert continuously. The four-inch underdrain
pipe will be connected by appropriate couplings. Ends of the underdrain shall
be connected to drop inlet weep holes and protrude two to three inches beyond
the inner wall.
(2) The subbase material shall be placed and graded, maintaining the specified
crown and compacted as required under Section 203-3.12 of the Standard
16. Editor's Note: See the diagrams included at the end of this chapter.
§ 183-20 BATAVIA CODE § 183-21
183:14
§ 183-22. Bituminous concrete pavement.
Specifications.
(3) The surface of the subbase shall be placed and graded to conform to the lines
and grades as shown on the typical road section. All depressions and/or boney
areas shall be brought to grade and/or choked with No. 1 and No. 1A
aggregate. The material shall then be rolled thoroughly from the gutter to the
center line.
C. Special care should be given during this operation not to harm the concrete gutters
(i.e., scraping with grader blade or hitting with roller wheels). Special attention
should also be given to obtaining good compaction next to the gutter. Use of a plate
tamper along the gutter line shall be required.
A. Work. The contractor shall furnish and construct bituminous concrete pavement,
installed in compliance with the required thickness and cross section(s) as shown
on the approved plans and on the typical road section, and as further described in
these specifications.
B. Material. The materials shall conform to the latest revision of Section 400 of the
NYSDOT Standard Specifications. Upon request, the contractor shall submit to the
town's Engineer (in writing) the source of the materials and provide a written
description of the material to be used, including size and percentages of the
aggregate and asphalt. The town's Engineer reserves the right to modify the
percentages of the aggregates to be used.
C. Method. Asphalt concrete pavement shall be installed in accordance with Section
400 of the Standard Specifications. Prior to commencing the installation of the
asphalt pavement, the subbase shall be graded and compacted between the concrete
gutters; this shall be performed to provide sufficient vertical clearance between the
top of the gutter and the compacted subbase stone to allow placement of the
specified thickness of asphalt pavement. Concrete gutters will be completely
backfilled and shall have seven curing days prior to paving. The asphalt pavement
shall be placed in the number of courses shown on the typical sections. If the top
course is applied to a road section where houses, buildings or other structures are
still under construction or future, abutting subdivision sections have no other
feasible construction access, the developer shall be responsible for the integrity of
the top course surface. The town will, at the time of dedication of the roadway, hold
the ten-percent contingency figure for the road section as an owner's guaranty until
all houses within the subdivision section are completed or other construction access
for future sections is provided.
D. Before applying the top wearing course, the following will be met:
(1) Any cracked or deteriorated gutters shall be removed and repoured as
described in Article III of these specifications.
(2) Any dips or deteriorated pavement shall be cut out, base checked and/or
removed, base reinstalled and compacted, and binder reinstalled.
(3) The binder surface shall be thoroughly cleaned as required by the Standard
§ 183-21 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-22
183:15
Specifications and the town's Engineer. Broom sweeping or other methods of
cleaning may not be sufficient and flushing with water may be required by the
Town Highway Superintendent or town inspector. All water for flushing shall
be provided by the contractor (or developer) at his own expense.
(4) A tack coat of asphalt emulsion NYSDOT material 702-09 will be required to
be applied at a rate of 0.02 to 0.10 gallons per square yard, where deemed
necessary by the Town Highway Superintendent or town's Engineer.
E. The final top course shall be finished level with or slightly above (maximum 1/4
inch) the concrete gutters; at no time shall it be below.
F. Protection of all new pavement shall be provided until the asphalt has properly set.
This protection is necessary on new roads where the traffic is largely comprised of
cars starting and stopping or by heavy trucks.
G. The construction season for asphalt concrete shall be as required by Section
401-3.01 of the Standard Specifications. Any exceptions to this specification must
be authorized by the Town Highway Superintendent or town's Engineer.
§ 183-22 BATAVIA CODE § 183-22
183:16
ARTICLE III
Concrete Gutters and Curb
§ 183-23. General requirements.
The contractor shall furnish and place Portland cement concrete gutters and curbs as
shown on the approved plans and in accordance with the thickness and cross section as
shown on the typical road section or applicable Standard Sheets. Placement shall also be
as stated in the following specifications, unless prior permission not to construct gutters
or curbs has been obtained from the Town Planning Board.
§ 183-24. Construction materials.
The material shall conform to the Standard Specifications, Section 609, Curbing Gutters
and Concrete Mall, and Section 624, Paved Gutter, and as shown on the appropriate
NYSDOT Standard Sheets.
§ 183-25. Construction methodology.
§ 183-26. Weather considerations and curing.
The forms shall not be removed until the concrete is sufficiently set to prevent chipping
of the edges. The gutter or curb shall be backfilled as soon as possible to prevent
undermining of the gutter or curb in the event of precipitation. The gutters and curb shall
be protected from traffic for seven days to avoid damage to them.
A. Method. The concrete gutters shall be constructed of the shape shown on the typical
road section and shall conform to the lines and grades shown on the approved plans
and as approved by the Town Planning Board. Finished top curbs shall be six inches
above the finished top course elevation adjacent to the curb.
B. Standard six-inch steel forms shall be used and set to the grade and alignment by
stakes established by the developer's engineer for this purpose. This base material
between forms shall be compacted by mechanical means, preferably a vibra-tamper.
These forms shall be oiled before pouring of concrete.
C. To ensure positive stormwater flow, gutters shall be screeded longitudinally with a
suitable straight edge. The screed shall be worked laterally (i.e., parallel to the
center line of the gutter, from the invert of the gutter to the outer edges). Screeding
shall be performed at the appropriate time during the setting of the concrete. When
gutters are installed by this hand method, special attention shall be given to the
spading of the concrete along the sides of the forms.
D. The gutter or curb may also be installed by use of an approved gutter machine using
the proper screed to form the invert shown on the typical road section and equipped
with a vibrator attachment.
E. The contractor shall protect the concrete until after the initial set. Any gutters or
curbs which are damaged with footprints, tire marks, etc., shall be removed and
replaced at the contractor's expense.
§ 183-23 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-26
183:17

ARTICLE IV
Concrete Sidewalks
§ 183-27. General requirements.
§ 183-28. Materials.
§ 183-29. Construction details.
A. Concrete sidewalks shall be installed where required by the Town Planning Board
at locations and of widths as shown on the approved plans. Minimum width of all
walks shall be five feet, zero inches. Walks shall be installed to provide a smooth
and uniform slope and alignment with consideration given to both pedestrian use
and snow removal. Where possible, a grassed mall between the sidewalk and
roadway shall be provided.
B. All walks shall be cross-sloped a minimum of 1/4 inch vertical per foot horizontal
and installed with the back edge elevation equal to that of the edge of pavement of
adjacent roadways. This may require regrading the proposed sidewalk area.
C. If sidewalk installation encroaches on existing open swales or cuts off roadside
drainage in any way, the drainage route shall be piped with a proper size and type
of pipe, to be approved by the town's Engineer.
D. Walks must be constructed continuously through all residential driveways.
Crossing of large width or high traffic volume driveways or entrance roads shall be
dependent upon the individual circumstances subject to the discretion of the Town
Highway Superintendent.
A. All materials shall meet the requirements of Section 608 of the Standard
Specifications.
B. The sidewalk base course shall be a minimum of four inches of Item 304.03,
Subbase Course Type 2.
A. The contractor shall remove any topsoil and unsuitable subsoil to obtain a stabilized
subgrade upon which the new walks are to be constructed. The subgrade must then
be graded, sloped and compacted before placement of the stone base course.
B. Base course material shall be installed to extend six inches outside the limits of the
proposed sidewalks. Stone base material shall be thoroughly compacted by use of a
minimum two-ton roller until no movement is observed ahead of the roller. If the
subgrade area becomes soft during construction, the town inspector may order the
soft material removed and the excavation filled with stone.
C. Concrete shall be placed in sections not to exceed 20 feet in length. Dummy joints
shall be formed every five feet and shall be at least one inch deep.
D. Concrete placement methods shall be in conformity with the requirements of
Section 608-3.01 of the Standard Specifications.
E. The sidewalk surface shall be properly floated and troweled and the edges of each
five-foot square block shall be finished with an edging tool. The entire surface shall
§ 183-27 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-29
183:19
then be broom finished.
§ 183-29 BATAVIA CODE § 183-29
183:20
ARTICLE V
Drainage Structures
§ 183-30. General requirements.
§ 183-31. Drainage system materials. [Added 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
Materials shall be in accordance with the following drainage specifications:
A. Work. The contractor shall furnish and place required drainage structures, including
pipe, manholes, drop inlets, underdrains and other items, as shown on the approved
plans and in accordance with all applicable requirements of these specifications.
B. Materials. All materials shall conform to the requirements of the Standard
Specifications and NYSDOT Standard Sheets. If required by the town's Engineer,
the contractor shall furnish certifications to the effect that the material meets the
requirements of the Standard Specifications.
C. Construction details.
(1) Drainage structures shall be installed in accordance with Sections 203, 600,
and 655 of the Standard Specifications and the associated Standard Sheets.
Excavation for pipes shall be in accordance with Standard Sheet Nos. 203-4R1
and No. 203-5R1. Excavation for structures shall provide a clear distance of
two feet on all sides to allow proper compaction of backfill material.
(2) All pipes and drainage structures within the roadway area shall be backfilled
with Item 203.07, Select Granular Fill, except underdrains, which shall be
backfilled with Item 605.1001, Underdrain Filter, Type 2. All drainage
structures and pipe, except underdrains, which are outside of the roadway area
may be backfilled with suitable excavated material if approved by the town's
Engineer.
A. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be supplied in conformance with ASTM
Specification C-76 Wall B. Joints shall be of the bell and spigot type with
compression-type joint.
B. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM D-3034,
minimum wall thickness SDR 35 with elastomeric gasket joint, ASTM D-3212.
C. Corrugated polyethylene pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM D-1248 with
an integrally formed smooth interior. Couplings shall be corrugated to match the
pipe corrugation and shall be furnished with a mastic-type gasket. All fittings shall
be molded or fabricated by the manufacturer and shall provide a watertight
connection as manufactured by ADS Type N-12 Pipe or approved equal.
D. Corrugated steel pipe. All pipes shall be coated inside and outside with joints made
with connecting bands and neoprene gaskets. Thickness gauges will be dependent
on the load conditions, except that 16 gauge shall be the minimum allowable
thickness.
E. Storm laterals.
§ 183-30 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-31
183:21
(1) Corrugated steel pipe shall be coated inside and outside and have joints with
connecting bands and neoprene gaskets. Thickness gauge will be dependent on
the load conditions, except that 16 gauge shall be the minimum allowable
thickness. Minimum six-inch diameter.
(2) PVC conforming to ASTM D-3034, minimum six inches in diameter and
standard lengths installed.
F. Catch basin leads shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and be perforated.
(1) Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVCP).
(2) Corrugated steel pipe (CSP).
(3) Polyethylene corrugated pipe (PECP).
G. Manholes and manhole ladders.
(1) Precast reinforced concrete sections shall be manufactured in accordance with
ASTM Specification C-478. Riser sections shall have tongue and groove ends
and super "O" joints and gaskets conforming to ASTM C-433. Manhole bases
may be preformed or poured in the field.
(2) All manholes shall be sealed inside completely with two coats of heavy-duty
eater repellent protective coating made of coal tar which complies with ASTM
Specification D-450, Type B.
(3) Manholes constructed of other materials shall be considered for approval
following a review of said manhole construction. In specifying those
manholes, the developer's engineer shall submit adequate design data and/or
shop drawings to substantiate the installation.
H. Manhole ladder and steps.
(1) Manhole ladders or steps shall be provided in all storm manholes and shall be
constructed of one of the following materials:
(a) Noncorrodible, aluminum magnesium alloy ladders, with intermediate
supports at five-foot intervals.
(b) Forged aluminum with drop front design and grooved tread surface.
(2) Steps shall be cast into the walls of riser sections and shall be aligned in each
section to form a continuous ladder with rungs equally spaced vertically in the
assembled manhole at a distance of 12 inches apart. Steps shall be of cast iron
with an asphalt coating as manufactured by Neenah R-1989E.
I. Frames and covers shall be Neenah R-1723, Syracuse Castings 1009, 1032,
1042-16 (Cover No. 1182025) or approved equal with a vented cover. The inside
diameter for clearance shall be a minimum of 23 inches.
J. Catch basin frames and grates shall be rectangular galvanized (ASTM A-123),
sized to fit gutter inlets or field inlets. The gutter grates shall be size No. 1 to fit the
catch basin inside dimension of 18 inches by 24 inches. The minimum field inlet
§ 183-31 BATAVIA CODE § 183-31
183:22
shall be size No. 9 to fit a field inlet of 24 inches by 24 inches inside dimension.
K. Catch basin manholes shall be set to allow a No. 1 grate to be installed.
L. Frames and grates shall be as specified in NYSDOT Specification Drawing
655-6R1. All grates shall be bolted to the frames.
§ 183-31 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-31
183:23

ARTICLE VI
General Grading, Trimming and Related Work
§ 183-32. Streets to be free of mud, dust or debris.
Developers and/or builders will be responsible for keeping subdivision streets generally
free of mud or dust and the roadway right-of-way free of construction material or debris.
If the subdivision is found out of compliance to this regulation, the authorized town
official (i.e., town inspector, Zoning Officer, Highway Superintendent, town's Engineer,
or Town Planning Board) may place a stop-work order on the portion of the project
found to be in violation, not conduct any further inspections, or both, until the violation
is brought into compliance with this regulation and is in accordance with the approved
plans.
§ 183-33. Drainage ditches. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
Where open storm drainage ditches or swales are constructed, the side slopes and bottom
shall be neatly graded and left in a clean condition. Ditches and side slopes shall
be seeded in accordance with the New York State Guidelines for Urban Erosion and
Sedimentation Control.
§ 183-34. Vacant lots.
Vacant, unsold lots shall not be used as a depository for scrap lumber or trash and shall
be rough graded to provide positive drainage. Filling of lots will not be allowed without
a properly authorized town fill permit.
§ 183-32 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-34
183:25

ARTICLE VII
Administrative Procedures
§ 183-35. Engineering drawings and approvals required.
A. All roadways within the town shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed
by the State of New York. All roadway field surveying (excluding topographic
surveys) and boundary designations shall be performed by a land surveyor licensed
by the State of New York.
B. All roadway plans submitted are subject to the written approval of the Town
Planning Board, Town Highway Superintendent, and town's Engineer. If the road
is to be dedicated to the town, final acceptance of the road by the Town Board will
be required prior to dedication. Other approvals, in addition to those required by the
town, may be necessary. These include, but are not limited to, the Genesee County
Highway Department, Genesee County Planning Department, New York State
Department of Transportation, New York State Thruway Authority, New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, federal agencies as appropriate
(i.e., construction through wetlands or across protected waters, etc.), and governing
regional agencies as required. It is the applicant's responsibility to procure all
approvals required. The town shall not bear any responsibility for approvals other
than those required directly by the town.
C. In accordance with Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, the applicant for a
subdivision approval shall meet with the Town Planning Board prior to the
Planning Board considering the proposed preliminary subdivision plan for
approval. Following this meeting, and prior to the Planning Board's approval of the
preliminary subdivision plan, the Planning Board shall classify the proposed
roadway(s) (i.e., minor road, collector road, major feeder, etc.) in accordance with
the road classifications described in these specifications and the typical sections. At
such time, the Planning Board shall also determine the required roadway
improvements (i.e., curbs, gutters, tree planting, streetlighting, etc.). The applicant
shall be notified of the Planning Board's roadway classification and required
improvements in writing. Following receipt of the Planning Board's desired
roadway classification and required improvements, the applicant's engineer shall
design the proposed roadway(s) in accordance with the Planning Board's directions
and these specifications.
D. All plans submitted must show, at minimum, the following: location map (one inch
equals 2,000 feet or larger scale) showing the proposed road in relation to other
roads in the town; center-line elevation of the pavement; location and elevation of
utilities (plan and profile views required for all utilities); location and elevation of
all drainage facilities (plan and profile required for all storm sewers, and plan with
proposed contours required for swales and ditches); location and elevation of the
following horizontal curve data: point of curvature, point of intersection, point of
tangency, and angle of curve; and location and elevation of the following vertical
curve data: point of curve, high point or low point, roadway grades, etc. Plan and
profile view of all proposed roadways is required. The plans submitted shall have
scales no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet (horizontal) and one inch equals five
feet (vertical). Survey data relative to the placement of monuments shall be as per
§ 183-10 of these specifications.
§ 183-35 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-35
183:27
§ 183-36. Inspection.
E. The plans submitted shall also include appropriate details, including necessary town
typical roadway sections, and details for curbing, gutters, stormwater facilities,
sidewalks, pavement striping, signalization, etc.
F. Also submitted with the plans shall be an engineer's design report, which shall
describe the bases for the design of the road. At minimum, the report shall include
geometric design calculations, the horizontal and vertical alignment of the roadway,
soils data, and detailed stormwater calculations using a computational method
acceptable to the town's Engineer.
G. The requirements of Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, of this Code must be met
by each applicant, in addition to the requirements of this specification. All
requirements of all other Town of Batavia ordinances shall also be observed.
A. Inspections by the town are required at each of the following stages of roadway
construction:
(1) Completion of clearing and grubbing and preparation of the subgrade (one
inspection for clearing/subgrade).
(2) Following installation of utilities, curbs (if required) and gutters (if required).
(3) Following preparation of roadway subgrade and, if required, sidewalk
subgrade.
(4) Following placement of the binder (base) course.
(5) Following placement of the top course.
(6) Final inspection prior to dedication to the town. Final inspection shall be
performed by the Town Highway Superintendent, owners of various utilities
(including the Town Water and Sewer Superintendent, if applicable), Town
Planning Board Chairman, town's Engineer, and others as appropriate.
B. The contractor/developer is responsible for arranging all inspection visits with the
town. The contractor/developer shall provide equipment and references sufficient
for the town inspection representative to check grade and alignment. This shall
include a transit or level, grading stakes and hubs and a local benchmark for the
project. [Added 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
C. All inspections are to be performed by the Town Highway Superintendent and/or
the town inspector. The inspections listed above are suggested; follow-up
inspections will be made as required until approval of each required inspection item
is received by the contractor/developer in writing.
D. The cost of inspection shall be borne by the contractor/developer, pursuant to
Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land. The town retains the right to invoice the
contractor/developer additional fees for inspections which require follow-up site
visits by the town inspector beyond the inspections required under Subsection A.
E. Inspections shall be scheduled with the Town Highway Superintendent and the
§ 183-35 BATAVIA CODE § 183-36
183:28
§ 183-37. Dedication.
Town Planning Board Chairman a minimum of 72 hours in advance of the
requested inspection.
A. Prior to dedication, the written recommendation for acceptance must be received by
the Town Board. Said recommendation must be provided by the Town Highway
Superintendent and endorsed by the Town Planning Board and town's Engineer.
B. Other approvals required prior to dedication may include the Genesee County
Highway Department, Genesee County Planning Department, New York State
Department of Transportation, New York State Thruway Authority, and other
agencies as applicable.
C. Prior to dedication, the contractor/developer shall furnish to the town record
drawings indicating as-built, approved roadway conditions. Said drawings are to be
provided as follows:
(1) One copy of reproducible as-built mylars to the Town Planning Board,
stamped by a licensed engineer or land surveyor certifying that the facilities
have been installed as indicated on the as-built plans. [Amended 12-16-1998
by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(2) One copy of nonreproducible prints to each of the Town Highway
Superintendent, Town Planning Board, and town's Engineer. If infrastructure
to be dedicated to the town (i.e., water, sanitary sewer, etc.) is included on the
drawings, one additional set of nonreproducible drawings shall be transmitted
to the Town Water and Sewer Superintendent.
D. One week prior to the dedication, a marketable title to the dedicated right-of-way
shall be given to the Town Board. Said title shall be delivered to the Town Hall
with written receipt requested or by certified mail (return receipt requested).
E. The town may require a guaranty of 10% of the value of the road from the roadway
contractor/developer, in accordance with the provisions of § 183-22C of these
specifications.
§ 183-36 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-37
183:29

ARTICLE VIII
Applicability
§ 183-38. General application of specifications.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development and construction of streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, parkways, alleys or other ways both within and
outside of any existing or proposed subdivisions within the Town of Batavia.
§ 183-39. Approval not required for certain improvements.
Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, unless otherwise required
by Article 16 of the New York State Town Law or by any other law, rule or regulation,
the Town of Batavia Planning Board's and Town Engineer's review and approval under
this chapter shall not be required for any improvements proposed to dedicated streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, parkways, alleys or other ways within the Town of
Batavia.
§ 183-38 ROAD SPECIFICATIONS § 183-39
183:31

Chapter 191
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Land separation — See Ch. 144.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 229.
§ 183-39 SEWER USE § 183-39
191:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 191-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of public and private sewers and
drains, the installation and connection of building sewers, the discharge of waters and
wastes into the public sewer system, the quantity and quality of discharged wastes, the
degree of pretreatment required, the control of industrial wastewater discharge and of
other miscellaneous permits and provide penalties for violations thereof in the Town of
Batavia, Genesee County, New York. These regulations prohibit the disposal into the
public sewer system of any pollutant or waste by any person that is in violations of
the federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendment of 1972, and any amendments thereto, and any more stringent New York
State, Genesee County, Town of Batavia, or City of Batavia local standards.
§ 191-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural the singular. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
B. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act and amendments
thereto, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — EPA and/or DEC.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — The owner in the case of a sole
proprietorship, a partner in the case of a partnership or the president or other officer
so designated by resolution in the case of a corporation.
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BPDES — Town of Batavia Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sanitary sewer or other place of disposal.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine added
to water, wastewater or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine
remaining at the end of a fifteen-minute contact period.
CITY — City of Batavia, Genesee County, New York.
§ 191-1 SEWER USE § 191-2
191:3
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Batavia, Genesee County,
New York.
COMMERCIAL USER — Any nonresidential user not within the definition of an
industrial user.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total
suspended solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform bacteria, chlorine demand, phosphorus
and phosphorus compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin,
nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, if the wastewater treatment system was designed
to treat such pollutants and removes such pollutants to a substantial degree, except
as prohibited herein or identified in the city's SPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several effluent portions
collected during a specified time period and combined to make a representative
sample.
CONNECTION — The physical tie-in of the building sewer or sewer extension to
the public sanitary sewer.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration during which the only pollutant added to the
water is heat.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWAGE — The Town of Batavia Water/
Wastewater Maintenance Supervisor.
DIRECTOR — The Water/Wastewater Maintenance Supervisor as designated by
the Town Board or his duly authorized agent or representative.
DISTRICT or SEWER DISTRICT — Any Town of Batavia sewer district.
DOMESTIC WASTES — The wastewater from the noncommercial preparation,
cooking and handling of food or containing human excrement and similar matter
from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain period of
time.
FLOW VOLUME — The quantity of wastes or liquid.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user of the publicly owned wastewater treatment
system that:
(1) Is identified in Division A, B, D, E or I of the Federal Standard Industrial
§ 191-2 BATAVIA CODE § 191-2
191:4
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater resulting from the processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments as distinct
from domestic wastes.
INTERFERENCE — Inhibition or disruption of the performance or operation of
the wastewater treatment system which contributes to a violation of the SPDES or
the applicable discharge permits or conditions.
MASS EMISSION RATE — The weight of material discharged to the wastewater
treatment system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass
emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination
of constituents.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any
other body of surface or ground water.
OWNER — A person having legal title to real property.
PERSON — Any and all persons, individual, firm, company, association, society,
municipal or private corporation, group, institution, enterprise, governmental
agency or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any waste, impurity, or other additive, such as heat or
radioactivity, that changes the quality and character of water delivered to the user
by the public water supply system or the user's private well supply. Private well
supplies may also contain pollutants inherent in the groundwater supply.
PRETREATMENT — The application of physical, chemical and/or biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant
properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the wastewater
treatment system.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal rules and regulations
implementing the Act, including any amendments thereto, as well as any
nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or
regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied. The Department of Water
and Sewage recognizes that in some cases these pretreatment standards may not
be sufficient to protect the operation of the wastewater treatment system, or make
it unable to comply with the terms of the SPDES permit. In such cases, the
Classification Manual;
Discharges toxic or poisonous substances or any substance(s) which either
singularly or in combination with other contributory users causes interference
in the wastewater treatment system;
(2)
Has in its wastewater any of the prohibited substances or characteristics
described in Article IV, § 191-16, Prohibited wastewater discharges; or
(3)
Has in its wastewater any concentrations or characteristics in excess of those
stipulated in Article IV, § 191-17, Limitations on wastewater discharges.
(4)
§ 191-2 SEWER USE § 191-2
191:5
Department of Water and Sewage reserves the right to impose more stringent
pretreatment standards than those specified in the EPA regulations.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this
instance by a Town sewer district or the city. This definition includes any sewers
that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant but does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS TREATMENT PLANT or POTW
TREATMENT PLANT—That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide
treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility. It may be a sanitary or storm sewer.
RESIDENTIAL USER — A user who introduces wastewater into the wastewater
treatment system from premises used only for human residence.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SERVICE CHARGE — The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater, stormwater or drainage
water.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU —
(1) All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
Any other industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown water);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Department of Water and Sewage on the
basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
(3) Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the above criteria has no
§ 191-2 BATAVIA CODE § 191-2
191:6
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industry is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
SLUG — Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-fourhour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
SPDES—The New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set forth
in the Environmental Conservation Law, Article 17, Titles 7 and 8.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Department of Water
and Sewage may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with current regulations,
determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in
which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average
limit for the same pollutant parameter;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which
33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a
six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or
the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oil, and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violations of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer
term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise
of its emergency authority under § 191-28 and the legislative intent of this
chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for
starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as
baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic selfmonitoring
reports; and
(6)
Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(7)
§ 191-2 SEWER USE § 191-2
191:7
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER — Any flow originating from or resulting from any form of
natural precipitation. This flow can occur during, immediately following or
substantially after (such as snow melt) the precipitation event.
SURCHARGE — The assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied
on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values
established as representative of normal sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and that is removable
by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater and referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
TOWN — The Town of Batavia, Genesee County, New York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Batavia, Genesee County,
New York.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which
constitutes a hazard to human beings or animal or plant life or inhibits aquatic
life or creates a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from a
wastewater treatment plant. See § 191-16B, Toxic substances.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by this chapter and/or the effluent standards in effect, or water whose
discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards.
USER—Any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater
into the Town's wastewater treatment system.
WASTE — Includes wastewater and any and all other impurities or waste
substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, heat or radioactive, associated with human
habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing,
or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
WASTEWATER (sometimes referred to as "sewage") — The liquid and watercarried
industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is
discharged into or permitted to enter the Town wastewater treatment system.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters,
including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define,
classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM (used interchangeably with "potw") —
Any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned by the Town or City
of Batavia for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of industrial and domestic wastes, or necessary to recycle or reuse
water at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the system, including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, wastewater collection systems, pumping,
§ 191-2 BATAVIA CODE § 191-2
191:8
power, and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a
reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities;
and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water
pollution control plant" or "POTW treatment plant."
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.
WPCF — The Water Pollution Control Federation.
C. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest edition of
"Glossary - Water and Wastewater Control Engineering," published by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation.
§ 191-2 SEWER USE § 191-2
191:9

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 191-3. Unsanitary deposit of waste prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town of Batavia, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or
other objectionable waste, except as provided by Chapter 4, Subchapter B, Part 364 of
the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation and/or Chapter 2, Regulation, of the Genesee County Sanitary Code.
§ 191-4. Discharge of untreated wastes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Batavia, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any wastes except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions and requirements of applicable federal,
state, county and local laws.
§ 191-5. Construction of privies, septic tanks and cesspools restricted.
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater within an operating sewer district in the Town.
§ 191-6. Connection to public sewer required. [Amended 4-18-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within an operating sewer district in
the Town is hereby required at his expense to install wastewater facilities therein and
to connect such facilities directly to the proper public sanitary sewer, provided that said
public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line, and connection is mandated by
either the Genesee County Health Department or the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. Said connection shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter as contained herein. Owners shall connect within 90 days after the date
of official notice to do so. Further, at any time, said described owners may voluntarily
connect to the public sanitary sewer system as set forth herein.
§ 191-7. Continuation of privies and septic tanks when connection permit is
refused.
The provisions of § 191-5 of this chapter shall be inapplicable to any person refused a
permit based on lack of available sanitary sewer capacity, provided that all such persons
shall be governed by § 191-6 of this chapter when it is determined by the Batavia Town
Board that adequate capacity is available.
§ 191-3 SEWER USE § 191-7
191:11

ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 191-8. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Department of Water and Sewage.
§ 191-9. Fees; application for permit; insurance.
A. Connection permit.
(1) There shall be two classes of permits for connection to the Town wastewater
treatment system:
(a) For residential and commercial users; and
(b) For industrial users.
(2) In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town's Water and Sewage Department.
B. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director to enforce this
chapter.
A. The connection fee for new connections shall be set from time to time by a Town
Board resolution, payable at the time of application for a permit; however, this fee
may be increased at the discretion of the Department of Water and Sewage for
nontypical or unusual connections to cover the additional nontypical permit work
items as required for the particular connection. This permit fee shall not be required
for all structures in existence within a Town of Batavia sewer district that are served
by the initially constructed sanitary sewers in accordance with § 191-6 of this
chapter. Any subsequent in-district or out-of-district sewer extension shall pay the
connection fee.
B. The permit fee includes permit processing, the physical tap into the public sewer,
including saddle materials by the Town, field location of connection and
consultation on building sewer locations, inspection of building sewer construction
and supervision of building sewer tests. The owner and his contractor, if any, shall
make application on a form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any construction plans, construction specifications, insurance
certificates, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Department of Water and Sewage.
C. Insurance requirement. The contractor or owner installing said private sewer line
and connecting the same to the Town's public sewer shall, prior to undertaking any
work, procure and file certificates of insurance with the Batavia Town Clerk
insuring the Town of Batavia as follows:
(1) General liability covering bodily injury, wrongful death and property damage
as follows: comprehensive form; premises-operations; explosion and collapse
§ 191-8 SEWER USE § 191-9
191:13
§ 191-10. Cost to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, testing and operation
and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Town from any loss or damage (including claims of others against the
Town) it sustains that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
§ 191-11. Separate sewer required for each building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except
that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the
Town does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused
by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
§ 191-12. Use of existing building sewers.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the Department of Water and Sewage, to meet all
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 191-13. Rules and regulations governing construction.
hazard; underground hazard; products/completed operations hazard;
contractual insurance; broad form property damage; independent contractors;
and personal injury: $500,000 single limit on account of each accident.
(2) Owner's and contractor's protective: $500,000 single limit on account of each
occurrence.
A. Building sewer.
(1) The building sewer shall be:
(a) Four-inch extra-heavy cast or ductile iron soil pipe meeting the
requirements of ASTM A74, latest revision, or Town-approved equals.
Town-approved couplings to be used.
(b) Four-inch plastic pipe utilizing virgin resin and meeting the requirements
of ASTM D3034 or F789, latest revision, with minimum SDR of 35 or
minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi, or nonpressure PVC pipe labeled
"Schedule 40," ASTM D-2665 and D-1785, latest revision. Joints for
plastic pipe shall meet the "Specification for Joints for Drain and Sewer
Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals," ASTM 3212, latest
revision. Chemically welded joints shall not be allowed.
(2) Six-inch-diameter pipe shall be used for any structure having more than four
units or an estimated average daily wastewater flow greater than 1,000 gallons
per day.
§ 191-9 BATAVIA CODE § 191-13
191:14
(3) For buildings requiring wastewater pumping, the discharge pipe shall be PVC
or HDPE pressure pipe, AWWA Specification C-900 (latest revision), with
minimum SDR of 18 or such material as is approved by the Department of
Water and Sewage in writing. All pressure pipe shall have a minimum working
pressure of 150 pounds per square inch.
(4) ASTM tests on all sewer pipes must be performed in the United States. Any
variance from the sewer described above must be approved by the Department
of Water and Sewage.
B. The slope of the sewers described shall be 1/4 inch per foot unless special
permission is obtained from the Department of Water and Sewage.
C. The building sewers shall have a minimum horizontal separation of 10 feet from the
water service. If this is not possible, any potable water line shall be above the sewer
and shall have a minimum vertical separation from the top of the sewer to the
bottom of the waterline of 1 1/2 feet from the water distribution main or service
connection and shall be in a separate trench or, if it must be located in the same
trench, on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the sewer and at an
elevation so that the bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of
the sewer. In a case where neither of these criteria can be accomplished or where a
crossover is required, construction plans shall be submitted to the Department of
Water and Sewage for approval.
D. The building sewer shall be brought to the building at a depth sufficient to afford
protection from frost. It shall be laid at a uniform grade in straight alignment insofar
as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings.
E. A minimum six-inch pipe is to be used in all road crossings. Road crossings shall
have a minimum cover of six feet and be carefully tamped and backfilled with select
material in accordance with requirements of the appropriate highway authorities
and as approved by the Department of Water and Sewage. If such cover cannot be
obtained, pipe shall be encased with six inches of concrete. A six-inch cleanout with
a cast or ductile iron or PVC riser and cap is to be installed in the vicinity of the
right-of-way line when a road crossing is installed.
F. All approved building sewer pipe shall be bedded with four-inch minimum
compacted cushion of No. 1 or No. 1A broken stone under the pipe and up the
spring line (vertical midpoint of pipe). Backfill material from pipe bed to 18 inches
above pipe must pass a one-inch screen test and be installed in at least two lifts,
with each lift to be compacted to optimum density. The remainder of the trench
from 18 inches to grade must be made in multiple lifts with suitable materials
containing stones no greater than six inches in their greatest dimension and with
each lift to be compacted to optimum density. Pipe shall be bedded carefully on the
compacted material so that it does not ride on bells or joints. No slag material is to
be allowed for house connections.
G. No footing drains, roof drains, or other drains carrying surface or ground water shall
be connected to the building or sanitary sewer. A sump pump will be provided by
the property owner wherever required to carry ground and surface water to a natural
outlet or storm sewer. Where any work is performed in a street or highway right-of-
§ 191-13 SEWER USE § 191-13
191:15
way, the owner or his agent shall first obtain a permit from the proper state, county
or Town highway authorities. Notice or request for inspection or final approval
by highway authorities will be the responsibility of the owner or his agent. Utility
companies are to be notified if work may affect their facilities.
H. All building sewers, at the discretion of the Department of Water and Sewage, shall
be air tested and/or smoke tested for leakage after installation. The test shall be
conducted on all joints that would be exposed to the infiltration of groundwater,
surface water or other extraneous sources of unpolluted waters. The test shall be
conducted from the point as close to the connection to the public sewer as possible,
to the building plumbing system, and shall be carried out prior to backfilling the
building sewer. Testing may also be carried out after backfilling if in the discretion
of the Department of Water and Sewage it is deemed necessary. All tests shall be
witnessed by the Department of Water and Sewage or an authorized representative.
I. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected to the satisfaction of
the Department of Water and Sewage. In the event of unstable soil conditions,
special construction methods may be required but shall be approved in writing by
the Department of Water and Sewage.
J. Each building sewer or drain must be provided with a cleanout at the interior face
of the house wall, at bends greater than 45°, at road crossings and at least for every
100 feet of length, the openings to be a minimum of three inches above the cellar
floor or the ground surface outside buildings. Double hand traps are required when
the trap is in the wall or inside the building. No trap or vent shall be placed less than
five feet from any window, door or ventilation intake.
K. Connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall be:
(1) For new public sanitary sewer construction: plastic, cast or ductile iron, wye
branch and/or riser installed at the time of construction of the sanitary sewer.
All wye branches or risers shall comply with appropriate pipe specifications
referenced elsewhere in this chapter. Joints shall be compatible with the
above-referenced specifications for the type of pipe used and shall be approved
by the Department of Water and Sewage. All damaged branches shall be
replaced. All connections shall be watertight. Concrete encasement of
branches, or mortar joints, shall not be deemed watertight. Risers shall be
braced against the trench wall or supported otherwise.
(2) For existing public sanitary sewers: saddle-type connections to the public
sanitary sewers (called main sewer) carried out by the Department of Water
and Sewage shall be made in a smooth, machine-drilled, round hole. The
fitting used shall be made to ensure that it will not protrude into the main
sewer. The fitting shall fit the contour of the inside of the main sewer and be
designed for the size of pipe into which construction is being made. Oneeighth-
inch clearance shall be provided between and fitting and the hole and
between the shoulder of the fitting and face of the main pipe. These spaces
shall be completely filled with waterproof joint material capable of
withstanding any stress or strain likely to be encountered in normal sanitary
sewer construction or maintenance. The fitting shall be manufactured of an
aluminum alloy, stainless steel or other approved material and shall be capable
§ 191-13 BATAVIA CODE § 191-13
191:16
of receiving all types of pipe approved for house service connections. It shall
be held in place until the adhesive is set.
L. All excavations for building or sanitary sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Department of Water and Sewage
and to the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Ditches and culvert pipes for storm
and surface water or other utilities disturbed during installation of sewers shall be
replaced to their original condition. All driveways and parking areas shall be
backfilled with select fill.
M. Within 30 days of connection to the public sewer, any septic tank, cesspool and
similar private wastewater disposal facility shall be abandoned, emptied and filled
with a suitable material approved by the Department of Water and Sewage.
N. Variations in the requirements set forth in Subsections A through F, inclusive, J and
K may be made in special circumstances if approved by the Department of Water
and Sewage in writing.
§ 191-13 SEWER USE § 191-13
191:17

ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 191-14. Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 191-15. Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural
outlet if in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations on approval of the
Department of Water and Sewage and upon obtaining a SPDES permit from DEC.
§ 191-16. Prohibited wastewater discharges.
No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or deposited into
the wastewater treatment system any wastewater which contains the following:
A. Flammable or explosive mixtures. Liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater treatment system or to the operation of the system. At no time shall
there be discharged any waste stream with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°
F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil, crank
case oil, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides.
B. Toxic substances. Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards
promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act, and chemical elements or
compounds, phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, or any other
substances which singly or by interaction with other wastes are not susceptible to
treatment or which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the
wastewater treatment system or that will pass through the system without being
treated to the required degree.
C. Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the
wastewater treatment system. All wastes discharged to the public sewer system
must have a pH value in the range of six to ten standard units. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic products.
[Amended 7-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
D. Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater treatment system, such as, but not limited to,
§ 191-14 SEWER USE § 191-16
191:19
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, hair and fleshings or hides, animal guts
or tissues, entrails, bones, spent lime, stone or marble dust, grass clippings, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil and similar substances. This prohibition
includes any wastewater which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the
public wastewater treatment system, forms suspended solids which obstruct the
flow in the sewer or create a condition that interferes with the proper operation of
the wastewater treatment system.
E. Oil and grease. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.), and determined by
the Director to be potentially harmful to the operation and efficiency of the POTW.
F. Excessive temperature. Any wastewater which exceeds a temperature of 150° F.
(65° C.) or which causes the temperature of the influent to the wastewater treatment
works to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
G. Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow
conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers.
H. Noxious materials. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance
or hazard to any form of life or are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer
for its maintenance and repair.
I. Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use and/or which will or may cause
damage or hazard to the wastewater treatment system or personnel operating the
system.
J. Excessive discharge rate. Quantities of wastewater flow, concentrations, or both,
which constitute a slug as defined herein.
K. Discolored material. Wastes with color, such as but not limited to dye water or
vegetable tanning solution, that is not removable by the treatment process.
L. Wastes with unusually high biochemical oxygen demand, chlorine demand, total
suspended solids, phosphorus, or ammonia nitrogen levels, except when a
surcharge agreement has been affected.
M. Any other wastes which, in the opinion of the Director, may be detrimental to the
maintenance and operation of the wastewater treatment system or may affect the
sewage treatment process to the extent that the effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the Director will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of such wastes in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment works,
§ 191-16 BATAVIA CODE § 191-16
191:20
§ 191-17. Limitations on wastewater discharges.
degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment works and other
pertinent factors.
A. General limitations on incompatible pollutants. No person shall discharge or
convey, or permit or allow to be discharged or conveyed, to a public sanitary sewer
any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants of such character or quantity
that will:
(1) Violate pretreatment standards.
(2) Cause the wastewater treatments works to violate its SPDES permit
requirements.
(3) Violate the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, rules or
regulations.
(4) Not be susceptible to treatment or interfere with the process or efficiency of
the wastewater treatment system.
B. Specific limitations on certain incompatible pollutants.
(1) The following are the maximum concentrations of pollutants allowable in
wastewater discharges to the wastewater treatment system. Dilution of any
wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
Parameter Limit
(mg/l)
30-Day Average
Effluent Concentration
Limits
(mg/l)
1-Day Maximum
Effluent Concentration
Arsenic (total) 0.1 0.2
Cadmium 0.3 0.7
Chromium (total) 1.7 2.8
Copper (total) 2.1 3.4
Cyanide (C12
amenable)
0.3 0.9
Cyanide (total) 0.7 1.2
Fluorides 4.0
Lead (total) 0.4 0.7
Mercury 0.1 0.2
Nickel (total) 2.4 4.0
Selenium (total) 0.1 0.2
Silver (total) 0.3 0.5
Sulfide 6.0
§ 191-16 SEWER USE § 191-17
191:21
Parameter Limit
(mg/l)
30-Day Average
Effluent Concentration
Limits
(mg/l)
1-Day Maximum
Effluent Concentration
Zinc (total) 1.5 2.6
Total toxic organics _ 2.1
(2) For the purpose of enforcement of discharge limits, consecutive samples taken
and analyzed shall be considered as being taken on consecutive days even
though one or more nonsampling days intervene. In applying the pretreatment
standards where more than one but fewer than 30 samples have been taken and
analyzed during any reporting period, the following formula shall be used to
established the standard for each pollutant which the average of the samples
shall not exceed:
Lx = L30 + F/ (L1 - L30)
Where:
Lx = Standard not to be exceeded by the average of x consecutive
samples.
L1 = Maximum for any one day.
L30 = Standard not to be exceeded by the average of 30 consecutive
days.
F = Multiplier for number of samples analyzed (from table below).
Number of Samples Values of F
1 1.00
2 0.597
3 0.430
4 0.35
5 0.266
6 0.223
7 0.186
8 0.167
9 0.141
10 0.127
11 0.114
12 0.109
13 0.089
14 0.077
15 0.064
16 0.058
§ 191-17 BATAVIA CODE § 191-17
191:22
Number of Samples Values of F
17 0.052
18 0.045
19 0.039
20 0.033
21 0.030
22 0.026
23 0.023
24 0.020
25 0.016
26 0.013
27 0.010
28 0.007
29 0.003
30 0.000
C. In cases where effluent characteristics of an industrial or commercial discharge
exceed the permissible limits for the compatible pollutants listed below, the
acceptability of such waste shall be left to the engineering judgment of the Town or
any other federal, state or local agencies having jurisdiction. The primary judgment
criteria for the determination of acceptability by the Town and responsible
authorities shall be whether the admission of such waste will, when added to the
existing wastewater flows, cause the wastewater treatment system to violate its
SPDES permit or violate other provisions of this chapter or cause the Town to
exceed its capacity in the jointly owned Town and city wastewater treatment
system. If it is determined it will not overload the system, permission to discharge
said compatible pollutants may be granted. However, the Town will require the
payment of an additional industrial operation and maintenance surcharge for the
additional cost of operation and maintenance to be applied to the cost of treating the
excessive strength wastewater. These charges are in addition to any sewer charges
for the nonexcessive waste discharge. The basis for these additional charges is in
Article X. "Excessive strength wastewater" is defined as:
(1) Concentrations of inert suspended solids, which are defined as concentrations
exceeding 300 mg/l (such as but not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries, and
lime residues) or dissolved solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride in
concentrations greater than 10,000 mg/l and sodium sulfate in concentrations
greater than 500 mg/l.
(2) Concentrations of BOD which are defined as concentrations exceeding 300
mg/1.
(3) Chlorine demand requirements exceeding nine mg/l.
(4) Concentrations of ammonia nitrogen which exceed 25 mg/l.
§ 191-17 SEWER USE § 191-17
191:23
§ 191-18. Waste to be discharged only from premises within sewer district.
No person shall discharge waste other than waste emanating from premises properly
connected to the public sanitary sewer within the Town sewer districts.
(5) Concentrations of total phosphorus which exceed five mg/l.
§ 191-17 BATAVIA CODE § 191-18
191:24
ARTICLE V
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
§ 191-19. Compliance with standards required.
§ 191-20. Revisions to federal regulations.
In the event that the federal government promulgates a regulation for a given new or
existing user in a specific industrial subcategory that establishes pretreatment standards,
revises existing pretreatment standards or establishes that such a user is exempt from
pretreatment standards, such federal regulations shall immediately supersede the existing
regulations unless the Department of Water and Sewage determines that the revised
standards, if implemented, would be deleterious to the operation of the wastewater
treatment system.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater treatment
system wastewaters containing substances subject to an applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated by the EPA in excess of the
quantity prescribed in such applicable pretreatment standards except as otherwise
provided in this section.
B. The Department of Water and Sewage shall notify the affected industrial users of
the required schedule for obtaining compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards; however, new sources shall initially comply with the existing
pretreatment standards. The allowance of a time period in order to achieve
compliance with the pretreatment standards will in no case be interpreted to allow
any industry to discharge wastes in the interim that interfere with the wastewater
treatment works complying with its existing SPDES permit or violate any provision
of this chapter. Town review, control and monitoring of the industrial discharges
will be in accordance with Article VI.
C. Upon application by an industrial user, the Department of Water and Sewage may,
at its discretion, revise any limitations on substances specified in the applicable
pretreatment standards to reflect removal of the substances by the wastewater
treatment facility. The revised discharge limit for specified substances shall be
derived in accordance with the Act.
D. Upon application by an industrial user, the Director may, at his discretion, adjust
any limitation on substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to
consider factors relating to such user which are fundamentally different from the
factors considered by the EPA during the development of the pretreatment standard.
Requests for and determinations of a fundamentally different adjustment shall be in
accordance with the Act.
E. At the Town's discretion, the cost to the Town for all or a portion of the services
necessary to implement this section shall be paid for by the industrial user. The
Town's work in planning for new sewer services or revisions to an existing sewer
service will not be carried out without prior agreement by the industrial user for
payment of the costs, including but not limited to administrative, engineering,
laboratory and legal costs incurred by the Town in connection with such work.
§ 191-19 SEWER USE § 191-20
191:25

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Discharge Permits and Monitoring
§ 191-21. Industrial discharge permits.
A. General permits. All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
POTW shall obtain an industrial discharge permit before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing
to the POTW shall obtain an industrial discharge permit within 180 days after the
effective date of this chapter. The permit required under this section is in addition
to that required under Article III, § 191-8 of this chapter. The Department of Water
and Sewage shall notify industrial users existing on the effective date of this chapter
of the requirement to obtain a permit. Hereafter, the permit shall be referred to as a
Town of Batavia Pollution Discharge Elimination System (BPDES) permit. The
BPDES permit shall be valid for a period of up to five years from the date of issue.
Users shall be responsible for permit renewal.
B. Users required to obtain BPDES permit. The users required to obtain a BPDES
permit shall include all significant industrial users and any other users so designated
by the Department of Water and Sewage who by the nature of their discharge or by
their past discharge practices may or have caused the wastewater treatment works
to violate its SPDES permit or may or have discharged substances set forth in
Article IV, § 191-16 and/or 191-17 of this chapter. The Department of Water and
Sewage will, at least 30 days prior to issuance of a permit, notify the Director of
receipt of the BPDES application and at the time of issuance of any permit send a
copy to the Director.
C. Permit application. Users required to obtain a BPDES permit shall complete and
file with the Town an application in the form prescribed by the Town, which shall
be accompanied by a fee set by Town Board resolution upon submission. The same
fee shall apply for permit renewal. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater
contribution permit within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, and
proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to the date requested for
connection to or contributing to the POTW.
(1) In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation and determined by the Department of Water and
Sewage, the following information:
(a) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(b) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to
those mentioned in Article IV of this chapter, as determined by a
laboratory approved and certified by the New York State Health
Department. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
§ 191-21 SEWER USE § 191-21
191:27
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any.
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to
show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
location, and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises,
including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Town, city, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing
final plans, executing a contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increments referred to in Subsection C(1)(i)[1] shall exceed nine
months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the Department of Water and Sewage including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met
on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with
this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being
taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than six months elapse between
such progress reports to the Department of Water and Sewage.
(j) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
(k) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
§ 191-21 BATAVIA CODE § 191-21
191:28
(l) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Town to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application.
(2) The Town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished,
the Town may issue a BPDES permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
D. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the BPDES permit of users subject to such
standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time
frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard has not previously submitted an application for a BPDES
permit as required under this article, the user shall apply for a BPDES permit within
180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard and submit the information required by Subsection C(1)(h) and (i) of this
section.
E. Permit conditions. BPDES permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established
by the Town. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to the POTW.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum range and time of discharge or requirement
for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedule.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Town and affording Town access
thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Town of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system.
§ 191-21 SEWER USE § 191-21
191:29
§ 191-22. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
F. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years or may be stated
to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum
of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Town during the
term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Article IV or V are
modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed
changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
G. Permit transfer. BPDES permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A BPDES permit as herein described prior to discharging or allowing
discharge from the premises.
A. Compliance data report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new user, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Department of Water
and Sewage a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards
and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units
in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed
by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to pretreatment regulations or a standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment regulations or standard or, in the case of
a new user, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Department of Water and Sewage during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment regulations or
standard or by the BPDES permit, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment regulations or standards. In addition, this report shall include a
record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the
average daily flow stated in the BPDES permit. At the discretion of the
Department of Water and Sewage and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Department of Water
§ 191-21 BATAVIA CODE § 191-22
191:30
§ 191-23. Monitoring facilities.
and Sewage may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are
to be submitted.
(2) The Department of Water and Sewage may impose mass limitations on users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection A of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration,
or production and mass where required by the Department of Water and
Sewage, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standard and the BPDES permit. All analyses shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments
thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall
be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where
40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication "Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April
1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the EPA.
(3) Where process effluent is mixed prior to pretreatment with wastewaters other
than those generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative limits may be
derived by the control authority or by the industrial user (with permission of
the control authority). Such alternatives will be derived by following the
instructions for combined waste stream formula as found in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
This may be employed at any time as deemed appropriate and necessary by the
control authority.
A. The Town may require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense,
monitoring manhole facilities acceptable to the Department of Water and Sewage
to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems. The user of any premises or facility discharging
industrial wastes or who may discharge wastes indicated in Article IV into the
public sewer system shall, when required by the Department of Water and Sewage,
install at his own cost and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the
accurate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater. Such
equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible
at all times. The sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment
and results shall be subject at any time to inspection by the Town. The monitoring
facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Town may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the
facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it
will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
§ 191-22 SEWER USE § 191-23
191:31
§ 191-24. Inspection and sampling.
The Town shall have the right to inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged
shall allow the Town or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or
in the performance of any of its duties. The Town and approval authority shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user
has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his
security personnel, and the Town and approval authority will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 191-25. Pretreatment.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable by the
Town shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Town for review and shall be acceptable to the Town before construction of the facility.
The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the Town under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable
to the Town prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
§ 191-26. Records.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and all other aspects of
this chapter shall be made available to officials of the Town and/or approval authority
upon request. The Town and/or approval authority shall have the right to obtain copies
of the records pertinent to this chapter.
§ 191-27. Confidentiality.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling,
and measuring equipment, when required, shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the owner.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Town's requirements and all
applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within 90 days following written notification by the Town.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
§ 191-23 BATAVIA CODE § 191-27
191:32
available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless
the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested in writing by the authorized representative of the user furnishing a
report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, SPDES permit
and/or the pretreatment program; provided, however, that such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 191-27 SEWER USE § 191-27
191:33

ARTICLE VII
Control of Prohibited and Limited Wastes
§ 191-28. Regulatory actions.
The Department of Water and Sewage shall initially rely upon the requirements of
Article IV and Article V to protect the Town wastewater treatment system; however,
if any wastewater which contains substances or particular characteristics shown to
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment system, or which contains any
prohibited substances or any concentration in excess of those described in Article IV,
§ 191-17 of this chapter or which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or causes an
interference to the POTW or causes the Town to violate any condition of its SPDES
permit, is discharged or proposed to be discharged into the Town of Batavia wastewater
treatment system or to any system tributary thereto, the Department of Water and
Sewage will, if applicable, take enforcement action in accordance with Article XI and
has the right to take any action necessary to:
A. Suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a BPDES permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Department of Water and Sewage, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge.
(1) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/
or the BPDES permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In
the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Department of Water and Sewage shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any person. The
Department of Water and Sewage shall reinstate the BPDES permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Department of Water
and Sewage within five days of the date of occurrence.
(2) The provisions of § 191-62 shall not apply to actions under Subsection A(1) of
this section.
B. Revoke, in accordance with the procedures of this article, the BPDES permit of any
user who violates the following conditions of this chapter, or applicable state and
federal regulations:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
§ 191-28 SEWER USE § 191-28
191:35
§ 191-29. Submission of plans.
Where pretreatment, equalization or holding (storage for scheduled discharge) of
wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is
required, detailed construction plans, construction specifications, operating procedures
and other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control
facilities shall first be submitted to the Department of Water and Sewage for review
and approval. Such submission shall be part of the BPDES permit application. Such
approval shall not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with the Act
(in particular Section 307) and any other applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation
or order of any governmental authority or relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facilities as necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter. Any
subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall
not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the Department of Water and
Sewage. In cases where treatment is provided to remove pollutants, plans shall be signed
and sealed by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of New York, unless waived
by the Department of Water and Sewage.
§ 191-30. Pretreatment facility maintenance and monitoring.
If pretreatment or control of wastewater flow is required, such facilities shall be
maintained continuously in good working order and operated as efficiently as possible
by the owner and/or operator at his own cost and expense, subject to the requirements
C. Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or
eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this chapter.
D. Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization, to reduce or
eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will
conform to the pretreatment standards and will not violate this chapter.
E. Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional
cost, expenses, or damages incurred by the Town due to the prohibited or limited
discharge.
F. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
G. Require the development of compliance schedules to meet any applicable
pretreatment requirements.
H. Require the submission of reports necessary to assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment requirements.
I. Carry out all inspections, surveillance, and monitoring necessary to determine
compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements.
J. Obtain other remedies for noncompliance by any user. Such remedies may include
injunctive relief and appropriate civil and criminal penalties specified in this
chapter, or appropriate criminal penalties.
K. Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter.
§ 191-28 BATAVIA CODE § 191-30
191:36
of these rules and regulations and all other applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
Monitoring of the pretreatment facility discharge shall be in compliance with Article VI.
§ 191-31. Grease, oil, solids and total petroleum hydrocarbons.
§ 191-32. Slugs and equalized discharge.
A. Interceptors (commonly called traps) for the treatment of grease, oil and solids shall
be provided and maintained by the user when the existing or proposed discharge
exceeds the limits specified in § 191-16A (flammable), D (solids) and E (grease or
oil) or when deemed necessary by the Department of Water and Sewage to protect
the operation and efficiency of the wastewater treatment system. Establishments for
which such interceptors shall be required include, but are not limited to, commercial
kitchens, such as for restaurants and banquet facilities or taverns, gas stations and
motor vehicle maintenance garages. Interceptors shall not be required where the
discharge is only from private living quarters or dwellings units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Department of Water and Sewage,
and the burden of proof of adequacy shall be the responsibility of the owner. All
interceptors shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. All users required to install and operate interceptors shall apply for
and obtain a BPDES permit in accordance with this chapter.
B. Emulsifiers and dissolving agents are specifically prohibited as interceptor aids, and
biological digestive products must be preapproved according to Town policy prior
to their use.
C. Waste streams that are not required to pass through an approved interceptor, and
those that have just passed through such interceptors, shall not contain total
petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) in excess of 100 mg/l.
A. No person shall cause the discharge of slugs of water or wastes. Each person
producing slug discharges which may be detrimental or cause overloading to the
capacity of sewers or treatment process or that cause the treatment facility to violate
its SPDES permit requirements shall construct and maintain, at his or her expense,
an approved storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of discharge
over a twenty-four-hour period. This facility shall have a capacity of at least 75%
of the total normal volume of a twenty-four-hour production period, and the outlet
to the sewer shall be equipped with a rate discharge controller or other approved
device, the regulation of which shall be approved by the Department of Water and
Sewage.
B. The control authority will evaluate, at least once every two years, whether each SIU
needs a plan to control slug discharges. If a plan is found to be necessary, the plan
will contain at least the following elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediate notification of the POTW of any accidental or slug
discharge, including any discharge that would violate any specific prohibitions
as contained in this chapter, with procedures for follow-up written notification
§ 191-30 SEWER USE § 191-32
191:37
§ 191-33. Protection from accidental discharge.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
operator's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and related operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Department of Water and
Sewage for review and shall be approved before construction of the facility. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility to modify this facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter. SIU's that are required to provide and maintain such facilities shall also fall
under any applicable regulations herein found in § 191-32 of this article.
§ 191-34. Reporting of accidental discharge.
If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable to comply with
any prohibition or limitations in this chapter, the user responsible for such discharge
shall immediately notify the Department of Water and Sewage and Director of the
City of Batavia Department of Public Works so that corrective action may be taken
to protect the wastewater treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to
the Department of Water and Sewage detailing the date, time and cause of accidental
discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken
to prevent future discharges shall be filed by the responsible industrial user within five
days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
§ 191-35. Inspections; improper use of sewers.
The Director shall have the right to inspect and/or test any building sewer and building
drain and appurtenances or private sewers that discharge wastewater directly or
indirectly to the wastewater treatment system. This includes the authority to inspect
basements for illegal connections such as sump pumps. In the case of basement
inspection, the Director shall give prior notice of no less than 12 hours nor more than
48 hours if requested by the owner. If it is found that such sewers or drains are used
or maintained in such a way as to cause any discharge that violates this chapter, the
Department of Water and Sewage will initiate enforcement actions in accordance with
Articles XI and XII.
§ 191-36. Costs to be borne by owner.
within five days.
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
A. All costs incurred by the Town or city in reviewing and implementing the control
actions specified in this article shall be the responsibility of the actual or proposed
user. These costs shall include but not be limited to such items as planning,
§ 191-32 BATAVIA CODE § 191-36
191:38
§ 191-37. Special agreements.
§ 191-38. Potentially hazardous waste.
The industrial user shall notify the Town, and the NYSDEC local region authorities,
verbally and with a written follow-up, immediately upon the discovery of any discharge
into the POTW and/or the storm drainage system of any substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under federal regulations.
§ 191-39. (Reserved)17
§ 191-40. (Reserved)18
engineering, laboratory tests and consultant services. The Town will invoice the
owner for its costs.
B. The Town shall obtain agreement from the user or proposed user prior to any
control action, except for actions under § 191-28A, or for monitoring action
required by the Act, or where required for enforcement of this chapter.
A. Special agreements and arrangements between the Department of Water and
Sewage and any persons or agencies may be established, provided that:
(1) It is the opinion of the Department of Water and Sewage that unusual or
extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions;
(2) The Batavia Town Board gives its prior approval to said special agreement
and/or arrangements;
(3) The user pays any applicable charges; and
(4) No special agreements shall circumvent Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
B. This approval shall be in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
17. Editor's Note: Former § 191-39, Informal hearing, was repealed 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002. See now § 191-63.
18. Editor's Note: Former § 191-40, Show cause hearing, was repealed 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002. See now § 191-64.
§ 191-36 SEWER USE § 191-40
191:39

ARTICLE VIII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 191-41. Entering private property. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
A. The Department of Water and Sewage, all duly authorized representatives or
employees of the Town, city, EPA, or DEC bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be entitled to enter the property of all users (which includes the
internal premises such as basements, etc.) for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling (including setting up sampling devices),
testing, and records examination in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
and for the further purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter
are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the Town and representatives of the approval
authority ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises to carry
out the actions specified in this section. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into his/her
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his/her security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town and
approval authority will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. These representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes except those having a direct bearing on the
application of and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Authorized Town representatives shall have the right to enter and inspect at any
reasonable time any part of the Town public sewer system, including public streets,
easements and property within which the public system is located. Additionally,
authorized Town representatives shall be permitted, as appropriate, to enter into the
private property of industrial waste discharges to carry out the activities specified
in this chapter.
C. Any inspector or representative seeking to enter private property pursuant to the
provisions of this section may enter such property on the consent of such user,
owner or occupant. For all purposes of this chapter each owner, occupant and user
shall be deemed to have consented to the entry onto any property, private or
otherwise, serviced by the Town's sewer system, or upon which is located records
or other information relevant to the implementation and enforcement of this chapter
as a result of the use of the Town's sewer service benefiting that property. Any
failure to provide access pursuant to a reasonable and otherwise valid request for
entry shall be deemed a violation of this chapter subject to all penalties and other
remedies provided herein.
D. In the event such entry is denied or if said inspector or representative determines
that it is preferable to obtain a search warrant without first seeking such consent,
said inspector or representative shall be entitled (in addition to all other available
remedies) to obtain a search warrant pursuant to the applicable provisions of law
from a court of competent jurisdiction to compel the owner or occupant to permit
immediate entry and inspection.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section, in the event an emergency
situation exists, the inspector or representative shall be entitled to immediately enter
§ 191-41 SEWER USE § 191-41
191:41
§ 191-42. Observance of safety rules; liability.
While performing the necessary work on the properties referred to in § 191-41, the
Department of Water and Sewage, representatives or employees of the Town, authorized
city representatives, representatives of the EPA, and representatives of the DEC shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner and/or
operators, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to those
representatives unless such injury is due to the negligence and/or fault of the owner
or operator. The Town, city, EPA, or DEC shall indemnify the owner against liability
claims and demands for personal injuries or property damage asserted against the owner
and growing out of gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by
the negligence, fault or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions.
§ 191-43. Authority to enter easements.
The Department of Water and Sewage and duly authorized representatives of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds an easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater treatment system lying within said easement above and
below ground. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
upon any private property for the purposes set forth in this section either with or
without a search warrant or with or without the cooperation of the owner, occupant
or user.
§ 191-41 BATAVIA CODE § 191-43
191:42
ARTICLE IX
Sanitary Sewer Extensions
§ 191-44. Application to construct extensions or additions.
Application to construct extensions or additions to any sewer district sanitary sewers
shall be made to the Department of Water and Sewage on forms prescribed by the Town
and shall be approved by the Town before submission to the Genesee County Health
Department. Two sets of detailed construction plans showing the proposed construction
shall be submitted to the Town for preliminary review. Following preliminary review
and approval, the applicant shall submit three sets of applications to construct a sanitary
sewer along with eight sets of detailed construction plans and specifications showing the
proposed construction. Five sets of the application and approved plans and specifications
shall be forwarded with a letter of approval to the Genesee County Health Department
for acceptance. Evidence of Health Department approval as well as other required local,
state and/or federal approvals is required prior to final acceptance.
§ 191-45. Inspection during construction.
§ 191-46. Construction standards.
Extensions or additions to the sanitary sewer system shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the latest revisions of the New York State Standards for Waste
Treatment Works, the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No.
9, Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, Genesee County Health
Department regulations and the American Society of Testing and Materials
Specifications for Sanitary Sewer Construction.
§ 191-47. Connection to public sanitary sewer.
A. Inspection during construction will be made by the Department of Water and
Sewage or its representatives. No sanitary sewers are to be covered until such
inspection has been made. The Department of Water and Sewage shall send a letter
to the applicant certifying that inspection, testing and acceptance have been
completed. Inspection and acceptance by the Department of Water and Sewage
does not relieve the owner of the responsibility to keep the sewer operating in
accordance with these regulations.
B. A complete set of as-built construction plans showing the final construction, wye or
tee locations and other information requested by the Department of Water and
Sewage shall be submitted prior to final acceptance. The cost of the Town
inspection and review will be the responsibility of the extension applicant.
A. No connection of sanitary sewer extensions shall be permitted to the public sanitary
sewer until completion of procedures outlined in this article.
B. Existing private sanitary sewers may be connected to the public sanitary sewer only
when they are found upon examination and test by the Department of Water and
Sewage to meet all standards set by this chapter. Any testing costs shall be the
responsibility of the sewer extension applicant.
§ 191-44 SEWER USE § 191-48
191:43
§ 191-48. Posting of bond.
Any person installing a sanitary sewer extension to the public sanitary sewer shall post
a maintenance bond to be approved by the Department of Water and Sewage for 25%
of the full value of the sewer construction cost with the Town of Batavia, guaranteeing
the sewer for a period of two years from the time of acceptance by the Department of
Water and Sewage. During this period, any defects in the sewer or appurtenances shall
be corrected at the applicant's expense.
§ 191-49. Sewer excavations.
§ 191-50. Extensions outside existing sewer districts.
Out-of-district sewer extensions and establishment of new districts shall comply with the
appropriate Town, state and federal laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations and other
rules and regulations the Town Board may adopt.
A. Whenever pipe laying is not in progress, the end of the pipe shall be securely closed
with a tight-fitting cover or plug. Any earth or other material entering the main
sewer due to operations of the plumber, contractor or building owner shall be
removed at his expense. All trenches must be protected by sufficient sheeting and
bracing.
B. Within a highway right-of-way, backfilling and restoration of surface shall be in
accordance with requirements of the highway agency having supervision.
§ 191-48 BATAVIA CODE § 191-50
191:44
ARTICLE X
Sewer Rents
§ 191-51. Use of rents.
There is hereby established in any and all Town of Batavia sanitary sewer districts a
system of sewer rents which shall be used:
§ 191-52. Components of sewer rents.
The sewer rents shall consist of the following components:
A. For the payment of the costs of operation, maintenance and repairs of the
wastewater treatment system; and
B. For the payment of the interest on and payment of indebtedness which has been or
shall be incurred for the construction of the wastewater treatment system.
A. An operation and maintenance charge that shall be levied on all users of the
wastewater treatment system. The operation and maintenance charge will result in
the distribution of the costs of operation and maintenance, including equipment
replacement, of the wastewater treatment system to each user in proportion to such
user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works as
required by the Act. Each user's contribution shall be based on sewer use. The
operation and maintenance charge shall be computed based upon sewer use as
determined pursuant to §§ 191-55, 191-56 and 191-57; provided, however, that for
the first year a property is tied into the wastewater treatment system, operation and
maintenance charges shall be computed based on the most recent average yearly
water consumption data. The operation and maintenance charge shall become due
and payable quarterly and shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The rate of the operation and maintenance charge shall be determined and reviewed
by the Town Board pursuant to § 191-53 hereof.
B. An industrial operation and maintenance surcharge that shall be levied on all
industrial users discharging excessive compatible pollutants as defined in Article
IV. This charge shall be levied to cover the additional operation and maintenance
costs necessary to transport and treat these wastes. This charge shall be based upon
the industrial user's proportionate share of the district's operation and maintenance
costs (including equipment replacement costs) based on wastewater flow and mass
emission rates required by the Act. The industrial surcharge shall become due and
payable quarterly and shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The
industrial operation and maintenance surcharge shall be computed by the
Department of Water and Sewage and shall be determined by said Department as
follows:
(1) The excess pounds of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids,
ammonia nitrogen, chlorine and phosphorus requirements will be computed by
multiplying the person's wastewater volume in million gallons per day by the
constant 8.345 and then multiplying this product by the difference between the
person' s concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended
solids, ammonia nitrogen, chlorine and phosphorus requirements and the
§ 191-51 SEWER USE § 191-52
191:45
aforementioned nonexcessive concentration in mg/l by weight. The surcharge
for each constituent will then be determined by multiplying the excess pounds
of each constituent by the appropriate rate of surcharge discussed below. This
product will then be multiplied by the number of days in the billing period to
determine the surcharge. Concentration figures in the above calculations shall
be daily averages determined in accordance with the provisions of Article VI,
Industrial Discharge Permits and Monitoring.
(2) Rates of surcharge. The rates of surcharge for each of the excessive compatible
constituents listed below shall be the City of Batavia rate of surcharge for each
constituent in effect at the time, plus the Town's actual administrative cost,
which shall be determined by the Town. The surcharge shall be in addition to
the charge for the nonexcessive waste discharge.
(a) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
(b) Suspended solids.
(c) Chlorine demand.
(d) Ammonia nitrogen.
(e) Phosphorus.
(3) The amount of surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by the Town and city
in removing the excess biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids,
ammonia nitrogen and phosphorus. This surcharge may include a
proportionate share of the following:
(a) Fixed charges and amortization costs for the wastewater treatment works
related to the appropriate surcharge parameter, as determined by the
Department of Water and Sewage. Such basis of fixed charges shall be
recalculated each year, or at the end of major construction periods,
whichever is shorter; and
(b) The actual annual cost of operation of the portions of the wastewater
treatment works, including repairs and maintenance, related to the
appropriate surcharge parameter, as determined by the Department of
Water and Sewage.
C. User charges shall be levied on all owners of any parcel of real property situated
within a sanitary sewer district or any user outside of the district boundaries. The
user charge shall represent the proportionate share of the district's capital costs as
determined by the Town Board and will be based on sewer use and/or, at the
discretion of the Town Board, excessive compatible pollutants if applicable.
(1) It is the determination of the Batavia Town Board that this charge shall
constitute the sewer use portion of the Town's benefit formula assessed for the
purpose of amortizing capital construction costs and that the balance of said
costs be amortized through assessment charges based on property valuations
to be levied on owners of all parcels of real property situated within a sanitary
sewer district, which assessment charges shall be due and payable yearly and
shall be included in the property owner's tax bill.
§ 191-52 BATAVIA CODE § 191-52
191:46
§ 191-53. Determination of sewer rents.
(2) User charges for other than excessive compatible pollutants shall be computed
based upon the user's sewer use as determined pursuant to §§ 191-55, 191-56
and 191-57. User charges shall be due and payable quarterly and shall be paid
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The rate of user charges shall be
determined and reviewed by the Town Board pursuant to § 191-53.
(3) If the user charge for an industry is based on excessive compatible pollutants,
this proportionate share will be based on the cost incurred by the Town in
constructing collection and treatment facilities for the wastewater discharged
to the public sewer by the industrial user. This incurred construction cost
estimate will be based upon the design requirement for collecting and treating
the hydraulic flow; BOD5, suspended solids, chlorine demand, ammonia
nitrogen and phosphorus requirements; and any other applicable waste
characteristics that must be taken into account in the design. The specific
design requirements of each industry will be arrived at through application to
the Town and/or city as per the requirements of Articles V and VI and a special
agreement entered into between the sewer district and industrial user. User
charges to industries based upon excessive compatible pollutants shall be
determined and computed by the Department of Water and Sewage, shall
become due and payable quarterly, and shall be paid pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Pursuant to § 452 of the New York State Town Law, all sewer rents and charges
shall be determined hereinafter by the Town Board by resolution and shall be
reviewed at least yearly by said Town Board, provided that any resolution
establishing and/or amending sewer rents and charges shall be adopted only after a
public hearing upon at least five days' public notice. [Amended 8-20-2003 by L.L.
No. 1-2003]
B. Operation and maintenance charges levied pursuant to the provisions of § 191-52A
of this chapter shall be according to the following rates: [Amended 12-17-1997 by
L.L. No. 2-1997]
(1) For Sewer District No. 1 of the Town of Batavia, New York, the rate of $3.02
for each 1,000 gallons of sewer use per quarter as determined pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 191-55, 191-56 and 191-57 of this chapter.
(2) For Sewer District No. 2 of the Town of Batavia, New York, the rate of $2.94
for each 1,000 gallons of sewer use per quarter as determined pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 191-55, 191-56 and 191-57 of this chapter.
C. User charges levied pursuant to the provisions of § 191-52B of this chapter shall be
according to the following rates: [Amended 12-17-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
(1) For Sewer District No. 1 of the Town of Batavia, New York, exclusive of the
Genesee Community College, the rate of $0.81 for each 1,000 gallons of sewer
use per quarter, and for the Genesee Community College the rate of $1.33 for
each 1,000 gallons of sewer use per quarter, both as determined pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 191-55, 191-56 and 191-57 of this chapter.
§ 191-52 SEWER USE § 191-53
191:47
§ 191-54. Levy and collection of sewer charges.
§ 191-55. Sewer use.
Except as herein provided in this article, the sewer use shall be the total metered water
use.
§ 191-56. Water not entering the sewer.
§ 191-57. Nonmetered water entering the sewer.
In the event that a property owner or occupant, either directly or indirectly, discharges
nonmetered water into the Town sanitary sewer system, the property owner must provide
(2) For Sewer District No. 2 of the Town of Batavia, New York, the rate of $0.59
for each 1,000 gallons of sewer use per quarter as determined pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 191-55, 191-56 and 191-57 of this chapter.
A. The amount due each quarter for operation and maintenance charges, industrial
operation and maintenance surcharges and user charges shall be stated on the
regular water bill and shall be itemized as separate and distinct charges.
B. All sewer charges in § 191-53 shall be due and payable at the same time water bills
are due and payable.
C. Responsibility for payment of sewer charges is with the property owner and/or
operator of an industrial or commercial facility.
D. A ten-percent penalty shall be added to any bill or portion thereof in arrears for 30
days. Any rent, charge or fee not paid shall become a lien upon the premises served
and shall be collectible as provided by New York State Law.
A. In the event the owner of a lot, parcel of land, building or other premises
discharging wastewater into a sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly, uses
metered Town water in excess of 25,000 gallons per quarter and claims a significant
portion of the metered water does not return to the sanitary sewer, such owner may
file a written statement to that effect with the Department of Water and Sewage.
B. Upon receipt of such statement, the Department of Water and Sewage may
authorize the installation, at the owner's expense, of a separate meter or meters to
measure the metered water returning to the sanitary sewer. If the installation of such
a meter or meters is not practical, the Department of Water and Sewage shall
determine a method of measuring the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer. In
such cases, the sewer charges shall be based on this determination. However, only
the owner's operation and maintenance charges shall be waived. The user charges
on the owner's quarterly billing and sewer charge to cover capital construction costs
on the owner's annual tax statement shall not be waived.
C. The significant undischarged portion of the metered water use must be in excess of
that quantity of water use that a typical water user does not discharge into the sewer,
and the agreed-upon water use reduction will only reflect that amount of
undischarged water use that is in excess of what is typical.
§ 191-53 BATAVIA CODE § 191-57
191:48
either a water meter and appropriate filtration devices or a sewer meter as determined
and directed by the Department of Water and Sewage to measure and/or estimate
the nonmetered water entering the Town sanitary sewer system. In such cases the
property owner shall be assessed operation and maintenance charges, user charges and
appropriate surcharges on the nonmetered water which is to be measured pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
§ 191-58. Meter costs.
All expenses in connection with metering shall be charged to the owner of the land.
§ 191-59. Charges to industrial users.
If applicable, provisions of this article covering user charges shall not pertain to
industrial users if they have a specific agreement with the applicable sewer district in
accordance with § 191-52 of this article.
§ 191-60. Inconsistent agreements.
The user charge system contained herein shall take precedence over any terms or
conditions of agreements or contracts between the Town and users (including industrial
users, special districts, other municipalities, and state and federal agencies or
installations) which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(A) of
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as amended) or the 40 CFR Part 35 rules
and regulations (February 17, 1984).
§ 191-57 SEWER USE § 191-60
191:49

ARTICLE XI
Liabilities and Penalties
§ 191-61. Liability for damages and expenses.
§ 191-62. Notice of violation.
§ 191-63. Informal hearing. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.2-2002]
Where any person who is duly notified of a violation as set forth in this chapter so
requests, an informal hearing shall be held between that person, the Department of Water
and Sewage and any other person deemed appropriate by the Department of Water and
Sewage. The purpose of the informal hearing shall be to promptly remedy violations
prior to any injunctive actions by the Town. Said informal hearing shall be requested
and held within three days of notice of violations. The request for or convening of an
informal hearing shall not prevent the Town from convening a show cause hearing or
pursuing any other relief or remedy as allowed by this chapter or otherwise.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the Town for
any and all losses, damages, and expenses incurred by the Town or for which the
Town may be held liable as a result of said violation. The expenses shall include
but not be limited to the determination of the source of the violation and, if
necessary, the restoration of the city wastewater treatment system to its original
operating condition, which shall include but not be limited to sewer cleaning, and
reconnection of sewer service following a determined necessary physical severance
of such sewer.
B. Any person either directly or indirectly discharging nonmetered water into the
Town's sanitary sewer system other than through a water or sewer meter as
provided for in § 191-57 hereof shall, in addition to all other liabilities and
penalties, be responsible for operation and maintenance charges, usage charges and
surcharges for the amount of said nonmetered water entering the Town's sanitary
sewer system.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, with the exception of § 191-16,
191-17 or 191-28A, shall be served by the Department of Water and Sewage with a
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit of seven
days for the satisfactory correction thereof.
B. Service of the notice of violation shall be sufficient if directed to the owner or
operator of a residence, commercial or industrial facility, as the case may be,
violating this chapter. Service of said notice of violation shall be made personally
upon the alleged violator, if possible. Otherwise said notice of violation shall be
sufficient if served by delivering the same to a person of suitable age or discretion
at the actual residence, commercial or industrial facility at which said violation is
occurring and by mailing the notice to the person to be served at his last known
residence or business address or, where service cannot otherwise be made with due
diligence, by affixing said notice of violation to the door of the residence,
commercial or industrial facility at which said violation is occurring and by mailing
said notice to such person at his last known residence or place of business.
§ 191-61 SEWER USE § 191-64
191:51
§ 191-64. Show cause hearing. [Added 10-16-2002 by L.L. No. 2-200219]
A. Except where the Department of Water and Sewage has acted under § 191-28A of
this chapter by severing the sewer connection(s) for the reasons stated in said
section, the Town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW; fails to pay sewer rents where the aggregate amount
of said unpaid sewer rents exceeds the sum of $2,500, it being the Town's
determination that unpaid sewer rents exceeding $2,500 will have a significant
economic impact on the Town and its sewer districts; refuses access to a premises
serviced by the Town's sewer system and/or containing records or other information
relevant to the Town's sewer system or the implementation and enforcement of this
chapter, including but not limited to all inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, testing and/or records examination to be performed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter; to show cause before the Town Board why the
proposed enforcement actions should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
property owner, occupant and/or user specifying the time and place of a hearing to
be held by the Town Board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to
be taken, the proposed enforcement actions, and directing the user to show cause
before the Town Board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. The Town Board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may
designate any of its members or an officer or employee of the Town to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Town Board notices of hearings requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other
evidence, together with recommendations to the Town Board for action
thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath
and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available
to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charge thereof.
D. After the Town Board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the
sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances shall have been installed, existing treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated and/or or other
adequate action is taken to remedy said violation. Further orders and directives,
including liabilities and penalties, as are necessary and appropriate may be further
issued in accordance with this Article XI. Any said order shall be final and
conclusive.
19. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 191-64 and 191-65 as 191-65 and 191-66, respectively.
§ 191-64 BATAVIA CODE § 191-64
191:52
§ 191-65. Enforcement actions.
E. Any action taken pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other right or
remedy available to the Town pursuant to this chapter or otherwise.
A. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Town or Department of Water and
Sewage, either alone or in conjunction with the foregoing penalties, from
maintaining an action or proceeding in the name of the Town or Department of
Water and Sewage in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance
with or to restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of this chapter. In
addition, the Town or Department of Water and Sewage reserves the right to obtain
reimbursement for any loss, damage or expense incurred by it as a result of any
violation of this chapter.
B. The approval authority shall have the right to seek or commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in cases where it deems the actions taken
by the Town in seeking injunctive relief insufficient.
§ 191-64 SEWER USE § 191-65
191:53

ARTICLE XII
Coordination with City
§ 191-66. Compliance with city regulations; capacity of system not to be exceeded.
A. This chapter shall not allow any action or special agreement regarding the discharge
of any wastes to the Town public system that would be less stringent than the
requirements of the City Sanitary Sewer Ordinance, Chapter 147 of the City of
Batavia Municipal Code.
B. In no case will the Town or city allow waste to be discharged that would cause the
Town or city to exceed its capacity in the jointly owned city/Town wastewater
treatment system.
§ 191-66 SEWER USE § 191-66
191:55

Chapter 194
SHERATON DOWNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 127. Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 223.
§ 191-66 SHERATON DOWNS § 191-66
194:1

ARTICLE I
Traffic and Parking
[Adopted 12-2-1987]
§ 194-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all existing traffic regulations that have been posted at the
Sheraton Downs, Town of Batavia, New York, on or after October 1, 1987.
§ 194-2. Establishment of regulated areas.
The Town of Batavia hereby establishes and adopts all those regulations, as posted,
regarding parking, standing, and speed that are, or were, in existence on October 1, 1987,
on the property located at the Sheraton Downs property, Park Road, in the Town of
Batavia, New York.
§ 194-3. Compliance with regulations required.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any of the regulations that have been
established by the town pursuant to the terms of this article.
§ 194-4. Enforcement.
The town hereby designates any policing agency, or agent, having jurisdictional
authority to enforce the regulations adopted by the town pursuant to the terms of this
article.
§ 194-5. Penalties for offenses.
For any violation of regulations established under this article, the penalty shall be the
same as if said violation occurred on public property, and the provisions and sanctions
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and regulations promulgated thereunder
shall apply.
§ 194-1 SHERATON DOWNS § 194-5
194:3

Chapter 198
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 138. Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 194-5 SOLID WASTE § 194-5
198:1

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 7-22-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
§ 198-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED FACILITY—A public or private facility or facilities where recyclables
may be delivered for disposal, including but not limited to dropoff centers, materials
recovery facilities, or other such public or private facilities.
RECYCLABLES — Any material designated from time to time by the town, provided
that such material is not hazardous and can be reasonably separated from the solid waste
stream and held for material recycling or reuse value.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including but not
limited to materials or substances discarded or rejected as being spent, useless,
worthless, or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or rejection, or
which are being accumulated, stored, or physically, chemically or biologically treated
prior to being discarded or rejected, having served their intended use, or as industrial,
commercial and agricultural waste, sludges from air or water pollution control facilities
or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material,
incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal, but not including
sewage and other highly diluted water-carried material or substances and those in
gaseous form, special nuclear or by-product material within the meaning of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or waste which appears on the list or satisfies the
characteristics of hazardous waste promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Conservation.
SOURCE SEPARATION—The segregation of recyclable material from the solid waste
stream at the point of generation for separate collection, sale or other disposition.
TOWN — Batavia, New York.
A. The town finds that the removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream
will decrease the amount of solid waste disposed of in landfills and aid in the
conservation of valuable resources.
B. The town finds that the New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires
all municipalities to adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, requiring
separation of recyclable and reusable material from solid waste.
C. The town finds that in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people
of the town it is necessary for the town to enact this article in order to encourage
and facilitate the maximum recycling practicable on the part of every household,
business and institution within the town.
D. The town declares that the purpose of this article is to establish and implement
recycling-related practices and procedures to be applicable to all waste generators
within the town.
§ 198-1 SOLID WASTE § 198-2
198:3
WASTE GENERATOR — Any person, household, business, governmental agency,
municipality or other legal entity which produces solid waste requiring off-site disposal.
WASTE HAULER — All persons engaged in the commercial collection, transportation
and/or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclables generated, originated or brought within
the town.
§ 198-3. Preparation of recyclables for collection.
§ 198-4. Waste haulers.
§ 198-5. Inspection of vehicles and containers.
The town may inspect all portions of vehicles and/or containers used in the collection,
transportation and/or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclables, including but not limited
to containers placed at the curbside of residences, to ascertain compliance with the terms
and conditions specified in this article.
A. Each waste generator in the town shall source-separate recyclables from solid
waste.
B. Each waste generator in the town shall provide for the removal of recyclables from
the property on which they are generated either through a service provided by a
private hauler or by direct haul by the individual waste generator to an authorized
facility.
C. Nothing in this article is intended to prevent any waste generator from making
arrangements for the reuse, private collection, sale or donation of recyclables;
provided, however, that such recyclables shall not be placed curbside or at any other
designated collection place on or immediately preceding the day for collection of
such recyclables.
A. All waste haulers in the town shall offer or cause to be offered to their customers
collection, transportation and disposal services for recyclables to the same extent
any such waste hauler offers collection, transportation and disposal services for
solid waste. Such services shall be provided on the same day(s) as solid waste
pickup, transportation or disposal services are provided.
B. No waste hauler shall be required to accept for collection solid waste which has not
been source-separated or hazardous waste.
C. All waste haulers must maintain records, including types of and volume of
recyclables collected, and supply such reports to the town as often as reasonably
requested by the town but at least once per year during the month of December.
D. All waste haulers are obligated to notify the town when residential or commercial
waste generators are not recycling.
E. All waste haulers must register with the town upon commencing any activity within
the town. Failure to register within 10 days after notification that they have not
registered will result in a fine of $500.
§ 198-2 BATAVIA CODE § 198-6
198:4
§ 198-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 198-7. Enforcement.
The town shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this article and collection
of all fines and penalties provided herein.
A. Failure of a residential waste generator to comply with the provisions of this article
shall result in a fine for each violation as follows: $50 for the first violation; up to
$500 for the second; up to $750 for the third; and $1,000 for each subsequent
violation.
B. During any 12 consecutive months, the failure of a commercial waste generator to
comply with the provisions of this article shall result in a fine for each violation as
follows: $500 for the first violation; up to $750 for the second violation; and $1,000
for each subsequent violation.
C. Failure of a waste hauler to comply with the provisions of this article shall result in
a fine for each violation as follows: $1,000 for the first violation; $2,000 for the
second; $3,000 for the third; and $4,000 for each subsequent violation.
§ 198-6 SOLID WASTE § 198-7
198:5

ARTICLE II
Disposal of Solid Waste
[Adopted 2-16-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 198-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEPOSIT — To put down, set down, leave, dump or otherwise place material onto or
into the ground.
DISPOSE — To abandon, leave behind, throw away, discard or place any solid waste
material in such a way that it is clear that the intention of the person placing such solid
waste is to forgo any further use of the solid waste material.
FILL — Any material used to improve the grade or use of the land.
PERSON — Includes an individual, society, club, firm, partnership, corporation,
municipality, or association of persons, and the singular number shall include the plural
number.
SOLID WASTE — Shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in 6 NYCRR
Part 360-1.2 and 1.3, the regulations adopted by the State of New York to regulate solid
waste management facilities, and the definition as set forth therein is incorporated herein
in its entirety.
§ 198-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the Town of Batavia.
§ 198-10. Procedures and regulations. [Amended 9-19-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
Except as hereinafter provided:
A. No person shall use any of the private or public lands within the Town of Batavia
as a place to dispose of or deposit solid waste.
B. Bringing any solid waste into the Town for the purpose of depositing or disposing
of the same within the Town is hereby prohibited.
C. Nothing contained in Subsections A and B shall prohibit any person from
depositing within said Town such fill as the Town Board or its designee shall deem
appropriate solely for the purpose of land improvement or the bringing of property
up to grade level required by the Town of Batavia Zoning Ordinance,20 as amended
from time to time, upon the following terms and conditions:
(1) Any person desiring to deposit on his property for the purposes hereinbefore
specified shall first make application therefor to the Town Board or its
designee on a form to be supplied by the Town. Said form shall indicate:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
20. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 198-8 SOLID WASTE § 198-10
198:7
(b) The name and address of the owner of the property if the applicant is not
the owner;
(c) The consent, in writing, of the owner of the property if he is not the
applicant;
(d) The property location at which the fill is desired to be deposited;
(e) The proximity of the area where said fill is proposed to be deposited with
respect to any roads, streets, highways, waterways, streams, ponds and
abutting property owners;
(f) The purpose for which said fill is desired;
(g) The approximate amount of fill required;
(h) The approximate average depth of the fill that will be deposited;
(i) Each and every kind and type of fill intended to be deposited on said
property;
(j) The length of time required to deposit said fill on the property;
(k) The time when said fill operations are intended to commence and cease;
and
(l) Such other information as may be hereinafter required by the Town Board
or its designee.
(2) Said application, once completed, shall be filed with the Town Clerk, with a
fee for the original application or the renewal thereof to be set periodically by
the Town Board by resolution. The Town Clerk shall present the same to the
Town Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting or immediately to its
designee. Within five calendar days after receipt of the application, the Town
Clerk shall mail a letter by first-class mail to any adjacent property owners
advising them of the application and that they have five calendar days to file
orally or in writing with the Town Clerk any objection or comments regarding
the application. The approval or consent of adjacent landowners is not required
in order to grant the application. The Town Board or its designee may not act
on said application until at least five calendar days after mailing the notices.
The Town Board or its designee may also request additional information from
the applicant if it deems it appropriate.
(3) Upon reviewing the application and any additional information that it may
request, together with the investigation that it may order, the Town Board or
its designee shall, within 60 calendar days after the application has been
presented to it, make a determination with respect to the same. The Town
Board or its designee may grant said application in full, deny the same in full
or grant the same in part and deny the same in part.
(4) The Town Board or its designee, in reaching its determination as to whether to
approve said application, shall take into consideration:
(a) Whether the fill desired to be placed on said property:
§ 198-10 BATAVIA CODE § 198-10
198:8
[1] Will endanger the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Town;
[2] Will cause unreasonable, uncontrolled or unnecessary damage to the
natural resources of the Town or surrounding area;
[3] Will emit noxious odors and fumes, attract rodents and vermin and
become breeding places therefor;
[4] Will cause or contribute to pollution of the air and ground, surface
or subsurface waters;
[5] Is of a combustible or incombustible nature;
[6] Is subject to disintegration and decay; and
(b) Whether the deposition of said fill would violate any statutes, rules,
regulations or ordinances of the Town of Batavia, County of Genesee or
State of New York.
(5) If the Town Board or its designee denies said application for any of the reasons
set forth in Subsection C(4) above, it shall set forth its reasons in written form.
If said application is approved, either in whole or in part, the Town Board or
its designee shall issue a permit to the applicant and, in its discretion, may
condition said permit and approval upon the applicant:
(a) Completing said fill operation within a specified period of time at the
expiration of which said permit shall expire. If no specific time is
designated, the fill permit shall expire after one-year. The applicant may
renew the original permit for two additional one-year periods by payment
of a renewal fee and confirmation by the Town that the applicant is
compliant with the original permit;
(b) Leveling said fill once depositing is completed;
(c) Covering said fill with not less than one foot of nonorganic material
within 30 days of completing or abandoning said fill operation;
(d) Compacting said fill as the same is deposited if said compaction is
deemed necessary for health and safety reasons; and
(e) Filing a performance bond running to the Town in an amount not to
exceed $5,000 to insure faithful compliance with the conditions upon
which said permit is issued.
(6) In addition to the penalties set forth in § 198-13 of this article, the Town Board
or its designee shall revoke the permit of any person who violates any of the
terms of the permit issued to him pursuant to this article.
(7) Where any land has been filled to a depth greater than three feet, the Town
Clerk shall keep a permanent record of such fill and the location thereof . Any
person may request a search of said record to determine if there has been any
deep fill placed on any property within the Town, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 198-10 SOLID WASTE § 198-10
198:9
§ 198-11. Residential use.
Residents of the Town may use lands which they own or occupy for residence or farm
purposes for the ordinary and usual purposes of disposing of solid waste normally
resulting from the use of said lands by the owners thereof for household or farm purposes
only.
§ 198-12. Town landfill.
The Town sanitary landfill located on Kelsey Road in the Town has been closed and
is maintained pursuant to an administrative order on consent with the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. There shall be no further use of the Town
sanitary landfill, and any existing local law, ordinance or regulation permitting the use
of the Town sanitary landfill is hereby repealed.
§ 198-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 for each offense
or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Every day of such violation shall be or may be a separate offense.
§ 198-14. Effect on prior laws or ordinances.
All Town laws or ordinances or parts of Town laws or ordinances inconsistent herewith
or contradictory hereto are hereby revoked.
§ 198-15. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this article shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect and impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined to the operation of the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or party thereof directly involved with the controversy in
which judgment shall have been rendered.
(8) The applicant will allow the Town to make any interim or final inspections to
monitor compliance with this article.
§ 198-10 BATAVIA CODE § 198-15
198:10
Chapter 204
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 34.
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Highways — See Ch. 127.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Road specifications — See Ch. 183.
Sewer use — See Ch. 191.
Water — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 235.
§ 198-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 198-15
204:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 204-1. Planning Board authorized to approve plats; declaration of policy; title.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used herein are defined as
follows:
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY —The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for
preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public
against flood damage.
EASEMENT—The lands created through authorization by a property owner for the use
by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
LOT — A piece, parcel, or plot of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or
for development.
A. By the authority of the resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Batavia
adopted on _____ pursuant to the provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law of the
State of New York, the Planning Board of the Town of Batavia is authorized and
empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks, or sites, with or without streets
or highways, to approve the development of entirely or partially undeveloped plats
already filed in the office of the Clerk of the county and to conditionally approve
preliminary plats within that part of the Town of Batavia outside the limits of any
incorporated village.
B. It is declared to be the policy of the Town Board to consider land subdivision plats
as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient, and economical development of the
Town. This means, among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such
character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health
or peril from fire, flood, or other menace; that proper provision shall be made for
drainage, water supply, sewerage, and other needed improvements; that all
proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with the
development pattern of the neighboring properties; that the proposed streets shall
compose a convenient system conforming to the Official Map, if such exists, and
shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan, if such exists,
and shall be of such width, grade, and location as to accommodate the prospective
traffic, to facilitate fire protection, and to provide access of firefighting equipment
to buildings; and that proper provision shall be made for open spaces for parks and
playgrounds.
C. In order that land subdivision may be made in accordance with this policy, these
regulations, which shall be known as and which may be cited as the "Town of
Batavia Land Subdivision Regulations," have been approved by the Town Board on
__________.
§ 204-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-2
204:3
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Town Board under § 270 of the
Town Law showing the streets, highways, and parks heretofore laid out, adopted, and
established by law and any amendments thereto adopted by the Town Board or additions
thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats.
OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE — The date when a subdivision plat shall be
considered submitted to the Planning Board as provided in § 276 of the Town Law and
is hereby defined to be the date of a meeting of the Planning Board at which all required
surveys, plans, and data described in Article VII are submitted.
PERFORMANCE BOND OR GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning Board
approves a plat, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.
PLANNING BOARD — The Town of Batavia Planning Board as established pursuant
to the provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing or drawings indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for
its consideration and meeting the requirements of Article VII.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, alley, or other way
which is an existing state, county, or Town roadway or way shown upon a plat
theretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action or a street or way
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Genesee County
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking area,
and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, streets shall be
classified as follows:
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by
vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between property lines or right-of-way lines.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily by a heavy volume of
traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS or LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS — Those which are
used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL SERVICE STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS—Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service to the back
or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
E.
§ 204-2 BATAVIA CODE § 204-2
204:4
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who or
which shall lay out, for the purpose of sale or development, any subdivision or part
thereof as defined herein, either for himself, itself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any lot into two or more lots for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. The
public acquisition of strips of land for extension of municipal infrastructure, including
but not limited to the widening or opening of streets and installation of public utility
infrastructure, and the transfer of agricultural parcels of at least 10 acres for the purpose
of continued agriculture, shall not be included within this definition nor subject to these
regulations.
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a
proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by law and by these
regulations to be presented to the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved,
may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in the office of the Genesee County Clerk.
TOWN DEVELOPMENT PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, TOWN PLAN or
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals recommending
the physical development of the Town prepared by the Planning Board pursuant to
§ 272-a of the Town Law which indicates the general locations recommended for various
public works and reservations and for the general physical development of the Town and
includes any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or
parts thereof.
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly designated engineer of the Town of Batavia.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Batavia, together with any and all amendments thereto.21
MAJOR SUBDIVISION—Any subdivision of a lot into five or more lots within a
three-year period, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of
municipal facilities.
A.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision of a lot into two, three or four lots,
not classified as a major subdivision, fronting on an existing street.
B.
21. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 204-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-2
204:5

ARTICLE II
Applicability
§ 204-3. Minor subdivision.
Whenever a minor subdivision of land as defined herein is proposed, before any
conveyance of any part thereof and before any permit for the erection of a structure
in such proposed subdivision shall be granted and before commencement of site
preparation, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall apply to the Zoning Officer for
a certificate of approval of said minor subdivision in accordance with Article III of this
chapter.
§ 204-4. Major subdivision.
Whenever a major subdivision of land is proposed, before any conveyance of any part
thereof and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision
shall be granted and before commencement of site preparation, the subdivider or his
authorized agent shall apply for and secure preliminary and final plat approval of such
proposed subdivision in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
§ 204-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-4
204:7

ARTICLE III
Procedure for Filing Minor Subdivision Applications
§ 204-5. Approval required.
Whenever any minor subdivision is proposed, and before any transfer of title, the
property owner shall submit a sketch plan and obtain written approval of such sketch
plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsections A, B and C of § 204-6.
Before any land is transferred or any permit for the erection of a structure is issued for
such land, final authorization of said land separation shall be obtained as set forth in
Subsection D of § 204-6.
§ 204-6. Sketch plan.
A. A property owner shall submit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer a completed
application and four copies of a sketch plan of the proposed minor subdivision. The
sketch plan shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor, or by the owner, and shall
show the entire parcel being divided and proposed lot lines, and any existing
easements, deed restrictions or covenants affecting the property. At that time, the
property owner shall also pay the fee established by separate resolution of the Town
Board.
B. Discussion of requirements and classification. Classification of the sketch plan will
be made at this time by the Zoning Enforcement Officer as to whether the proposal
qualifies as a minor subdivision, or must be processed as a major subdivision.
C. Preliminary review. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the sketch plan
to determine whether it meets the requirements of these regulations. The Zoning
Officer may, where he or she deems necessary, make specific recommendations to
be incorporated by the applicant into the proposal prior to submitting it for final
authorization.
D. Final authorization. Within 180 days after close of preliminary review, the property
owner shall provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer a final sketch plan. This sketch
plan shall meet all the recommendations made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
in the preliminary review. Upon determination that the sketch plan complies with
this chapter and his or her recommendations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may
approve the sketch plan and issue a certificate of approval of minor subdivision to
the owner. The approval shall be filed at the Genesee County Clerk's office. No
further review by the Planning Board is required.
§ 204-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-6
204:9

ARTICLE IV
Procedure for Filing Major Subdivision Applications
§ 204-7. Approval required.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract for the sale of any
part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed
subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply
for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this article.
§ 204-8. Preliminary plat.
A. Discussion of requirements and classification.
(1) Before preparing the preliminary plat, the applicant shall discuss with the
Planning Board, or its representative, the requirements of land, street
improvements, drainage, sewerage, water, fire protection, and similar aspects
as well as the availability of existing services.
(2) Classification of the proposed preliminary plat is to be made at this time by the
Planning Board as to whether it is a minor or major subdivision as defined in
these regulations. The Board may require, however, when it deems it
necessary for protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, that a minor
subdivision comply with all or some of the requirements specified for major
subdivisions in these regulations.
B. Application procedure. Prior to filing an application for the approval of a
subdivision plat, the applicant shall file an application for the approval of a
preliminary plat.
(1) The application shall:
(a) Be made on forms available at the office of the Town Clerk.
(b) Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide as well as all
lands owned by the applicant adjacent to the area proposed for
subdivision.
(c) Be accompanied by three copies of the preliminary plat, as described in
Article VII, § 204-19, of these regulations.
(d) Comply in all respects with Article V of these regulations and with the
provisions of §§ 276 and 277 of the Town Law, except where a
modification may be specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
(2) Fees may be charged for processing applications for plat approval for minor
subdivisions, preliminary plat approval for major subdivisions and final plat
approval for major subdivisions, as well as for site plan reviews, public
hearings, consulting fees, engineering expenses, inspection expenses, bad
check charges, state environmental quality reviews, appeals, variances, special
use permits and other administrative actions. The fees shall be set by the Town
Board by resolution and may be changed from time to time in the same
§ 204-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-8
204:11
§ 204-9. Subdivision plat.
manner.
C. Study of preliminary plat. The Planning Board will carefully study the practicability
of the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the requirements of the
community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention will
be given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the
topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the
future development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of
the Comprehensive Plan and the Official Map as they may be adopted.
D. Applicant to attend Planning Board meeting. The applicant or his representative
should be prepared to attend the next regular meeting of the Planning Board and
any subsequent meetings deemed necessary by the Chairman of the Planning Board
to discuss the preliminary plat.
E. Required changes for conditional approval. Within 45 days after the time of
submission of a preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall take action to
conditionally approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove such
preliminary plat, and the grounds of any modification required or the grounds for
disapproval shall be stated upon the records of such Planning Board. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within such forty-five-day period shall constitute a
conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
A. Application procedure. Within six months of the conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the Planning Board an application for
approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall:
(1) Be made on forms provided by the Planning Board at the time of conditional
approval of the preliminary plat.
(2) Include the entire subdivision.
(3) Be accompanied, for a major subdivision, by three copies of the subdivision
plat and construction detail sheets as described in Article VII, § 204-20, of
these regulations.
(4) Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat as conditionally approved.
(5) Be presented to the Chairman of the Planning Board at least two weeks prior
to a regular meeting of the Board in order that a public hearing may be
scheduled and the required notice given.
B. Official submittal date. The subdivision plat shall be considered officially
submitted only at the regular meeting of the Planning Board following completion
of the application procedure outlined above.
C. Endorsement of State Health Department. The proposed subdivision plat shall be
properly endorsed by the State Health Department as meeting the standards of the
State Sanitary Code, Public Health Law, or other applicable health code before any
public hearing is scheduled. The plat should be in final form before State Health
Department approval.
§ 204-8 BATAVIA CODE § 204-9
204:12
D. County notification. The Planning Board will also, if the county has established a
County Official Map, notify the Genesee County Planning Board and the County
Superintendent of Highways or Commissioner of Public Works if the subdivision
plat proposes structures or new streets having frontage on, access to, or otherwise
directly related to any county road, existing or proposed, as shown on the County
Official Map. The County Planning Board reports to the Planning Board within 30
days on its approval or disapproval or on its approval subject to stated conditions of
the proposed subdivision plat. The plat may be approved by the Town subject to
stated conditions, notwithstanding such report, when the application of such report
will act to deprive the owner of the reasonable use of his land.
E. Public hearing. Before the Planning Board acts on any subdivision plat, it shall hold
a public hearing thereon within 30 days after the time of official submittal date in
accordance with § 276 of the Town Law. If any zoning changes are to be requested
at the time of approval of the subdivision plat, a public hearing thereon must be
held in accordance with Town Law. The two public hearings may be held at the
same time.
F. Action on proposed subdivision plat. After careful study, the Planning Board shall,
within 45 days from the public hearing on the subdivision plat, approve, modify, or
disapprove such plat. The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated on the
records of the Planning Board. A subdivision plat shall not be signed by the
authorized officers of the Planning Board until the applicant has met all the
conditions of the action granting approval of such plat.
G. Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions
shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the Board
and endorsed, in writing, on the plat. In the event that any subdivision plat, when
recorded, contains any such changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and
the Board shall institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of
the County Clerk.
H. Signing of plat.
(1) Every subdivision plat submitted to the Board for its approval shall carry the
following endorsement:
Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of the Town of Batavia, New
York, on the_____ day of__________, _____, subject to all requirements and
conditions of said resolution. Any change, erasure, modification or revision
of this plat, as approved, shall void this approval. Signed this_____ day of
______, by
______________________________ ______________________________
Chairman Secretary
(2) In the absence of the Chairman or Secretary, the Acting Chairman or Acting
Secretary, respectively, may sign in his place. If there is a County Official
Map, such endorsement shall stipulate that the plat does not conflict with the
County Official Map or, in cases where the plat does front on, or have access
to, or is otherwise related to roads or drainage systems shown on the County
Official Map, that such plat has been approved by the County Planning Board
§ 204-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-9
204:13
§ 204-10. Required improvements and agreements.
in the manner specified by General Municipal Law.
A. Improvements and performance bond. Prior to an action by the Planning Board
approving a subdivision plat, the applicant shall be required to complete, in
accordance with the Planning Board's decision and to the satisfaction of the
appropriate Town departments, all the street, sanitary, and other improvements
specified in the action approving said plat or, as an alternative, to file with the Town
Board a performance bond in an amount estimated by the Planning Board to secure
to the Town the satisfactory construction and installation of the incomplete portion
of the required improvements. A period of one year, or such other period as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate, within which required improvements
must be completed shall be specified by the Planning Board and expressed in the
bond. Such performance bond shall comply with the requirements of § 277 of the
Town Law and shall be satisfactory to the Town Board as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution. The bond shall provide that an amount determined adequate
by the Planning Board shall be retained for a period of one year after the date of
completion of the required improvements to assure their satisfactory condition. All
required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his expense without
reimbursement by the Town or any district therein. Said improvements shall
include the following:
(1) Streets and streetlighting facilities.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Grass curb strips.
(5) Sidewalks.
(6) Street shade trees.
(7) Monuments.
(8) Stormwater runoff system.
(9) Sanitary sewage collection system.
(10) Water supply system.
(11) Park and recreation facilities.
(12) Electrical, telephone, and utility lines.
(13) Plantings and ground cover.
B. Inspection of improvements. The Town shall employ an inspector to act as agent of
the Planning Board for the purpose of assuring the satisfactory completion of
improvements required by the Planning Board and shall determine an amount
sufficient to defray costs of inspection. The applicant shall pay the Town costs of
inspection before the subdivision plat is signed for filing. If the Planning Board or
§ 204-9 BATAVIA CODE § 204-10
204:14
§ 204-11. Filing of approved subdivision plat.
Upon completion of all requirements set forth in the action approving the subdivision
plat and notation to that effect upon the subdivision plat, it shall be deemed to have
final approval and shall be properly signed by the appropriate officer of the Planning
Board and may be filed by the applicant in the office of the Genesee County Clerk. Any
subdivision plat not so filed and recorded within 90 days of the date upon which said plat
is approved or considered approved by reason of the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall become null and void unless the particular circumstances of said applicant warrant
the Planning Board to grant an extension, which shall not exceed two additional periods
of 90 days. The applicant shall provide the Town Clerk with a copy of the plat certified
by the Genesee County Clerk as to being the true and certified copy of said plat on file
in the county office.
§ 204-12. Public streets, parks and playground areas.
The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or imply the acceptance by the Town of any street, park, playground, or
other open space shown on said plat. The Planning Board may require said plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. If the Planning Board determines that a
suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be properly located in any such plat or are
otherwise not practical, the Board may require, as a condition to approval of any such
plat, a payment to the Town of a sum to be determined by the Town Board, which sum
its agent finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with Planning Board recommendations or the
approved construction detail sheets, the applicant and the bonding company will be
severally and jointly liable for the costs of completing said improvements according
to specifications.
C. Offers of cession and release.
(1) The plat shall be endorsed with the necessary agreements in connection with
required easements or releases. Offers of cession to the Town shall be
presented prior to plat approval.
(2) Formal offers of cession to the Town of all streets and parks not marked on the
plat with notation to the effect that such cession will not be offered shall be
filed with the Planning Board prior to plat approval. If the owner of the land
or his agent who files the plat does not add as part of the plat a notation to the
effect that no offer of dedication of such streets, highways, or parks or any of
them is made to the public, the filing of the plat in the office of the County
Clerk or Register shall constitute a continuing offer of dedication of the streets,
highways, or parks or any of them to the public, and said offer of dedication
may be accepted by the Town Board at any time prior to revocation of said
offer by the owner of the land or his agent.
(3) Before final approval of the subdivision plat, the Planning Board will require
a certificate of approval from the Town Attorney as to the legal sufficiency of
the offers of cession by the subdivider of the areas for public use, such as
parks, streets, playgrounds, and other areas.
§ 204-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-12
204:15
shall constitute a trust fund to be used by the Town Board exclusively for neighborhood
park, playground, or recreation purposes, including the acquisition of property. The
Planning Board may require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and
the Town Board covering future title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading,
development, equipment, and maintenance of any park or playground area, as well as
a written agreement covering the maintenance and plowing of all streets within the
subdivision until such time as they are accepted for public maintenance by the Town
Board.
§ 204-13. Initiation of land sales or construction.
Upon posting of the performance bond in accordance with Article IV, § 204-10, and
after approval and filing of the subdivision plat, the subdivider may initiate land sales or
construction of the subdivision itself.
§ 204-12 BATAVIA CODE § 204-13
204:16
ARTICLE V
Development Standards for Major Subdivisions
§ 204-14. Consideration by Planning Board.
The Planning Board, in considering an application for the subdivision of land, shall be
guided by the following considerations and standards.
§ 204-15. Character of land; conformity to Official Map and Comprehensive
Plan.
§ 204-16. Design standards.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood,
or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and Comprehensive Plan. Subdivisions shall conform
to the streets and parks shown on the Official Map of the Town as may be adopted
and shall be properly related to the Town Comprehensive Plan as it is developed
and adopted by the Town Planning Board.
A. Streets. The following regulations shall govern the layout of streets:
(1) The design of the street pattern shall be based upon a local residential or minor
street pattern connected to a residential collector street system.
(2) The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas, or their proper protection
where adjoining land is not subdivided, at the same or greater width insofar as
such may be deemed necessary for public requirements.
(3) Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
(4) All right-of-way street widths and street pavements shall be measured at right
angles or radial to the center line of the street and shall not be less than the
following:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Collector street 66
Marginal service street 60
(5) Whenever possible, streets should intersect at right angles and not intersect at
angles of less than 60° unless approved by the Planning Board.
(6) The grades of streets shall be in accordance with specifications established by
the Town Engineer, and such grades as submitted on subdivision plats shall be
approved by him prior to final approval by the Planning Board.
(7) All proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide access to adjacent
§ 204-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-16
204:17
properties. When a proposed subdivision abuts an existing subdivision, the
subdivider shall make every attempt to design the street system of the
proposed subdivision to connect with dead-end or stub streets of the existing
subdivision.
(8) The following standards shall apply to cul-de-sac streets:
(a) A cul-de-sac should be located, if possible, so that it drains toward its
entrance.
(b) Unless there is the expectation of extending the street through to the
adjoining property, a cul-de-sac street should not be brought to the
property boundary line but should be placed so that the lots can back on
the property line of the subdivision.
(c) No cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length.
(d) All culs-de-sac shall have a turnaround at the end of the street which shall
have a right-of-way radius of 60 feet and pavement radius of 50 feet
unless the Planning Board approves an alternate arrangement.
(9) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extension of the street through to
adjacent property and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
(10) New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except that wherever a
proposed subdivision borders a half or partial street, the Planning Board shall
require that the other part of the street be platted in the proposed tract if it is
found that such a requirement would increase the effectiveness of the
circulation system in the area.
(11) Multiple intersections involving a junction of more than two streets shall be
prohibited.
(12) Local residential streets and residential collector streets shall not intersect with
arterial streets less than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center
line.
(13) The minimum distance between center-line offsets at street jogs shall be 150
feet.
(14) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to
be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing
street shall have the same name.
(15) The minimum radius of horizontal curves, minimum length of vertical curves,
and minimum length of tangents between reverse curves shall be in accordance
with specifications established by the Town Engineer, and said items shall be
approved by him prior to final approval of the subdivision plat by the Planning
Board.
(16) All street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be rounded by curves of at
§ 204-16 BATAVIA CODE § 204-16
204:18
least twenty-foot radius and curbs shall be adjusted accordingly.
(17) In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other at any one
point by more than 10° shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which
for the center line of the street shall not be less than 400 feet on major streets,
200 feet on collector streets and 100 feet on minor streets.
B. Lots. The following regulations shall govern the layout of lots:
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation and the minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the
type of development and use contemplated.
(2) All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as to area and dimensions for the zone
in which the subdivision is located. However, in the event of utilizing Town
Law, the Planning Board may use its discretion in determining lot sizes.
(3) Each lot shall abut on a street built to the Town's specifications.
(4) Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of required
building lines on both streets as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots
shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from
such line.
(6) Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved
streets.
(7) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended
use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, or similar
circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate investigation, require
modification of such lots.
(8) Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to
accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning Ordinance22
and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street
traffic.
(9) Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed specifically
for such purposes, with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and
delivery facilities.
(10) Double frontage lots will not, in general, be approved.
C. Easements. An easement shall be provided for all natural drainageways and all
utility lines when such utility line or lines do not fall within a dedicated right-ofway.
All easements shall be plotted on the preliminary plat and subdivision plat. A
clause shall be inserted in the deed of each lot affected by an easement indicating
that the easement exists and its purpose. Except as further required in this section,
22. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 204-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-16
204:19
easements shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. Where a subdivision is traversed
by a drainageway, channel, or stream, a drainageway easement conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse shall be provided. The easement shall
be 20 feet wide or such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage
and provide sufficient width for maintenance. Where it is found that additional
easement width is needed, such width shall be determined by the Planning Board
in consultation with the Town Engineer. To the fullest extent possible, easements
shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines. All utility lines which
are primarily intended to provide service to the lots within the subdivision shall
be installed underground at a depth and at such locations as will minimize risk of
interruption of services. A five-foot easement running parallel with and contiguous
to all street and highway rights-of-way shall be provided to the Town granting
the Town the right to protect, plant, prune, spray, remove, control, regulate and
improve shrubbery and shade trees thereon.
D. Landscaping and ground cover.
(1) All lot areas which are not covered by structures or paving shall be properly
seeded by the developer.
(2) The developer shall provide a liberal and functional landscaping scheme for
the entire subdivision. Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of two trees
which shall be in addition to the street shade trees. This requirement may be
waived by the Planning Board in wooded areas where the subdivider intends
to maintain existing trees.
(3) Individual homeowners may, by written agreement with the subdivider and
builder, seed and landscape their yards independently.
(4) When a proposed subdivision borders upon an existing commercial or
industrial establishment or any other use which, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, may be detrimental to the tranquility of the future residents of the
subdivision, the Planning Board may require a landscape screen to buffer the
subdivision from the noncompatible use.
E. Preservation of natural features.
(1) Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least four inches to six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision
and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. At no time shall topsoil be
removed from the site without written permission from the Planning Board.
(2) To the fullest extent possible, all existing trees and shrubbery shall be
conserved by the subdivider. Special consideration shall be given to the
arrangement and ultimate improvement or development of the lots to this end.
Precautions shall also be taken to protect existing trees and shrubbery during
the process of grading the lots and roads. Where there is a question as to the
desirability of removing a group of trees which serve to add interest and
variety to the proposed subdivision in order to allow for use of the land for a
lot or lots, the Planning Board may, after proper investigation, require
modification of such lots. Where any land other than that included in public
rights-of-way is to be dedicated to the public use, the developer shall not
§ 204-16 BATAVIA CODE § 204-16
204:20
remove any trees from the site without written permission from the Planning
Board.
(3) Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural lake, pond, or stream, the
boundaries or alignment of said watercourse shall be preserved unless, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, a change or realignment will enhance the
development and beauty of the subdivision or the utilization of such features
by the future residents of the subdivision. All proposed changes in watercourse
alignment shall be in accordance with the revised New York State Stream
Conservation Law.
(4) Unique physical features, such as historic landmarks and sites, rock
outcroppings, hilltop lookouts, desirable natural contours, and similar features,
shall be preserved if possible.
(5) The subdivider shall not be permitted to leave any surface depressions which
will collect pools of water.
(6) The subdivider shall not be permitted to leave any hills or mounds of dirt
around the tract. All surfaces shall be restored within six months of the time of
the completion of the section of the subdivision.
F. Floodplain.
(1) Mapping. If any portion of the land within the subdivision is subject to
inundation or flood hazard by stormwater, such fact and portion shall be
clearly indicated on the preliminary plat and the prominent note on each sheet
of such map whereon any such portion shall be shown.
(2) Use. Land subject to flooding, and land deemed by the Planning Board to be
otherwise uninhabitable, shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property or aggravate
the flood hazard.
G. Self-imposed restrictions. The owner may place restrictions on the development
greater than those required by the Zoning Ordinance.23 Such restrictions, if any,
shall be indicated on the final subdivision plat.
H. Modification of standards. The Planning Board may modify the specified
requirements in any individual case where, in the Board's judgment, such
modification is in the public interest or will avoid the imposition of unnecessary
individual hardship.
I. Parks, playgrounds or open space.
(1) Land shall be reserved for park, playground, open space, or other recreational
purposes in locations designated on the Comprehensive Plan or elsewhere
where the Planning Board deems that such reservations would be appropriate.
For a major subdivision, each reservation shall be of an area equal to 5% of
the total land within the subdivision, but in no case shall a reservation be less
than two acres. The area to be preserved shall possess the suitable topography,
23. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Zoning.
§ 204-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-16
204:21
general character, and adequate road access necessary for its recreational
purposes.
(2) Where a major subdivision is too small to establish an adequate recreation area
site; where the land in a subdivision is unsuitable in character; or where the
Town Comprehensive Plan or good planning judgment would not locate a
recreation area; or in the case of a minor subdivision, the applicant will be
required to provide a cash equivalent of $50 per lot, deposited with the Town
Clerk for the account of the Town of Batavia Park, Playground and Open
Space Trust Fund, to be used for acquisition of such areas in suitable locations.
(3) Where the Planning Board requires land to be set aside for parks, playgrounds,
or other recreational purposes, the Board shall require that the site be graded,
loamed, and seeded and may require it to be fenced.
(4) When area for park, playground, recreational purposes or open space shall
have been required on the subdivision plat, the approval of said subdivision
plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the Town of such an area.
§ 204-16 BATAVIA CODE § 204-16
204:22
ARTICLE VI
Improvements Within Major Subdivisions
§ 204-17. General regulations.
The developer, before the approval of the subdivision plat, shall complete all
improvements to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer or post a performance bond
sufficient to insure the satisfactory completion of the following required improvements,
except where waivers may be requested, and the Planning Board may waive, subject
to appropriate conditions, such improvements as it considers are not requisite in the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever this chapter references
that improvements be made in accordance with standards and/or specifications on file
in the Town Clerk's office, said standards and/or specifications shall include, but not be
limited to, Chapter 183, Road Specifications, of this Code, which chapter details general
design standards for Town roads, streets and related construction matters, as well as
material and construction specification details for roadway construction, concrete gutters
and curbs, concrete sidewalks, drainage structures and general grading, trimming and
related work.
A. Streets. All streets shall be constructed, graded, and paved in accordance with the
standards and specifications on file in the Town Clerk's office.
B. Storm drains, culverts, catch basins and other drainage structures shall be installed
in accordance with the standards and specifications on file in the Town Clerk's
office and in accord with the final map approved by the Planning Board. All pipe
shall comply with the requirements of the current New York State Highway
Department specifications governing construction of these facilities. The location,
length, depth, size, grade, and type of pipe shall be designated in the plans. If
unusual conditions are discovered at the time of construction which are not
provided for on the plans, the Town Engineer shall determine the type and extent of
construction required to overcome such conditions.
C. Curbing or gutters shall be constructed on both sides of all streets shown on all
proposed subdivision plats and in accord with the construction standards on file in
the Town Clerk's office.
D. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street and constructed in accord
with the standards on file in the Town Clerk's office.
E. Driveway aprons shall be required between the curbing and the sidewalk and shall
be of six-inch concrete meeting the same specifications established for curbing.
F. Street signs shall be of metal and shall be installed at the intersection of all streets
in conformity with Town specifications at the locations approved by the Planning
Board.
G. Grass strips shall be provided within the portion of the street right-of-way beyond
the curb or gutter line and shall be properly graded and seeded.
H. Street trees shall be planted in every subdivision at intervals from 40 feet to 60 feet
along both sides of the street. Existing trees may be taken into consideration when
determining the above. Trees shall be at least three feet from any sidewalk and
§ 204-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-17
204:23
§ 204-18. Permitted modifications.
located on the building side of the walk rather than the street side. Where dwelling
structures are oriented with their rear on the street, street trees shall be at least six
feet from the curbline. Trees should also be at least 10 feet from any line which is
directly under utility wires. The average trunk diameter shall be at least two inches,
and an average height of six feet above finished grade level is required. Such trees
shall be of a species and at locations approved by the Planning Board. No tree
shall be planted within 25 feet from an existing or proposed streetlight or street
intersection.
I. Shade trees, other than within the right-of-way, may be required when, taking into
consideration the existing trees on the lots, the Planning Board shall deem it
necessary. Such trees shall be in conformance with the standards of size, kind, and
locational limitations prescribed for trees along the street line.
J. Streetlighting facilities shall be provided along all streets in the subdivision and
along all streets upon which the subdivision abuts. Such lighting facilities shall be
in accordance with the Town standards and shall be installed as approved and
directed by the Town Engineer.
K. Sanitary sewers and treatment disposal facilities shall be required. Where a public
sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect or provide for
connection with such sanitary sewer and shall provide within the subdivision the
sanitary sewer system required to make the sewer accessible to each lot in the
subdivision. Sewer systems shall be approved by the Town and health official(s)
and be in accordance with other requirements of law. The construction is subject to
the supervision of the Town Engineer.
L. Where a public water main is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect
with such water main and provide a water connection for each lot in accordance
with Town standards, procedures, and supervision. Fire hydrants shall be required
and shall be installed in the locations approved by the Town Engineer and in accord
with the New York State Board of Fire Underwriters.
M. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at intervals of
approximately 500 feet, or such other distance as the Planning Board may
determine appropriate, and their location shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
Iron pipes shall not be considered permanent monuments for the purpose of these
regulations. Standards for monuments are on file in the Town Clerk's office.
A. Concrete curbing may be omitted and, in lieu thereof, concrete gutters, rolled
gutters or other means for controlling stormwater may be constructed as may be
approved by the Town Engineer and Planning Board.
B. Sidewalks may be omitted on one or both sides of the street to the extent deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board.
C. Where curbing and/or sidewalks are not provided, adequate provision for the
protection of the edge of the road pavement, and graded shoulders, at all driveway
openings and other accessways shall be provided in a manner approved by the
Town Engineer.
§ 204-17 BATAVIA CODE § 204-18
204:24
D. Where sidewalks and curbing are not provided, grass curb strips shall not be
required. However, grading and seeding of the area between the pavement edge,
shoulder, or approved drainage structure and the front property line of the lot shall
be provided.
E. Individual sewage disposal systems (septic tanks) may be provided in lieu of
facilities connected to a public sanitary sewage disposal system. Where such system
is not reasonably available, such on-site disposal systems shall not be subject to the
provisions of these regulations regarding subdivision control but shall be subject to
all other applicable laws and regulations of the Town, county, and state. Sewage
lagoons shall be prohibited.
F. Individual on-site water supply systems may be provided in lieu of providing a
water supply connected to a public utility system. Where such a system is not
reasonably available, such on-site water supply systems shall not be subject to the
provisions of these regulations regarding subdivision approval but shall be subject
to all other applicable laws and regulations of the Town, county and state.
G. Fire hydrants may be omitted where adequate water mains which are a part of a
public utility water system are not either existing or proposed to be available to the
subdivision.
§ 204-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-18
204:25

ARTICLE VII
Specifications for Plats
§ 204-19. Preliminary plat.
Preliminary plats submitted to the Planning Board shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than one inch equals 100 feet and shall show the following information:
§ 204-20. Major subdivision plat.
Major subdivision plats shall be accompanied by separate construction detail sheets, and
A. The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and streets. There
shall also be included a key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet showing all
streets, streams, and property within 1,500 feet of the applicant's property. All
property held by the applicant in the area should be identified.
B. The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines (include the
entire area proposed to be subdivided and the remainder of the tract owned by the
subdividing owner).
C. All pertinent features, such as existing structures, streets, railroads, water bodies,
streams, swamps, and large trees, that may influence the design of the subdivision
and topography at a contour interval of one foot or two feet, depending on the
steepness of the land, unless waived by the Planning Board.
D. The location, width, and approximate grade of all proposed streets. Approximate
elevations shall be shown at the beginning and end of each street, at street
intersections, and at all points where there is a decided change in the slope or
direction.
E. The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all proposed or existing lots.
F. The approximate location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside
for playground or park use.
G. The names of all property owners of record, or the names of developments within
500 feet.
H. The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided, the name
and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner, and the name of the land
surveyor.
I. The date, source of the North point, and scale.
J. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an acre.
K. Proposed provision of water supply, fire protection, disposal of sanitary waste,
stormwater drainage, street trees, streetlighting fixtures, street signs, and sidewalks,
data on which must be available for consideration at this stage.
L. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be numbered
consecutively in accordance with the procedure established by the Town. The total
number of residential lots shall be noted on the plat.
§ 204-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-20
204:27
both shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval, as follows:
A. Drawing, scale, and size of plat and construction detail sheets. The subdivision plat
and construction detail sheets shall be clearly and legibly drawn on a stable,
transparent, reproducible base. In areas zoned for lots of minimum size of 20,000
square feet or more, maps and profiles shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet. In areas zoned for lots less than 20,000 square feet, maps and profiles shall be
at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. Maps shall be on uniform size sheets in
accordance with the New York State statutes. Whenever any project is of such size
that more than one sheet is required, then an index map on the same size sheet shall
accompany these sheets. The construction detail sheets shall show all items
included in Subsection D and as actually constructed.
B. Information to be shown on plat. Plats shall show the following information:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title which shall not duplicate or too
closely approximate that of any other development in the Town.
(2) Date, source of the North point, and scale.
(3) Name, address, and signature of the owner, subdivider, and licensed engineer
or land surveyor.
(4) Names of owners of record of abutting properties or developments.
(5) Locations, names, and widths of existing streets, highways and easements,
building lines, parks, and other public properties.
(6) Locations and widths of all streets and sidewalks, together with names of
streets, and location, dimensions, and status of all easements proposed by the
subdivider.
(7) Lot areas in square feet.
(8) Lot lanes with accurate dimensions and bearings of angles.
(9) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all
lines and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(10) Radii of all curves and lengths of arcs.
(11) Location, material, and approximate size of all monuments.
(12) The accurate outline of all property which is offered, or to be offered, for
dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all
property that is proposed to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use
of the property owners of the subdivision.
(13) Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(14) Each block shall be numbered and the lots within such block shall be
numbered consecutively in accordance with the procedure established by the
Town. The total number of residential lots shall be noted on the plat.
C. In addition to the subdivision plat as described above, the following shall also be
§ 204-20 BATAVIA CODE § 204-20
204:28
presented to the Planning Board:
(1) A certificate that there are no tax liens on the property being subdivided.
(2) A performance bond in such amount as is necessary to complete street and
utility improvements.
D. Construction detail sheets. Construction detail sheets shall show the following
information, except that where requirements have been waived, applicable
specifications may be omitted:
(1) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all
streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the
elevation along the center line of the existing street or streets within 100 feet
of the intersection, in both directions, shall be shown. All elevations must be
referred to established United States government or approved local
benchmarks where they exist within 1/2 mile of the boundary of the
subdivision.
(2) The Planning Board may require, where steep slopes exist, that present
elevations of all proposed streets shall be shown every 100 feet at five points
on a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points
shall be at the center line of the street, each property line, and points 30 feet
inside each property line.
(3) Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of street
pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, manholes, and catch
basins; the locations of street trees, streetlighting standards and street signs;
the location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary
sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants; and the exact location and size
of all water, gas, electric, or other underground utilities or structures.
E. All plans shall conform to the Town minimum road specifications and shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.
§ 204-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-20
204:29

ARTICLE VIII
Variances, Waivers and Violations
§ 204-21. Variances.
Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official
Map, the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning Ordinance, if such exists.
§ 204-22. Waivers.
Where the Planning Board finds that, due to the special circumstances of a particular
plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the interest of the
public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or
lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may
waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions.
§ 204-23. Conditions.
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Board shall require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified.
§ 204-24. Violations; enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to divide or otherwise alter
existing property lines of lots or parcels of property without first complying with
this chapter.
B. Where the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds a violation of these provisions, he/she
shall serve a written order-notice upon the owner by registered mail to remedy such
condition. Such written notice shall include the provisions of law violated, the
corrective action to be taken, the penalties and remedies which may be involved by
the Town for noncompliance and time for compliance.
C. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine and/
or imprisonment as set forth in § 268 of New York State Town Law. Each and every
week such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
D. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may, with permission of the Town Board, institute
court action to enforce any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
E. In addition to the remedies described in this section, the Town of Batavia may seek
an injunction to restrain, correct or abate any violation of this chapter and/or
maintain an action at law for damages sustained as a result of any violation of this
chapter. Damages may include but not be limited to legal fees and court costs
expended or incurred by the Town as a result of legal proceedings brought
hereunder.
F. The Town Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized herein to issue and serve
§ 204-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 204-24
204:31
§ 204-25. Supersession of state law.
All applicable statutes, laws and local ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, including §§ 276 and 277 of New York State Town Law, are hereby superseded
to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
appearance tickets with respect to violation(s) of this chapter which he/she is
required to enforce.
§ 204-24 BATAVIA CODE § 204-25
204:32
Chapter 209
TAXATION
§ 204-25 TAXATION § 204-25
209:1

ARTICLE I
Exemptions for Eligible Business Facilities
[Adopted 1-24-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
§ 209-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant an incentive for the expansion of existing
businesses in the Town of Batavia and the location of new businesses in said town by
granting tax exemptions to said businesses for periods as specified herein.
§ 209-2. Powers and duties of Assessor.
The Assessor of the Town of Batavia shall have the power and be charged with the duty
to carry out the purpose and intent of Article 4-A of the Commerce Law,24 § 485 of the
Real Property Tax Law25 and the other applicable laws of the state to grant to business
facility owners or operators exemptions from taxes and special ad valorem levies to the
extent provided in the aforementioned New York State laws.
§ 209-3. Determination of assessed value.
Said Assessor shall determine the assessed value of the exemption pursuant to such state
laws and shall grant as an exemption 100% thereof for 10 years.
§ 209-4. Commencement date.
Any exemption so granted shall commence with the assessment roll prepared on the next
following taxable status date of the Town of Batavia.
24. Editor's Note: Article 4-A of the Commerce Law (now the Economic Development Law) was repealed by L. 1983, c. 15.
25. Editor's Note: Section 485 of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed by L. 1988, c. 165.
§ 209-1 TAXATION § 209-4
209:3

ARTICLE II
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 1-30-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 209-5. Maximum exemptions reduced.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision (2)(d) of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, the
Town of Batavia, Genesee County, New York, hereby reduces the maximum exemptions
allowed in Subdivision (2)(a), (b) and (c) of said § 458-a to $9,000, $6,000 and $30,000,
respectively.
§ 209-5.1. Exemption extended to Gold Star Parents. [Added 5-16-2001 by L.L.
No. 2-2001]
Pursuant to the provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(7), the Town of Batavia
hereby includes a Gold Star Parent within the definition of "qualified owner," as
provided in Paragraph (c) of Subdivision 1 of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, and
also includes property owned by a Gold Star Parent within the definition of "qualifying
residential real property" as provided in Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 1 of said section,
provided that such property shall be the primary residence of the Gold Star Parent.
§ 209-5 TAXATION § 209-5.1
209:5

ARTICLE III
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 4-26-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
§ 209-6. Exemption reduced to zero.
The per centum of business investment exemption allowable pursuant to § 485-b of the
Real Property Tax Law, effective June 8, 1976 (Laws 1976, Chapter 278, as amended),
is reduced to no allowable exemption, as permitted by enactment of local law in
accordance with § 485-b, Subdivision (7) of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 209-6 TAXATION § 209-6
209:7

Chapter 223
VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 127. Parks — See Ch. 169.
§ 223-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of this chapter is to control the recreational use of off-highway vehicles
as defined herein in order to prevent injury to persons and damage to property, to
protect the rights of the residents of the Town of Batavia to the peaceful enjoyment of
their properties, and further generally to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Town of Batavia.
§ 223-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are herein defined. Words
in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter. "Shall" is always mandatory and not directive. Other words, except when
specifically defined herein, shall have the meanings commonly attributed to them.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION — Includes a county, city, town, village, school
district, fire district, or a special or improvement district of a county or town.
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled by other than muscular
power, including but not limited to snowmobiles; two-wheeled motor vehicles
known as trail bikes, minibikes, and motor scooters; three-wheeled motor vehicles
known as all-terrain cycles; and four-wheeled motor vehicles known as go-carts
or all-terrain vehicles, excluding the following: farm vehicles, lawn and garden
tractors and other similar equipment designed primarily for property upkeep and
maintenance and not for recreational use and also excluding vehicles owned or
operated by any municipal corporation, police agency or fire department.
OPERATOR — Every person who operates or is in actual possession or physical
control of the off-highway vehicle.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or any body of
persons, whether incorporated or not.
POLICE AGENCY — Any public police or public law enforcement agency,
whether federal, state or municipal.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All other property in the Town of Batavia that is not
public property as defined herein.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, easements or any other areas
§ 209-6 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § 223-2
223:1
§ 223-3. Operation on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate, maneuver or place any off-highway
vehicle upon public property.
§ 223-4. Operation on private property.
dedicated or commonly used by the public in the Town of Batavia.
TOWN — The Town of Batavia, Genesee County, New York.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate, maneuver, park or place any
off-highway vehicle on property not owned or leased by him or by a parent, brother,
sister, or child of his without the express written consent of the owner or one of the
owners of said property.
B. Any written consent required by Subsection A above shall be deemed void and of
no effect unless it is signed by the owner or his authorized representative and dated
within six months. Said written consent shall further be deemed void and of no
effect if it has been revoked by the owner or his authorized representative. Said
written consent shall be subject to any terms and conditions the owner or his
authorized agent shall deem appropriate.
C. An owner or his authorized agent may revoke any written consent granted pursuant
to this section by:
(1) Orally communicating said revocation directly to the person previously
granted said consent;
(2) Personally delivering to said person a written statement revoking the written
consent; or
(3) Mailing a written statement revoking said consent to the last known residence
or business address of the person previously granted said written consent by
regular first class mail and delivering a copy of said written revocation to the
Town Clerk.
D. Where written consent is required pursuant to this section, a copy of the written
consent conforming to the provisions of this section shall be carried on the person
of each operator of the off-highway vehicle and shall be produced for inspection
upon the request of any peace officer or police officer.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to off-highway vehicles if:
(1) They are being used for agricultural purposes or for the upkeep and
maintenance of real property;
(2) When used for such purposes, said vehicle or vehicles are operated at a speed
of 10 miles per hour or less; and
(3) Said vehicles are not operated in violation of any other applicable laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations.
§ 223-2 BATAVIA CODE § 223-5
223:2
§ 223-5. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the care, custody and
control of any child under the age of 16 years knowingly to permit such child to operate
an off-highway vehicle in violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 223-6. Impoundment or confiscation of vehicles.
§ 223-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, or parent, as defined in § 223-5 above, who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. The peace officer or police officer shall immediately impound any off-highway
vehicle that is operated in violation of any section or sections of this chapter. The
off-highway vehicle shall be returned to the owner upon payment of expenses and
charges necessarily or actually incurred for the impoundment of said vehicle and
payment of any fine that may be imposed by the court for said violation, or upon
direction of the court.
B. In the case of a second or subsequent violation by the same person, the court may
order the confiscation of said vehicle in lieu of any fine and/or imprisonment. Any
vehicle which is confiscated pursuant to this section will be sold at public auction
according to the appropriate procedures and law affecting public auctions by
municipalities.
§ 223-5 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § 223-7
223:3

Chapter 229
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Land separation — See Ch. 144.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Sewer use — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 223-7 WATER § 223-7
229:1

ARTICLE I
Water Use
[Adopted 7-17-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991]
§ 229-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to codify water regulations previously adopted by the
Batavia Town Board and to provide Town water users with a written statement of
conditions under which water service will be furnished and continued by the Town of
Batavia.
§ 229-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all property and water users within the Town's present and
future water districts, as well as to all present and future water users outside of the
Town's districts. The terms and provisions of this article shall be considered a part of the
contract of every person who obtains water from the Town, and, by acceptance of the
Town of Batavia water, each of said persons shall be considered as having given his or
her consent to be bound thereby.
§ 229-3. Word usage.
The gender and number used in this article are used as reference terms only and shall
apply with the same effect to the masculine or feminine gender, corporate or other
business form, and the singular shall likewise include the plural. "Town" shall mean the
Town of Batavia.
§ 229-4. Application for permit.
A. All persons desiring a water supply from the Town or replacement and/or
modification of existing installations shall first make written application, on forms
supplied by the Town, to the Town of Batavia stating fully the several and various
uses for which the water is to be used and be issued a permit to perform the work
covered by the application. Such application shall be signed by the owner of the
premises or his duly authorized agent and be accompanied by such plans,
specifications and drawings as may, from time to time, be required by the Town. If
said application is approved by the Town, no permit shall be granted for the
installation, replacement or modification of a water supply until the application fee
for the same in an amount to be established and modified from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board shall have been paid in full to the Town Clerk. Upon
completion of the work, or as stages of construction dictate, the Town shall be
notified and inspections performed.
B. Certificates of satisfactory inspection shall be issued as appropriate by the Water/
Sewer Maintenance Department. When the work is completed to the satisfaction of
the Town and in compliance with all rules and regulations contained in this article,
and on payment as directed by the Town Clerk of either all fees, charges and all
other expenses due the Town or a deposit in an amount set by the Town Clerk
against anticipated fees, charges and all other expenses accompanied by a written
agreement to pay the balance due when billed by the Town, the water to the
§ 229-1 WATER § 229-4
229:3
§ 229-5. Water tap requirements and fees.
§ 229-6. Installation and maintenance of service.
premises shall be turned on.
A. The owner, at his own expense, shall obtain all excavation, backfill, street opening
and other permits prior to the commencement of work. In addition the person or
organization carrying out such excavation must present to the Town Clerk prior to
commencing such work evidence of the existence of a performance bond and
liability insurance coverage providing the Town of Batavia with adequate
protection against any and all claims against it for personal injury, including
wrongful death, or property damage arising as a result of such excavation. If any
question arises as to the adequacy of such bond and/or liability coverage, the
decision of the Town Board shall be final. No work shall be performed on or within
10 feet of any water main without prior Town approval and Town supervision.
B. The work of inserting the taps, tees and connections and/or any other work
involving any water main shall be done only by the Town of Batavia Water/Sewer
Maintenance Department or by persons authorized by it to make such connections.
All such taps shall be made at the side of the main unless otherwise authorized by
the Town.
(1) Property owners within an existing or subsequently created Town of Batavia
water district desiring a water tap of up to and including two inches shall pay
a flat fee to the Town in an amount established by schedule and modified from
time to time by Town Board resolution.
(2) Property owners within an existing or subsequently created Town of Batavia
water district desiring a water tap of greater than two inches shall pay all costs
associated with the tap and delivery of Town water to the property line,
together with such fees as are established and modified from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board.
(3) Property owners outside of an existing or subsequently created Town of
Batavia water district, whether within or without the Town, desiring a water
tap of any size shall pay all Town costs, together with such fees as are from
time to time established by the Town Board.
A. The owner receiving a permit for the introduction of a water service into his
premises shall be required to cause such service to be placed not less than four feet
below the surface of the earth at all places between the water main and the inside of
the foundation wall of the building into which the water service is introduced.
Exceptions may only be approved by the Water/Sewer Department upon written
application setting forth the location and reasons supporting the exception.
B. All service pipes from the water main must be connected with the main by separate
pipe of not less than 3/4 inch in diameter. No service line shall be closer than 10
feet horizontal separation and 18 inches vertical separation from any septic/sewer
system. Where not possible exceptions must be approved by the Water/Sewer
Department.
§ 229-4 BATAVIA CODE § 229-6
229:4
§ 229-7. Interruption of service; rights reserved by Town.
The Town reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water in its
mains for the purpose of repairs, extension, tests or for any other similar purpose. Where
water service has been interrupted, the Town shall not be liable for any loss or damage
resulting from any deficiency or failure in the supply of water for any reason whatsoever;
for any loss or damage resulting from the bursting or breaking of any mains or service
pipes; or for any loss or damage resulting from any accident to the water distribution
system. In addition, the Town shall not be liable for any loss or damage from any excess,
deficiency or variation in the pressure or volume of water; for any loss or damage caused
by water escaping from or obstructions in a service line due to frost or any other cause;
or for any loss or damage as a result of water escaping from laterals, fixtures, appliances
or pipes owned by consumers. It is the intention of the Town, to the extent practicable,
to give suitable notice of actual or potential interruption of service to the consumer. No
deduction for any water bill shall be made as a result of any interruption or curtailment
of such service as described herein.
§ 229-8. Multiple users.
(1) All service pipes must be of Type K copper material, except that service pipes
of a diameter of two inches or larger may be of ductile or cast-iron pipe or
equivalent. A six-inch sand bed for the service pipe and six-inch sand cover or
equivalent over the pipe are required, if deemed necessary by the Water/Sewer
Department. Exceptions in pipe material may be granted on an individual basis
as determined by the Water/Sewer Department.
(2) The owner of property into which water is introduced by a service pipe shall
maintain such services in proper order and make all repairs to said service pipe
from curb stop to meter or from meter pit to inside foundation at his own cost
and expense. The owner shall promptly repair damage from frost, leaks and
breaks to prevent waste of water. If the owner fails to observe these
requirements, the situation shall be deemed an emergency and the Town may
shut off water to the premises until the requirements of this subsection are
complied with. The Town shall have the right but not the obligation to make
the necessary repairs required by this subsection and to charge the cost thereof
to the property owner. In addition, the cost of lost water may be assessed
against the property affected, to be collected as part of the water rent.
A. Except as authorized by the Town Board under rules to be promulgated by it, every
residential building and commercial establishment shall have a separate service
from a Town water main.
B. When water is supplied to more than one party through a single tap, the bill for
water supply shall be rendered to one or more of the owners of the premises, any
one of whom shall be considered solely responsible for the same and for complying
with this article. In case of nonpayment, the water may be shut off and/or other
penalties imposed by the Town, notwithstanding the fact that one or more of the
parties using said water may have paid his proportion to such owner or to any other
person. The Town acknowledges no responsibility for any adverse consequences
borne by any multiple users of water affected by Town dealings with the owner of
§ 229-6 WATER § 229-8
229:5
§ 229-9. Limiting or cutting off water supply.
The Town reserves the right to limit the amount of water furnished to any consumer
when circumstances warrant such action, although no limit may be stated in the
application or permit for such use, or the Town may entirely cut off the use for any
manufacturing purpose or any use for supplying power at any time by giving reasonable
notice to the consumer of such intended action.
§ 229-10. Owner's responsibility for consumption and leaks.
The owner of the premises to which water is supplied shall be chargeable with all water
taken from the Town mains, and, if leaks occur in the service lines between the curb stop
and the meter, the Town may estimate the amount of water lost by such leaks and charge
the same to the owner of the premises.
§ 229-11. Discontinuance of use of water.
§ 229-12. Cross-connections.
No person shall install or permit to be installed any cross-connection, whether permanent
or temporary, between the Town's water distribution system and any other source or
supply of water or source of contamination, any water-softening device or pressure tank
previously hooked up to a nonmunicipal water source, any boiler without appropriate
check valves or any other installation prohibited by either State of New York or County
of Genesee Health Department rules and regulations. If the owner fails to comply with
this section, the situation shall be deemed an emergency and the Town may shut off
water to the premises until the requirements of this section are complied with.
§ 229-13. Fire plugs and hydrants.
No person shall open any fire plug or hydrant, whether public or private, to draw water
the property as described above.
C. Whenever two or more parties are supplied by the same service pipe or meter, the
Town shall have the right to invoke whatever penalty provisions of this article it
shall deem appropriate upon the failure of any one of the parties supplied to pay the
water rents when due or to comply with any other provision of this article.
A. Any property owner wishing to discontinue use of his water supply from the Town's
water distribution system must give written notice thereof to the Town.
B. In the event water is shut off at the request of the property owner and a final bill
rendered, a shutoff charge of $10 shall be assessed. In addition, the water meter
must be protected from damage from all causes enumerated in § 229-14A of this
article and/or returned in good condition to the Town when water is shut off.
C. When water is turned off for nonpayment of rents or for violation of any rule or
regulation, a ten-dollar shutoff fee will be charged to the customer, and it shall not
be turned on again until the party in default shall pay all water rents due and the
amount of all penalties which may be imposed by the regulations set forth herein.
In addition, a ten-dollar turn-on charge shall be assessed.
§ 229-8 BATAVIA CODE § 229-13
229:6
therefrom except under the direction of the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department and
in compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Where private plugs or hydrants are being used for improper purposes, the Town shall
require a suitable outside tap to be installed and the hydrant or plug shall be sealed at the
owner's expense.
§ 229-14. Meters.
A. Use required; damage to meters. No water service shall be given to any person
except through a meter which shall be purchased from the Town at a price
established from time to time by Town Board resolution. After the meter is
attached, any damage which such meter may sustain resulting from the carelessness
of the owner, agent or tenant or from the neglect of any of them to properly secure
and protect the same, or any damage that may result from allowing the meter to
become frozen or to be injured by hot water or steam, or from any other cause, shall
be paid by the owner on demand of the Town of Batavia. In case such payment is
not so made, the water may be shut off from the premises and not turned on again
until all charges are paid. Upon request of the property owner, the Town of Batavia
will provide a written statement as to the basis of such charge.
B. Meters one inch or less in diameter.
(1) Installation and maintenance. The Town will install and maintain all meters up
to and including one inch in diameter. Meters shall be set as near as possible
to the point of entry of the service connection pipe to the building and shall be
kept unobstructed and easily accessible to Town employees at all times. In
cases where the Town believes access is not adequate, it can by written notice
compel the meter to be moved to a more accessible location. In cases where
the customary location of the meter is distant from the property line of the
premises or under such other circumstances as deemed appropriate by the
Water/Sewer Maintenance Department, it may require the meter to be set in a
pit or box approved by the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department at the
expense of the consumer and located near the appropriate property line of the
premises. Valves must be placed before and after the meter to facilitate service
of meters as deemed appropriate by the Water/Sewer Maintenance
Department. All proposed meter locations must be previously approved by the
Water/Sewer Maintenance Department.
(2) Testing. Meters may be tested by the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department
at any time, and meters up to one inch in diameter will be tested upon
application of the consumer and the making of a deposit of $10. If the meter
shall test not more than five-percent fast on full or half flow, the deposit is to
be forfeited to the Town. If the meter tests more than five-percent fast, the
meter will be repaired or replaced at Town expense and the deposit returned.
If a meter tests five-percent or more slow, the Town shall, at its option, bill for
the amount of water not previously billed for as a result of meter malfunction.
(3) Charges. On each meter of one inch or less in diameter the Town shall, on each
bill, assess a miscellaneous charge in an amount established by schedule and
modified from time to time by resolution of the Town Board to cover portions
of the Town's routine maintenance costs on each meter and normal
§ 229-13 WATER § 229-14
229:7
replacement of the meter when it fails due to old age or equipment
malfunction. Said charge is not intended to cover meter failure resulting from
causes set forth in Subsection A hereof.
C. Meters greater than one inch in diameter.
(1) Installation and maintenance. The consumer will install, under the Water/
Sewer Department's supervision, and maintain all meters of greater than one
inch in diameter. Said installations shall be provided with a valved bypass
around the meter and valved spur pipe on the building side of the meter for test
purposes. In cases where the customary location of the meter is distant from
the property line of the premises or under such other circumstances as deemed
appropriate by the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department, it may require the
meter to be set in a pit or box approved by the Water/Sewer Maintenance
Department at the expense of the consumer and located near the appropriate
property line of the premises. Valves must be placed before and after the meter
to facilitate service of meters as deemed appropriate by the Water/Sewer
Maintenance Department. All proposed meter locations must be previously
approved by the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department. The design of such
special meter settings and location shall be submitted to the Water/Sewer
Maintenance Department for approval before construction is undertaken by
the consumer. The consumer will replace at his expense defective parts in
improperly operating meters, including meters damaged by virtue of any
reason enumerated in Subsection A hereof, and will at his expense replace
meters that have worn out or are not capable of being repaired. No meter may
be removed, for any cause, without written permission from the Town.
(2) Testing. The Town Water/Sewer Maintenance Department will from time to
time test meters larger than one inch in diameter to determine their accuracy.
In the event that an owner shall request additional testing, the same shall be
provided by the Water/Sewer Maintenance Department and paid for by the
consumer in an amount established and modified from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board. If any test of a meter larger than one inch in
diameter shall show that meter to be reading more than three-percent slow by
normal Town testing standards, then that meter shall be deemed to be
malfunctioning and shall be subject to repair as described in Subsection C(1)
of this section. The Town shall also, at its option, bill for the amount of water
previously not billed for as a result of meter malfunction.
(3) Charges. A meter testing charge based on meter size shall be charged upon
commencement of billings for water service for all meters larger than one inch
in diameter. This charge, which shall be based upon the size of the meter, shall
be established and modified from time to time for each size meter by
resolution of the Town Board.
D. Failure to register. If any meter becomes damaged and fails to register, or if the
same registers improperly, the user will be charged at a consumption to be
determined by the Town based on the best information available to it.
E. Resident consumers. All meters for properties located within the Town shall be
listed under the name of the owner of the property, and all water used in connection
§ 229-14 BATAVIA CODE § 229-14
229:8
§ 229-15. Water rates.
§ 229-16. Interference with Town water system.
with such property will be billed to the owner of the property.
F. Billing cards. The Town may, prior to each water billing, send each consumer of
Town water a self-addressed, stamped postcard. Each user shall be responsible for
reading his inside water meter or meters, entering the correct reading on the card
and returning the card to the Batavia Town Hall in a timely fashion. Failure to do
so within the time frame indicated on the water billing card shall result in an
additional fee to be established and modified from time to time by Town Board
resolution. The Town may also elect to read any or all meters at any time. In its
discretion, the Town Board shall offer a financial incentive for the return of the
cards in a timely fashion in an amount established by schedule and modified from
time to time by Town Board resolution.
A. The Town Board shall by resolution establish and from time to time modify water
rates for all water sold by the Town of Batavia. The Town Board shall bill for water
services based on water consumption of each consumer as shown by the consumer's
water meter and/or on consumption as estimated by the Town according to the
provisions of this article. In cases where consumption does not reach a minimum as
determined by the Town Board, a minimum charge, if established by Town Board
resolution, shall be assessed.
B. All water bills shall be due and payable at the office of the Town Clerk within 30
days of the billing date. All water bills will be mailed by the Town Clerk, but the
failure of any consumer and/or owner to receive a bill shall not excuse nonpayment
of the same.
C. In the event a consumer shall not pay a water bill within 30 days from its billing
date, an additional 10% of the total charge shall be added to the amount due as a
penalty. All billing amounts considered overdue by the Town as of October 20 of
any calendar year shall be turned over to the county for levy on the following year's
tax rolls.
A. Stop valves, stop cocks or gate valves. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless
duly authorized, to open, close, turn or interfere with any stop valve, stop cock or
gate valve belonging to the Town.
B. Injury to Town water supply. The malicious, willful, careless or negligent
destruction of or injury to any of the works on property in any way connected with
the water supply of the Town is hereby prohibited.
C. Street mains. No person, except employees of the Town or those acting under its
direction, shall open or close any valve or gate in the street mains or molest or
interfere with the same in any manner whatsoever.
D. Easement rights. No person shall interfere in any manner with the waterline
easement for any reason. Interference shall include, but not be limited to,
construction within the easement right-of-way and the removal or addition of soil
or any other materials.
§ 229-14 WATER § 229-17
229:9
§ 229-17. Right of entry upon property and easements. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
A. All duly authorized employees of the Town, including the Town's Department of
Water and Sewage, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be entitled to
enter the property of all users for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling (including setting up sampling devices), testing and records
examination for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the chapter
are being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants
of a premises where public water is used shall allow such Town employees ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises to carry out the actions
specified in this section. Where a water user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into his/her
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his/her security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town will
be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. These representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes except those having a direct bearing on issues relative to compliance with
all provisions of this article.
(1) Any Town employee seeking to enter private property pursuant to the
provisions of this section may enter such property on the consent of such user,
owner or occupant. For all purposes of this article, by use of such public water,
the user, owner and occupant shall be deemed to have consented to the entry
onto any property serviced by public water within the Town of Batavia or
otherwise containing records necessary or relevant to issues relating to
compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to permit access based
upon a reasonable and otherwise valid request for entry shall be deemed a
violation of this article subject to all penalties and other remedies provided in
this article.
(2) In the event such entry is denied or if said employee determines that it is
preferable to obtain a search warrant without first seeking such consent, said
employee shall be entitled (in addition to all other available remedies) to
obtain a search warrant pursuant to the applicable provisions of law from a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel the owner or occupant to permit
immediate entry and inspection.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in the immediately preceding
subsection, in the event an emergency situation exists, Town employees,
including employees of the Town's Department of Water and Sewage, shall be
entitled immediately to enter upon any private property for the purposes set
forth in this section either with or without a search warrant or with or without
the cooperation of the water user, owner or occupant.
B. Right to enter upon easements for purposes of inspection, observation and repair.
The Town of Batavia, including its Department of Water and Sewage, as well as its
employees and duly authorized representatives, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
Town holds an easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
§ 229-17 BATAVIA CODE § 229-17
229:10
§ 229-18. Connection to public water system required.
§ 229-19. Adoption of schedules.
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, unless and until appropriate
schedules of fees, charges, rates, amounts and/or financial incentives are adopted by the
Town Board, the schedules of fees, charges, rates, amounts and/or financial incentives
in effect at the time of the adoption of this article shall continue until replaced.
§ 229-20. Liability; penalties for offenses.
Town's water system lying within said easement above and below ground. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in accordance with the
terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
A. The owner of all houses, buildings or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within an operating water district
in the Town is hereby required at his/her expense to install waterline facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water main
source, provided that said water main is within 100 feet of the property line and is
operational. Such a connection shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
article as provided for herein.
B. Once a water main has been constructed within 100 feet of an owner's property line
and becomes operational, an owner, within five years, shall connect his house,
building or other structure to the water main. If it becomes necessary for the Town
to provide a written official notice to the owner, the owner, after receipt of such a
notice, will have 90 days from receipt of the notice to connect to the waterline
before being in violation of this section. In no event shall the Town provide an
official written notice to any owner until the five-year grace period as
aforementioned has expired.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be liable to the Town for any
and all losses, damages, and expenses incurred by the Town or for which the Town
may be held liable as a result of said violation.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, other than the provisions
requiring payment of water bills or other charges, shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or to imprisonment
for a period of not more than 15 days, or both. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Town or Water/Sewer Department,
either alone or in conjunction with the foregoing penalties, from maintaining an
action or proceeding in the name of the Town or Department in any court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction the
violation of any provision of this article.
§ 229-17 WATER § 229-21
229:11
§ 229-21. Termination of service for violation. [Amended 10-16-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article or otherwise, the Town shall
have the right to terminate the water service to any property based upon a violation of
this article, including but not limited to the nonpayment of any bill for water services.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, except in the case of emergency,
temporary interruption necessitated by repairs, extensions or maintenance operations,
shortage of water or similar situations, no service shall be suspended or terminated by
the Town without complying with the following procedures:
A. Notice of violation and hearing. Upon the determination by the Town that a
violation has occurred pursuant to this article or that a bill for water services is not
paid within 60 days of the date due, the Town shall notify in writing the occupant
of the affected premises, as well as the owner thereof, in the manner and within the
time frames provided in Subsection B hereof, setting forth specifically the grounds
for termination of service and the time and place of a hearing within the Town to
determine whether said service shall be terminated. Such notice shall contain a
warning that unless such person or persons shall appear and offer proof or other
evidence at such hearing, the service shall be terminated without further notice.
B. Manner and time of service.
(1) The written notice provided for in Subsection A hereof shall be served in one
of the following ways:
(a) By personal service of a copy thereof; or
(b) By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known
address of the occupant, as well as the owner, of said premises. If said
certified mail is refused or returned, service upon the occupant or owner,
as the case may be, shall be made by mailing a copy of said notice by first
class mail to the address of the occupant or owner, as the case may be, in
a post office or official depository under the exclusive care and custody
of the United States Postal Service within the State of New York.
(2) Where regular mail is used in lieu of certified mail, an additional copy of such
notice shall either be served personally upon any adult person residing in or
occupying the affected premises if such person can be reasonably found or
shall be securely affixed upon said affected premises.
(3) If said notice is served in accordance with Subsection B(1)(a) above, the same
shall be served at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Service shall
be deemed complete on the date said service is made.
(4) If said notice is served in accordance with the provisions of Subsection B(1)(b)
hereof, service shall be completed at least 15 days prior to the date of the
hearing. Service by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon depositing
the same in a post office or official depository under the exclusive care and
custody of the United States Postal Service within the State of New York.
(5) Service by regular mail and either delivery to an adult person residing in or
§ 229-21 BATAVIA CODE § 229-21
229:12
occupying the affected premises or by securely affixing a copy upon the
affected premises shall be deemed complete upon depositing said mail and
either delivery to an adult or affixing to the premises, whichever event shall
last occur.
C. Conduct of hearing. At the time and place specified in the notice, a Town official
designated by the Town Board, hereafter referred to as the "hearing officer," shall
conduct the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally by the hearing
officer, and oral or documentary evidence pertinent to the facts and issues raised by
the Town or other interested parties may be received without regard to admissibility
under the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings. The hearing officer
shall require the participants or spectators to conduct themselves in an orderly
fashion. Failure to comply with the directions of the hearing officer to obtain order
may result in exclusion from the proceedings or in a decision adverse to the interests
of the disorderly party and granting or denial of the relief sought, as appropriate.
All parties to the hearing shall further be afforded a fair hearing providing the basic
safeguards of due process.
D. Determination. At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer may order the
termination of the service or other appropriate action as he or she may determine.
The hearing officer's decision shall be made in writing and forwarded to each
interested party pursuant to the provisions of Subsection E below.
E. Appeal. Any party aggrieved by the action of the hearing officer shall have the right
to appeal to the Town Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing within 14 days
after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such party's last known
address a written notice of appeal, together with a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for the appeal. The Town Board shall set a time and place for the
hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the aggrieved
party at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing. The Town Board shall, after hearing all interested parties, either affirm or
reverse the decision of the hearing officer or make such other ruling as it deems
appropriate. The Town Board's decision shall be made in writing and mailed to each
interested party at the party's last known address. The decision and order of the
Town Board shall be final and conclusive.
§ 229-21 WATER § 229-21
229:13

ARTICLE II
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted 11-24-1993]
§ 229-22. Authority to inspect plumbing.
§ 229-23. General requirements.
A. Responsibility of the Water-Sewer Foreman. The Foreman, or his designated agent,
shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in this Town as frequently
as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed
in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of the
Town by the plumbing. The Water-Sewer Foreman shall notify or cause to be
notified in writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building
or premises to correct, within a reasonable time set by the Water-Sewer Foreman,
any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this article, and
which in his judgment, may, therefore, permit the pollution of the Town water
supply, or otherwise adversely affect the public health.
B. Inspection. The Water-Sewer Foreman, or his designated agent, shall have the right
of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making
inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building or premises, provided
that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwelling, consent to such
inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion
therein or in control thereof.
A. Hazardous cross-connections must be promptly eliminated.
B. Cross-connection control is the joint responsibility of the supplier of the water and
the water customer (Part 5, New York State Sanitary Code, Subpart 5-1, Public
Water Supplies, Section 5-1.31).
C. Cross-connection control by containment must be employed and requires the
installation of an acceptable backflow device in every water service line to a facility
for which a potential hazard exists. Control devices will be installed at or as near
the point of entry into the facility as possible immediately downstream of the
service connection.
D. These regulations are enacted and enforced to protect the public water system in
accordance with provisions mandated by the New York State Department of Health
as described in the Public Water Supply Guide - Cross Connection Control dated
January 1981. If questions arise of interpretation or conflict of degree of
application, this NYS publication and EPA Cross Connection Control Manual dated
June 1989 will be the source of final information.
E. All water districts, as well as any out-of-district water customers, must comply with
these regulations.
F. All cross-connection control devices in the water system will be tested by a New
York State Department of Health certified tester annually. A copy of all test results
will be supplied to the Water-Sewer Foreman annually by the property owner.
§ 229-22 WATER § 229-23
229:15
§ 229-24. Frequency of inspection of protective devices.
Testing and maintenance records shall be kept by the supplier of water for each
required backflow prevention device. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul
shall also be kept and made available to the water purveyor and Genesee County
Health Department upon request.
G. All plans and specifications for cross-connection control devices installed or to be
installed in the Town water system must be prepared by a New York State licensed
professional engineer.
H. Should access to any facility or dwelling be denied to the Water-Sewer Foreman or
his agent for the purpose of determining if and/or what cross-connection control
device is necessary, then the maximum protection device will automatically be
mandated with no further investigation.
I. Failure to provide the required protective device or to adhere to prescribed testing
requirements will result in proceedings to terminate service to the violation party
per § 229-27 of these regulations.
J. All plans and specifications relating to cross-connection control must be approved
by the Water-Sewer Foreman and the Genesee County Health Department. A
completed works approval is also required for the installation of acceptable
backflow prevention devices at all new customer facilities, and for corrections to
installations at existing customer facilities.
K. Availability of a supplementary supply of water. The existence of a supplementary
supply of water to a facility creates a situation wherein a backflow preventor must
be installed on the service connection from the public water supply system by the
water customer.
L. All plans and specifications relating to cross-connection control must be
accompanied by a copy of the New York State Department of Health Application
(DOH-347) and the Town of Batavia "Review of Plans for Protective Devices on
Public Water Supply Distribution Systems Check Sheet," a copy of which is
attached as Appendix B. Copies of the above stated "check sheet," as well as New
York State Department of Health application for approval of backflow prevention
devices (DOH-347) (Appendix A) can be obtained from the Town of Batavia
Water-Sewer Foreman.26
A. It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises in which backflow protective
devices are installed to have competent inspections made at least once a year, per
§ 229-23F of these regulations, or more often in those instances where successive
inspections indicate repeated failure.
B. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the water
user whenever they are found to be defective. These tests shall be performed by a
New York State Department of Health certified backflow prevention device tester,
and all test results will be provided to the water purveyor within 72 hours after the
test is made.
26. Editor's Note: Appendixes A and B are on file in the Town offices.
§ 229-23 BATAVIA CODE § 229-25
229:16
§ 229-25. Definitions.
A. Definitions. As used in the chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCEPTABLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — An acceptable air gap,
reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly as used to contain
potential contamination within a facility.
ACCEPTABLE DEVICES — Those devices or assemblies found to be acceptable
for containment control in New York State in accordance with the Genesee County
Department of Health requirements as outlined in Section 8 of the Cross
Connection Control Guide, January 1981. See appendix for determination of
acceptability as taken from this section.
AESTHETICALLY OBJECTIONABLE FACILITY — One in which substances
are present, which if introduced into the public water supply system could be a
nuisance to other water customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
Typical examples of such substance are: food-grade dyes, hot water, stagnant water
from fire protection systems in which no chemical additives are used, etc.
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
The differential distance shall be at least double the diameter (d) of the supply pipe.
In no case shall the air gap be less than one inch. (See FIG. 1-A).
APPROVED CHECK VALVE—A check valve that seats readily and completely,
and meets the New York State Department of Health list of acceptable devices, as
outlined in Section 8-1 of the Cross Connection Control Guide, January 1981.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply approved by the New York
State Department of Health.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the approved public water supply.
BACKFLOW — A condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that causes the
§ 229-25 WATER § 229-25
229:17
flow of water or other liquids and/or gases into the distribution pipes of a public
water supply from any source other than its intended source.
BACKPRESSURE — The resulting backflow of contaminated, polluted, or
otherwise unacceptable quality water from a plumbing fixture or other customer
source(s) into a public water supply system due to a greater pressure within the
customer's water system. (See FIG. 1-B)
Example: Only the valve at A separates the potable and the fire tank water in a
large factory. The factory's potable water system, at B, is being filled from the
public water supply system at C which is delivering water at a pressure of 60 psi.
At the same time, the fire-fighting system is activated, which provides potentially
stagnant tank water at a pressure of 120 psi. If valve A in open, or leaks, the tank
water will be forced into the public water supply system.
BACKSIPOHONAGE — The backflow of contaminated or polluted water, or
water of questionable quality from a plumbing fixture or other customer source(s),
into a public water supply system main due to a temporary low or subatmospheric
pressure within the public water supply system. (See FIG. 1-C)
§ 229-25 BATAVIA CODE § 229-25
229:18
Example: A hose is submerged in a laboratory sink A. Both buildings are
connected to the same public water supply system C. This main could develop a
low pressure due to a main break elsewhere in the system. The building on the right
has installed a booster pump in the system. The building on the right has installed
a booster pump in the basement at 8, in order to augment available pressures. The
booster pump could deplete the water in main C, thereby subjecting the customer's
water system to a pressure less than atmospheric thus causing a reversal of flow
from the laboratory in the opposite building.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — A person who
is NYS Department of Health certified and found competent for the testing of
backflow prevention devices. He or she shall be provided with an appropriate
unexpired identification card. Failure to perform his or her duties competently and
conscientiously will result in prompt withdrawal of his or her authority to test
devices under this article.
CONTAINMENT—Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's entire
facility from the public water system so as to provide the protection necessary to
prevent contamination of the public water supply in the event of backflow from the
customer's facility.
CONTAMINATION —The presence in water of a substance that tends to degrade
its quality.
CROSS-CONNECTION — A physical connection between the public water
system and a customer water system.
CUSTOMER — A water user served by a public water system; all water districts,
including individual private users outside the existing water districts, as well as all
out-of-Town customers.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — The piping used to convey water supplied
by a public water supply system from the point of supply throughout the customer's
facility.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — Whether a facility is rated as "hazardous,"
"aesthetically objectionable" or "nonhazardous."
§ 229-25 WATER § 229-25
229:19
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE (DCV) ASSEMBLY, ACCEPTABLE — Two single
independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness
of each check valve. This device must be approved as a complete assembly, and
listed on the NYS Department of Health list of acceptable devices in Section 8 of
the Cross Connections Control Guide. (See FIG. 1-D)
HAZARDOUS FACILITY — One in which substances may be present which, if
introduced into the public water system, would or may endanger or have an adverse
effect on the health of other water customers. Typical examples: laboratories,
sewage treatment plants, chemical plants, hospitals, mortuaries.
INTERCONNECTION — A joining of two independently operated public water
supply distribution systems.
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT ENGINEER — The Genesee County Health
Department Engineer having jurisdiction.
NONHAZARDOUS FACILITY — One which does not require the installation of
an acceptable backflow prevention device.
PLUMBING CONTROL — Prevention and elimination of cross-connections
within the customer's water system by enforcement of building or plumbing codes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A NYS-approved supplier of water,
including the source, treatment works, transmission mains, distribution system and
storage facilities serving the public.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE — Acceptable if found on the
NYS Department of Health list of devices as described in Section 8 of the Cross
Connection Control Guide, January 1981. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks. This device must be approved as a complete assembly.
See FIG. 1-E.
§ 229-25 BATAVIA CODE § 229-25
229:20
§ 229-26. Basic method of control.
SUPPLEMENTARY SUPPLY — Any water source or system, other than the
public water supply, that is available within the water customer's facility.
SUPPLIER OF WATER—The owner or operator of a NYS-approved public water
system.
WATER SUPERVISOR — The consumer or a person on the premises charged
with the responsibility of complete knowledge and understanding of the water
supply piping within the premises and for maintaining the consumer's water system
free from cross connections and other sanitary defects, as required by regulations
and laws.
A. Whenever possible, cross-connection control will be achieved by the containment
method. Any user employing a device which will achieve control by any other
method will make written application to the Water-Sewer Foreman to request such
authorization. The Water/Sewer Foreman and the Genesee County Department of
Health will be the final authority determining the applicability of any and all
devices so used.
B. The containment method.
(1) Using the containment approach to cross-connection control results in totally
isolating a facility with a potential hazard from the public water supply system.
Each water service line to such a facility will be protected in a manner
commensurate with the degree of hazard. When any portion of a consumer's
water supply system is rated hazardous, then the entire system receives the
same rated degree of hazard. That includes piping for potable as well as
nonpotable water.
§ 229-25 WATER § 229-26
229:21
§ 229-27. Determining degree of hazard and protection.
§ 229-28. Type of protection.
The protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard as tabulated below:
(2) Under certain conditions, fire sprinkler system connections to the public water
supply system may warrant a separate evaluation of the type of protective
device required.
A. Degree of hazard. To achieve containment, an acceptable backflow prevention
device must be installed in every service connection where deemed necessary under
this article by the Water-Sewer Foreman or his designee.
(1) Criteria to be used for determining the degree of hazard are as follows:
(a) Use, toxicity and availability of containments.
(b) Availability of a supplementary supply of water.
(c) Fire-fighting system evaluation.
(2) Based on these considerations, a facility will be rated as hazardous,
aesthetically objectionable or nonhazardous.
(3) This cross-connection control program will enact a major emphasis on
isolating those facilities that pose the greatest hazard in the most vulnerable
portions of the distribution system.
B. Degree of protection.
(1) The degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
(a) A hazardous facility must be contained through the use of a RPZ or an air
gap.
(b) An aesthetically objectionable facility must be contained through the use
of DCV.
(c) Nonhazardous facilities may be, but are not mandated by these
regulations to be, protected through internal plumbing control to ensure
that plumbing cross-connections are adequately protected or eliminated.
(2) It is not possible to list every circumstance and facility type that may be
encountered while evaluating all water users in the water system. Therefore,
while evaluating a facility, the inspector will rely on these regulations, good
common sense and the Genesee County Health Department Engineer, as
needed, to adequately ensure the basic protection desired by this program.
(3) Internal plumbing control necessary for the protection of the on-premises user
is not equivalent to containment, but is a necessary adjunct to a totally
protective program. The water customer is responsible to prevent crossconnection
within his facility.
§ 229-26 BATAVIA CODE § 229-28
229:22
§ 229-29. Fire-fighting system evaluation.
A. Any premises on which there is an auxiliary water supply, the public water supply
system shall be protected by an air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device.
B. At the service connection to any premises on which a substance that would be
objectionable (but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water
supply) is handled so as to constitute a cross-connection, the public water supply
shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly.
C. At the service connection to any premises on which a substance of unusual toxic
concentration or danger to health is or may be handled, but not under pressure, the
public water supply shall be protected by an air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. This device shall be located
at or as near the point of entry into the facility as possible immediately downstream
of the water meter, and all piping between the water meter and receiving tanks shall
be entirely visible.
D. At the service connection to any premises on which any material dangerous to
health, or toxic substance in toxic concentration, is or may be handled under
pressure, the public water supply shall be protected by an air gap separation. The
air gap shall be located as close as practicable to the property line, and receiving
tanks shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the
public water supply shall be protected with an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device, providing this alternative is acceptable to the Water-
Sewer Foreman and Genesee County Department of Health.
E. At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station,
the public water supply shall be protected by an air gap separation. The air gap shall
be located as close as practicable to the property line, and all piping between the
water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot
be reasonably met, the public water supply shall be protected with an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
F. At the service connection to any premises not covered by Subsections A through E
above, the public water supply shall be protected with an approved single check
valve assembly at the discretion of the Water-Sewer Foreman or his designee.
A. A separate evaluation of the fire-fighting system in use at a facility is required
because of the number of variables involved in making the determination of
adequate protection of the public water supply system. The sprinkler system service
connection is usually an independent connection to the public water supply and as
such will be separately evaluated as to the hazard posed. Fire department
connections are used to pump water into sprinkler system. The quality of water
pumped into the sprinkler system may be of concern.
B. The following outlines the type of acceptable backflow prevention device required
by class of sprinkler system used ("AWWA Manual No. M-14, Backflow
Prevention and Cross-Connection Control"). The device is the minimum needed to
satisfy containment requirements and applies only to sprinkler systems connected
§ 229-28 WATER § 229-29
229:23
to public water supply water mains.
(1) Class 1: direct connections from public water mains only; no pumps, tanks, or
reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no antifreeze or
other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to atmosphere, dry
wells, or other safe outlets.
(2) Class 2: same as Class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in the
connections from the street mains (booster pumps do not affect the potability
of the system). It is necessary, however, to avoid drafting so much water that
pressure in the water main is reduced below 20 psi.
(3) Class 3: direct connection from public water supply main plus one or more of
the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from
aboveground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks. (All storage
facilities are filled with or connected to public water only, the water in the
tanks to be maintained in a potable condition. Otherwise, Class 3 systems are
the same as Class 5.)
(4) Class 4: directly supplied from public mains similar to Classes 1 and 2, and
with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises; or an auxiliary
supply may be located within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection.
(5) Class 5: directly supplied from public mains, and interconnected with auxiliary
supplies, such as: pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to
contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells, mills or other industrial
water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used.
(6) Class 6: combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the
public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction
tanks.
C. Corresponding backflow protection recommended; (AWWA M-14):
(1) Class 1: none, other than the check valve required by the National Fire Code.
(2) Class 2: none, other than the check valve required by the National Fire Code.
(3) Class 3: will generally require minimum protection (approved DCV) to
prevent stagnant waters from backflowing into the public potable water
system.
(4) Class 4: will normally require backflow protection at the service connection.
The type (air gap, RPZ, or DCV) will generally depend on the quality of the
auxiliary supply; will normally need maximum protection (air gap or RPZ) to
protect the public potable water system.
(5) Class 5: will normally need maximum protection (air or RPZ) to protect the
public potable water system.
(6) Class 6: protection would depend on the requirements of both industry and fire
protection, and could only be determined by a survey of the premises.
§ 229-29 BATAVIA CODE § 229-30
229:24
§ 229-30. Penalties for offenses.
§ 229-31. Acceptable devices.
A. Notification of violation. The Water-Sewer Foreman shall notify the owner, or
authorized agent of the owner, of any building or premises in which there is found
a violation of this article, of such violation. The Water-Sewer Foreman shall set a
reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon
failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time
interval the Water-Sewer Foreman may, if in his judgment an imminent health
hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated
and/or recommend such additional fees or penalties to be invoked as herein may be
provided.
B. Fines. The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance
of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a violation to
remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the Water-Sewer Foreman
shall, upon conviction thereof by the court, be required to pay a fine of not more
than $100 for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements
of this article, after the specified time provided under Subsection A shall constitute
a separate violation.
A. Determination of acceptability. Only three devices are applicable to the
containment concept of cross-connection control. These are the DVC, the RPZ and
the air gap.
B. Which DCV or RPZ are acceptable? Acceptance of a device is based on one of the
following two evaluation procedures:
(1) A device will be placed on the New York State Department of Health List of
Acceptable Devices when it has successfully passed both the laboratory and
the field evaluation phases of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control
and Hydraulic Research approval program and the manufacturer has been
granted a certificate of approval.
(2) A device which has been evaluated against each of the following three
standards by an independent testing laboratory and shown to comply will be
placed on the New York State Department of Health List of Acceptable
Devices:
(a) Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Section 10, Specifications of
Backflow Prevention Devices.
(b) American Society of Sanitary Engineering Standard No. 1013 (RPZ) or
No. 1015 (DVC).
(c) American Water Works Association Standard C506. The Bureau of
Public Water Supply will review the evaluation report of the backflow
prevention devices under test and shall determine what sizes, if any, are
acceptable.
§ 229-30 WATER § 229-31
229:25
C. Based on the above, a list of acceptable devices is published from time to time. As
new units are found acceptable, the list will be revised and will be available as a
separate guideline available from the Local Health Department Engineer.
§ 229-31 BATAVIA CODE § 229-31
229:26
Chapter 235
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 34.
Adoption of zoning laws — See Ch. 70.
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 116.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 204.
§ 229-31 ZONING § 229-31
235:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 235-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 16 of the Town Law of the State of New
York, the Town Board of the Town of Batavia hereby adopts and enacts as follows.
§ 235-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Batavia Zoning Ordinance."
§ 235-3. Purposes.
This chapter is adopted for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community, as follows:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with a
comprehensive land use plan and population density that represent the most
beneficial and convenient relationships among the residential, nonresidential and
public areas within the town, considering the suitability of each area for such uses,
as indicated by existing conditions, trends in population and mode of living, and
having regard for the use of land, building development and economic activity,
considering such conditions and trends both within the town and with respect to the
relation of the Town to areas outside thereof.
B. To provide adequate light, air and privacy; to promote safety from fire, flood and
other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of the
population.
C. To protect and conserve the value of the land throughout the town and the value of
buildings appropriate to the various districts established by this chapter.
D. To protect the rural character and the social and economic stability of all parts of
the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of
the Town.
E. To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings through the
comprehensive zoning plan set forth in this chapter and to minimize the conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
F. To promote the most beneficial relation between the uses of land and buildings and
the circulation of traffic throughout the town, having particular regard for the
avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and convenient
vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings throughout the town.
G. To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of public
facilities and services and for private enterprise in building development,
investment and other economic activity relating to uses of land and buildings
throughout the town.
H. To limit concentrated development to an amount equal to the availability and
§ 235-1 ZONING § 235-3
235:3
§ 235-4. Applicability and interpretation.
§ 235-5. Word usage and definitions.
capacity of public facilities and services.
I. To prevent the pollution of streams and ponds, to safeguard the water table, and to
encourage the wise use and sound management of the natural resources throughout
the Town in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community
and the value of the land.
J. To prevent excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of
design in the exterior of large-scale multifamily (20 or more units) residential
developments, commercial and industrial uses.
A. No building shall be erected, constructed, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor
shall any land, water or building be used, designed or arranged to be used, for any
purpose except in conformity with this chapter. No building, structure, or premises
shall be used, and no building or other structure shall be erected, which is intended,
arranged or designed to be used for any trade, industry, business or purpose of any
kind that is noxious by reason of the emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage,
smoke, fumes, gas, noise or vibration, or that is dangerous to the health or safety of
the community.
B. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are
declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the
public safety, health, morals and general welfare. This chapter shall not be deemed
to affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties; however, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are
imposed by other ordinances, rules, regulations, licenses, certificates or other
authorizations, or by easements, or covenants, or agreements, then the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail.
C. This chapter shall not apply to uses which were legal prior existing nonconforming
uses as defined herein except as set forth in § 235-15.
D. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans or construction of a
building for which a zoning permit has been issued.
E. All buildings under construction at the time this chapter is adopted shall conform to
the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time construction was commenced.
A. Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall carry
their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot";
the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is always
mandatory; and the word "occupied" or "used" shall be construed to mean and shall
be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied."
B. The following terms are specifically defined. As used in this chapter, the following
words shall have these meanings:
§ 235-3 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:4
ABOVEGROUND TANK — Any stationary tank which is not entirely covered
with earth or other backfill material.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building situated on a lot, subordinate to the
main building on the same lot, and used for purposes customarily incidental and
subordinate to said main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to the
principal use of the main structure and which is attached thereto or located on the
same lot.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of buildings and located on the same lot (i.e., a garden is accessory
to a residence). For the purposes of this chapter, a family day-care home, roadside
stand and home occupation (as defined herein) shall be considered accessory uses
to a principal use on a lot; however, they and other accessory uses may be subject to
additional requirements and review provisions set forth in this chapter (i.e., a Home
Occupation II requires issuance of a special use permit).
ADULT CARE — The provision of temporary or long-term residential care and
services to adults who, though not requiring continual medical or nursing care as
provided by facilities licensed or operated pursuant to Article 28 of the Public
Health Law or Articles 19, 23, 29, and 31 of the Mental Hygiene Law,27 are, by
reason of physical or other limitations associated with age, physical or mental
disabilities or other factors, unable or substantially unable to live independently.
ADULT CARE FACILITY — A facility, other than a family-type home, which
provides adult care. For the purposes of this chapter an adult care facility shall
include the following: adult home, enriched housing program, residence for adults,
shelter for adults, public home and private proprietary adult care facility as defined
by the New York State Department of Social Services, Chapter II, Subchapter D,
Part 485.
ADULT USE — The definitions associated with adult uses are contained in
§ 235-49.
AGRICULTURAL USE — Any parcel of land containing at least five acres used
for the raising of food products or other useful or valuable growths of the field or
garden for sale, together with dairying, raising of livestock and poultry, and other
generally accepted agricultural practices, where the same is carried on as a business
or otherwise for profit.
ALTERATION — Structural changes, rearrangements, change of location, or
addition to a building, other than repairs and modification in building equipment.
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any mechanical, electric or electronic device used or
Such uses shall include the establishment of necessary farm structures within
the prescribed limits, and the storage of equipment used in connection
therewith.
(1)
Agricultural uses shall exclude the raising of fur-bearing animals, riding
academies, public stables or dog kennels.
(2)
27. Editor's Note: Article 23 of the Mental Hygiene Law was repealed by L. 1999, c. 558.
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:5
designated to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disc, key or any other article into a slot, crevice, or other opening
or by paying money to have it activated. Not included are rides, bowling alleys, any
device maintained within a residence for the not-for-profit use of occupants thereof
and their guests, any gambling device, or jukeboxes.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A building or land used for the temporary harboring
of stray or homeless dogs, cats, and other similar household pets, together with
facilities for the provision of necessary veterinary care and adoption of the harbored
animals.
ANIMAL WASTE STORAGE FACILITY — Any building, structure, pond,
lagoon or yard for the bulk storage of animal waste for eventual removal and/or
dispersion.
ANTENNA — An arrangement of wires or metal rods used in transmitting or
receiving electromagnetic waves.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multifamily."
AQUIFER — A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation
that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield adequate quantities of
groundwater to the wells.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The surface and subsurface land areas that
collect precipitation or surface water and transmit this water to an aquifer.28
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land subject to a one-percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year and part of Zone A on the Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical
requirements of this chapter.
ARTERIAL HIGHWAY—A highway which collects and distributes traffic to and
from minor highways. For the purposes of this chapter the following highways shall
be considered arterial highways within the town: New York State Route Nos. 5, 33,
63 and 98.
AUCTION HOUSE — An enclosed place or establishment conducted or operated
for compensation or profit as a private or public market where items are offered for
sale through competitive bidding. The term "auction house" shall not include onpremises
estate, foreclosure, real estate or personal property sales conducted upon
the estate, foreclosed or for-sale property or property belonging to the personal
property owner. The term "auction house" shall not include flea markets, yard
sales or livestock markets defined or regulated elsewhere or sheriff's or bank
repossession sales.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied one-family dwelling in which a
room or rooms are rented on a nightly basis for periods of less than two weeks.
Meals may or may not be provided.
28. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Architectural Review Board," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 2-19-2003.
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:6
BOARDINGHOUSE — An owner-occupied dwelling wherein more than three
nonrelated, nontransient people are sheltered for profit.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The officially designated Town of Batavia Board of
Appeals as established by the Town Board in accordance with § 267 of Town Law.
BUFFER STRIP — See § 235-13F.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, machinery,
equipment or other material.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest the
street line or, if there are street lines on two or more sides of the building, the line
of that face of the building fronting on that street line where the principal entrance
is located. This face includes decks and porches but does not include steps.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Town of Batavia as
appointed by the Town Board. Whenever the term "Building Inspector" appears
in this chapter, it shall be interpreted to mean "and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer."[Amended 12-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer stating
that plans for the proposed construction of a building are in conformance with the
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY — A temporary building or temporary structure
erected, constructed or placed upon the premises for a period not exceeding nine
months. All other buildings or structures shall be deemed permanent for the
purposes of this chapter.
CAMPGROUND—Land on which is located one or more cabins, trailers, shelters,
houseboats or other accommodations for seasonal or temporary living purposes,
excluding mobile homes.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the Building
Inspector upon completion of construction, alteration or change in occupancy or
use of a building or land. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter only and any adjustments thereto granted by the Board
of Appeals.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon completion of construction, alteration or change in
occupancy or use of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with
all the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
CHILD DAY CARE — Care for a child on a regular basis provided away from the
child's residence for less than 24 hours per day by someone other than the parent,
stepparent, guardian or relative within the third degree of consanguinity (blood
relationship) of the parents or stepparents of such child. "Child day care" does not
refer to care provided in:
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:7
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A program or facility in which child day care
is provided on a regular basis to more than six children for more than three hours
per day per child for compensation or otherwise, except those programs operating
as a group family day-care home, a family day-care home, or school-age child care
program, as defined in this section.
CLUB — An organization established pursuant to the New York Not-For-Profit
Corporation Law for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, catering
exclusively to members and their guests, whose activities are not conducted
primarily for profit.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development of residential lots, each
containing less area than the minimum lot area required for the zone within which
such development occurs, while maintaining the overall density limitation imposed
by said minimum lot area through the provision of open space as part of the site
development plan.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer as
appointed by the Town Board. who shall have all qualifications, duties and powers
to administer and enforce all of the provisions in this chapter in the same manner as
the Building Inspector.[Added 12-21-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure, including one or
more antennas, that is intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television,
telephone or microwave communications but excluding those used either for fire,
police and other dispatch communications or exclusively for private radio and
television reception and private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar
communications.
COMMERCIAL EXCAVATION (MINING) — A lot or part thereof used for the
purpose of excavation, processing or sale of sand, gravel, or clay, or other natural
mineral deposits or the quarrying of any kind of rock formation, and exclusive of
A summer day camp, traveling summer day camp or children's overnight camp
as defined in the State Sanitary Code;
(1)
A program for school-age children operated solely for the purpose of religious
education, sports, classes, lessons or recreation;
(2)
A facility providing day service under an operating certificate issued by the
New York State Department of Social Services;
(3)
A facility providing day treatment under an operating certificate issued by
the Office of Mental Health or by the Office of Mental Retardation and
Developmental Disabilities; or
(4)
A kindergarten, prekindergarten or nursery school for children three years
of age or older, or a program for school-age children three years of age or
older, or a program for school-age children conducted during nonschool hours,
operated by a public school district or by a private school or academy which
is providing elementary or secondary education or both in accordance with the
compulsory education requirements of the Education Law, provided that such
kindergarten, prekindergarten, nursery school or program is located on the
premises or campus where the elementary or secondary education is provided.
(5)
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:8
the process of grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which a
building permit application has been filed. Commercial excavation shall be divided
into two categories based on the scale and type of operation as follows:
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that is
operated primarily (51% or more) to put energy into the electric grid, and/or has a
nameplate capacity of more than 50 kilowatts (kW), and/or a total height of more
than 175 feet, and/or a blade length of more than 30 feet.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 2-2008]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A meeting hall or place of assembly not operated
primarily for profit.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — A supervised community home operated in
compliance with the New York State Mental Hygiene Law which houses not more
than 14 individuals and provides client supervision on a twenty-four-hour basis. For
the purposes of this chapter an approved community residence as defined herein is
considered a one-family dwelling.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The usually inverted, cone-shaped depression in the
water table that occurs due to the pumping of a well. The outermost limit of the
cone of depression is a figure, generally circular in shape, defined by the point(s)
where the elevation of the water table is no longer affected by the pumping of the
well; also the vertical projection of that figure onto the land surface.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Businesses engaged in construction of buildings and
structures, remodeling and repairs to existing buildings and structures, electrical
services, plumbing services, excavation and grading services, roofing and siding
services, masonry services, paving services, well drilling, sewage disposal system
installation and services, and other similar services.
CONVALESCENT HOME OR EXTENDED CARE FACILITY—See "hospital."
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the combined area of
all buildings or structures on the lot.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, which change could lead
to increased flood damage, excluding normal maintenance to farm roads.
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste, radioactive material, hazardous waste, or wastewater
into or on any land or water so that such solid waste, radioactive material, hazardous
waste, or wastewater will remain on the land or water and will not be removed.
DISPOSAL TRANSFER STATION — A solid waste management facility, other
than a recyclables handling and recovery facility exclusively handling
nonputrescible recyclables, that can have a combination of structures, machinery,
MAJOR EXCAVATION — All excavations requiring a New York State
mined land reclamation permit shall be considered major excavations.
(1)
MINOR EXCAVATION — All excavations not requiring a New York State
mined land reclamation permit shall be considered minor excavations.
(2)
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:9
or devices, where solid waste is taken from collection vehicles and placed in other
transportation units for movement to another solid waste management facility.
DOWNGRADIENT — Portions of a lot defined by areas of lower land surface
elevation with respect to the elevation of other portions of the same lot. In general,
groundwater flows from areas of higher elevation (upgradient areas) to areas of
lower elevation (downgradient areas). (See definition of "upgradient.")
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — Includes a drive-in restaurant, refreshment stand, bank,
car wash and the like where patrons are typically served in, or near, their motor
vehicles.
DWELLING — A building, including a modular home, designed or used
exclusively as permanent living quarters for one or more families. The term shall
not be deemed to include an automobile court, hotel/motel, boardinghouse, mobile
home, tourist home, tent or recreational vehicle.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit only.
(Double-wide or triple-wide mobile homes designed and built at the factory to be
combined on site and with a minimum width of 20 feet and minimum floor area of 720
square feet shall be deemed to be one-family dwellings for the purpose of this
chapter.)
DWELLING, TWIN HOME — A two-family dwelling in which a lot line passes
between the units along a common wall.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY —A dwelling containing two dwelling units only.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, providing complete
housekeeping facilities (kitchen, bath, living and sleeping areas) for one family.
DWELLING UNIT, PRIMARY — A dwelling, or portion thereof, providing
complete living facilities for one family, and which occupies a space equal to or
greater than 50% of the total available living space within a structure.
ECHO UNIT — A separate, detached, temporary dwelling unit, with its own
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities, accessory to a single-family dwelling,
for the use of and occupied by the elderly relatives of the occupants of the onefamily
dwelling. Such unit shall be constructed and installed in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter B of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and shall not be a mobile home.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit and
maintain a common household. It may consist of a single person or of two or more
persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption. It may also include
domestic servants and gratuitous guests.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME—A family home which is a personal residence and
occupied as a family residence which provides child day care on a regular basis for
more than three hours per day per child for three to six children for compensation
or otherwise, as provided for under the New York State Department of Social
Services. The name, description or form of the entity which operates a family daycare
home does not affect its status as a family day-care home. For the purposes of
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:10
this chapter, a family day-care home shall be considered an accessory use to a onefamily
dwelling.
FAMILY-TYPE HOME — Adult care operated and provided for the purpose
of providing long-term residential care, room, board and personal care and/or
supervision to four or fewer adult persons unrelated to the operator. For the
purposes of this chapter a family-type home shall be considered a home occupation.
FARM — See "agricultural use."
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal
or any other manufactured material or combination of materials, or natural
plantings (i.e., living fence), other than temporary uses such as snow fences or
rabbit fences.
FERTILIZED VEGETATION — Areas of vegetation being cultivated by humans
that require the application of fertilizers, pesticides or other substances in order to
grow or maintain their existence.
FERTILIZER — Any commercially produced mixture that contains phosphorus,
nitrogen, and/or potassium which is applied to the ground to increase nutrients to
plants.
FIRST FLUSH — The delivery of a disproportionately large load of accumulated
pollutants that are washed from impervious surfaces and the surface of the land
during the early part of storms and transported in stormwater runoff.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of the community
on which FEMA has delineated the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of
inland waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of, or runoff of, surface
waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE—That area of the town identified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FEMA Community Number 360278) as being subject to flood
and/or mudslide hazards, which area is delineated on the Zoning Map, and for
which special floodplain management requirements and criteria are enumerated in
Chapter 112, Flood Damage Prevention, of this Code.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the
several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding
basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed
porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior
faces of walls.
FLOOR, LOWEST — The floor of the lowest enclosed level, including basement,
crawl space, or garage.
FRONTAGE — The extent of a building or a lot along one public street as defined
herein.
GAME ROOM — A building or place containing five or more amusement games
as defined herein (see "amusement game").
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:11
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of one or more motor
vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit
therein, nor is space for more than two cars leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage, other than a private garage, available to the
public, operated for gain, and which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing,
washing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
GASOLINE STATION — Any building or land used for the sale of motor fuel, oil
and motor vehicle accessories which may include facilities for lubricating, washing
or servicing motor vehicles, but not painting or body repairs.
GASOLINE STATION-MARKET (CONVENIENCE STORE) — A gasoline
station which provides a second commercial service such as a restaurant, dairy bar,
beverage market, food or grocery market, or a commercial use which provides for
gasoline sales. For the purpose of this definition, sales from vending machines are
not considered commercial service.
GRADE, FINISHED — The natural surface of the ground, or the surface of the
ground, lawn, walks or roads after the completion of any change in contour.
GROUNDWATER — All the water found beneath the surface of the land and
present in aquifers and aquifer recharge areas.
GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE — A family home which is a personal residence
and occupied as a family residence which provides child day care on a regular
basis for more than three hours per day per child for seven to 12 children for
compensation or otherwise, as provided for under the New York State Department
of Social Services. For the purposes of this chapter, a family day-care home shall
be considered a home occupation use.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — Any floor usable for living purposes, which
includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof.
A floor used only for storage purposes is not habitable.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE —Any substance listed as a hazardous substance in
6 NYCRR Part 597, List of Hazardous Substances, or a mixture thereof.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste, or combination of wastes, which is identified
or listed as hazardous pursuant to 6 NYCRR Part 371, Identification and Listing
of Hazardous Wastes. Hazardous waste, because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, poses a significant hazard to
human health or safety if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
HERBICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling, or mitigating any weed, and being those substances defined
as herbicides pursuant to Environmental Conservation Law § 33-0101.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful
employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services.
Home occupations are further classified as being either Category I or II, depending
upon whether or not nonresident individuals are working on site and whether more
than one customer visit is expected at a time (see descriptions below).
(1) In particular, a home occupation may include, but is not limited to, the
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:12
HOME OCCUPATION I — A home occupation which employs, on site, only
resident members of the family and which expects not more than one customer
visiting the site at any given time.
HOME OCCUPATION II — Any home occupation which is not considered a
Home Occupation I as set forth above.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as
an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
facilities or training facilities.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL—An establishment for the medical and/or surgical care of
animals.
HOTEL/MOTEL—A building providing overnight accommodation for more than
four transient people, which building need not be owner-occupied and may provide
eating, restaurant and related facilities.
HUMAN EXCRETA — Human feces and urine.
HYDROLOGIC BUDGET RECHARGE AREA — The total area of surface land
that is necessary to supply recharge to the well at an amount equal to that being
withdrawn from the well each day, based on the annual average groundwater
recharge area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any man-made material, such as pavement used in
parking lots or driveways or any building or other structure on a lot, that does not
allow surface water to penetrate into the soil.
INDOOR RECREATION — Includes, but is not limited to, a health club, bowling
alley, tennis court, table tennis, pool hall, skating rink, gymnasium, swimming pool,
hobby workshop, and similar places of indoor recreation.
INDUSTRIAL PARK—A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with
special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
JUNKYARD — The term "junkyard" shall be defined in the same manner as is
set forth in Chapter 138, Junkyards, of this Code, together with any amendment(s)
following: art studio; barbershop/beauty parlor (limited to two work stations);
cleaning services; contractors; computer programmer; cook; day nursing;
direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.); draftsman;
dressmaker or tailor; electrical/radio/television repair; financial planning and
investment services; insurance agent; musician; photographer; professional
offices of a physician, dentist, lawyer, accountant, engineer or architect; real
estate office; teaching or tutoring (limited to two students at one time);
telephone answering; upholsterer; group family day-care home; school-age
child care; and family-type home.
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following:
motor vehicle repair shop, machine shop, welding and fabrication shop,
commercial stables and kennels, restaurants or furniture refinisher (involving
dip tanks or stripping).
(2)
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:13
thereto.
KENNEL — A building or land used for harboring six or more dogs over six
months old.
LAND APPLICATION OF HUMAN WASTE — A site where septage or sewage
sludge is applied to the soil surface or injected into the upper layer of the soil to
improve soil quality or to provide plant nutrients. (This use is prohibited within the
town; see also § 235-16.)
LANDFILL, SANITARY — The depositing of refuse in a natural or man-made
depression or trench, or dumping it at ground level, then compacting to the smallest
practical volume, and covering with earth or other material in a systematic and
sanitary manner.
LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An area and building(s) where a
landscaping contractor stores equipment, vehicles, materials (rock, stone, bricks,
fencing, fixtures, etc.), tools and other items related to his/her business provided no
direct retail sales are conducted on site.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — The processing, fabrication, assembly or packaging of
previously prepared or refined materials.
LOT — Land occupied or which may be occupied by a building and its accessory
uses, together with required open spaces, having not less than the minimum area,
width and depth required for a lot in the district in which such land is situated, and
having frontage on a street or other means of access as may be determined by the
Planning Board to be adequate as a condition for issuance of a building permit.
Any land included in a public road, street or highway right-of-way shall not be
considered part of the lot for zoning purposes.
LOT AREA — The total area within property lines. Any land included in a public
road, street or highway right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets. (Also see the definition "lot line, front.")
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the street right-of-way line of
the lot to its opposite rear line measured at right angles to the street right-of-way
line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE — The property lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the line
separating the lot from the street right-of-way. In the case of a lot abutting more
than one street, each street line shall be considered a front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot line. If
the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point at the
rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line, not less
than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The property line or lines extending from the front lot line to
the rear lot line, except in the case of corner lots which have no rear lot line.
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:14
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth.
MANUFACTURING — Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the
assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of
materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.
MANURE — Animal feces and urine.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, whether occupied or not, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities. For the purpose of this chapter, an unoccupied mobile home shall
be considered the same as an occupied unit.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel which has been improved for the rental or
lease of two or more lots and the provision of services for mobile homes for
nontransient residential use.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP—Any building or land used for gain, wholly
or partially, engaged in the business of service, repair or diagnosing motor vehicle
malfunctions or repairing bodies, fenders or other components damaged by
accidents or otherwise.
MUNICIPAL WELL — A groundwater well operated by a city, town, village,
or special district created pursuant to New York State Law for the purpose of
providing a public water supply.
NATURAL VEGETATION — Existing and naturally occurring indigenous
vegetation which grows and is maintained without need of applications of
fertilizers, pesticides or other chemical substances.
NONCOMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that
is operated primarily (51% or more) for on-site (may be for more than one parcel)
consumption, and has a nameplate capacity of 50 kW or less, and a total height
of 175 feet or less, and a blade length of 30 feet or less. These are also defined
as wind energy conversion systems (WECS) or small wind energy production
facilities.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building legally existing at the time it was
created which in its design or location upon a lot does not conform to the current
regulations of this chapter for the district or zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record legally existing at the date of the
passage of this chapter which does not have the minimum frontage or contain the
minimum area for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of a building or of land legally existing at the
time it was created but not conforming to the current zoning regulations of the
district in which it is located.
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who,
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:15
by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of
a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, that may
include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, or
newspaper or candy stand.
ON-SITE CONSUMPTION — The use of petroleum to heat or cool a residential
or nonresidential structure or to operate machinery necessary for agricultural
activities. "On-site consumption" does not include on-site use of petroleum for
processing or manufacturing activities or the sale or distribution of petroleum for or
into vehicles, except vehicles used for agricultural operations on that site.
OUTDOOR RECREATION — Includes, but is not limited to, a golf course;
golf driving range; trap, skeet, and archery range; swimming pool; skating rink;
tennis court; recreation stadium; baseball and softball fields; skiing facility; hunting
preserve; and similar places of outdoor recreation.
OUTDOOR SOLID-FUEL-BURNING DEVICE — A solid-fuel-burning device
designed and intended for installation outside of the primary building on a lot and
used to produce heat for transfer to the primary or accessory building(s) on such lot.
OWNER — An individual or individuals, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one motor
vehicle on a transient basis and having a width of 10 feet, and an area of not less
than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways, and having access
to a street. Handicapped parking spaces may be larger and therefore require more
space; however, regardless of its size, such space shall constitute a single parking
space.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
PEST — Any insect, rodent, fungus, weed or other form of terrestrial or aquatic
plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or other microorganism which the
Commissioner of Environmental Conservation declares to be a pest as provided be
Environmental Conservation Law § 33-0101.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest, and any substance or mixture of
substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant, and those
substances defined as pesticides pursuant to Environmental Conservation Law
§ 33-0101 et seq.
PETROLEUM — Any petroleum-based oil of any kind which is liquid at 20°
Celsius under atmospheric pressure and has been refined, re-refined, or otherwise
processed for the purpose of being burned as a fuel to produce heat or usable
energy, or which is suitable for use as a motor fuel or lubricant in the operation or
maintenance of an engine. Waste oil which has been reprocessed or re-refined and
which is being stored for sale or use as a fuel or lubricant is considered petroleum
for purposes of this chapter.
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:16
PLANNING BOARD — The officially designated Town of Batavia Planning
Board as established by the Town Board in accordance with § 271 of the Town
Law.
POND — A body of water (other than a swimming pool) created through
construction or other similar method, having a depth of two or more feet.
PUBLIC STREET/ROAD — A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded
to the public for public use and which has been improved in accordance with
municipal standards.
RADIATION—Ionizing radiation, that is, any alpha particle, beta particle, gamma
ray, x-ray, neutron, high-speed proton, and any other atomic particle producing
ionization, but shall not mean any sound or radio wave, or visible, infrared, or
ultraviolet light.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any material in any form that emits radiation
spontaneously.
RECHARGE — The addition of water to an aquifer or to a pumping well; also
the amount of water added to an aquifer or a pumping well. Recharge is typically
expressed as a rate, e.g., inches per year or gallons per day.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A unit primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own power or
is mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle (see also "sport recreational vehicle").
The basic entities are:
RECYCLABLES HANDLING AND RECOVERY FACILITY — A solid waste
management facility, other than collection and transfer vehicles, at which
recyclables are separated from the solid waste stream or at which previously
separated recyclables are collected and which is regulated by 6 NYCRR Part 360.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION—A church, temple, parish house, convent, seminary
and retreat house.
TRAVEL TRAILER—A vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such
a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motor vehicle.
(1)
CAMP TRAILER — A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by a
motor vehicle.
(2)
TRUCK CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be loaded onto, or affixed
to, the bed or chassis of a truck. Truck campers are of two basic types:
SLIDE-IN CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.
(a)
CHASSIS-MOUNT CAMPER — A portable unit designed to be affixed
to a truck chassis.
(b)
(3)
MOTOR HOME — A vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle
chassis.
(4)
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:17
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — A residential facility, operated by either
a public or private agency and regulated by the New York State Department of
Social Services, exercising custody of dependent, neglected, abused, maltreated,
abandoned or delinquent children; homes or shelters for unmarried mothers;
residential programs for victims of domestic violence; or adult care facilities.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designed, at which food is sold
for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed building and
where the taking of food and drink from said building is incidental. However, a
snack bar or refreshment stand at a public, semipublic or community swimming
pool, playground, play field or park operated for the convenience of the patrons of
the facility shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RETAIL TRADE — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to
the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
ROADSIDE STAND — A structure of a nonpermanent nature (movable and
temporary) located on the owner's property utilized during the harvest season for
the sale of agricultural products grown primarily by the owner.
SATELLITE DISH — A structure which is designed and/or intended to receive,
relay or send television signals to or from orbiting or geostationary satellites.
SCHOOL — Includes parochial, private and public institutions providing New
York State approved educational services, including preschool and vocational
programs, together with private and public schools and colleges and universities.
SCHOOL-AGE CHILD CARE PROGRAM—Care provided on a regular basis to
more than six school-age children under 13 years of age or who are incapable of
caring for themselves where such children attend a school higher than kindergarten
or attend full-day (at least six hours) kindergarten at a public or private school,
whether such care is provided for compensation or otherwise.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT—A structure which prevents any materials that
have spilled or leaked from primary containment structures, such as piping, tanks
or other containers, from reaching the land surface or any water body.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings
divided into separate units or compartments used to meet the temporary storage
needs of businesses and residential users. A warehouse operated for a specific
commercial or industrial establishment shall not be considered a self-service
storage facility.
SEPTAGE — The contents of a septic tank, cesspool, or other individual
wastewater treatment works which receives domestic sewage wastes.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of businesses occupying adjoining structures,
having adequate space for loading and unloading and adequate off-street parking.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to a structure or
painted or represented on a structure, which shall display or include any letter,
word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement. A sign
includes any billboard but does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:18
nation, or group of nations, or of any state, city or other political unit or of
any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious,
political or like campaign, drive, movement or event. However, a sign as designed
herein shall not include a similar structure or device located within a building.
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign. Where there is
no geometric frame or edge of the sign, the area shall be defined by a projected,
enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines
said sign.
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing or sketch prepared to specifications
containing necessary elements, as set forth in this chapter, which shows the
arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as
shown on such plan. Plats showing lots, blocks or sites which are subject to review
under § 276 of the New York State Town Law and/or any local laws of the Town
of Batavia regulating the division of property shall not be subject to review as site
plans under this chapter unless a zoning application is submitted.
SKILLED TRADE SHOP — A shop where an individual involved in a skilled
building trade (i.e., carpenter, plumber, electrician, etc.) assembles custom fixtures,
cabinets, etc., for installation by him/her at a job site location. No retail sales of
materials and/or products directly to the public shall be allowed on site.
SLUDGE — The solid, semisolid or liquid waste generated from a waste
processing facility, but does not include the liquid stream of effluent.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A specifically designated use that would not be
appropriate generally without restriction in a zoning district but which, if controlled
as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood, or otherwise, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, promotes the public health, safety, welfare, morals,
order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity and/or the general welfare.
SPILL — Any escape of a hazardous substance or petroleum from the primary
containers used in the normal course of storage, transfer, processing, or use.
SPORT RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Motor vehicles for personal use by
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
and/or industry conducted or to products manufactured or sold upon the same
lot.
(1)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign limited to providing information on the
location of an activity, business or event.
(2)
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which advertises an
establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold,
produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is
located (e.g., billboards or outdoor advertising).
(3)
PORTABLE SIGN—A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise,
designed to be movable and not structurally attached to the ground, a building,
a structure or another sign.
(4)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign related to a single activity or event having a
duration of no more than 60 days.
(5)
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:19
occupants of a household. Examples of recreational vehicles shall include
motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, and boats. Examples of sport
recreational vehicles shall not include vehicles for sale or lease. (See also
"recreational vehicle.")
STABLE, PRIVATE — A building in which horses or other livestock are kept for
private use and not for hire, remuneration, or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building in which horses or other livestock are kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLING OF AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS — A concentration of animals,
permitted under agricultural use, private stable and public stable, within a building,
structure or other defined area for the purpose of housing or feeding.
STREET/ROAD GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of
the street shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET/ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line determining the limit of the
highway rights of the public, either existing or contemplated.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or in the ground or attachment to something having location on or in the
ground.
SWIMMING POOL — A structure intended for bathing, swimming or diving
purposes, made of concrete, masonry, metal or other impervious materials,
provided with a recirculating and/or controlled water supply with a depth of greater
than two feet.
TEMPORARY USE—An activity conducted for a specified limited period of time
which may not otherwise be permitted by the provisions of this chapter. Examples
of such uses are buildings incidental to new construction which are removed after
the completion of the construction work.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Batavia, New York.
TOWNHOUSE — An independent single-family dwelling unit, which is one of a
series of dwelling units, having a common party wall between each adjacent unit,
each with a private outside entrance.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
TOWNHOUSE CLUSTER — A building, or group of buildings, with each
building containing not more than eight townhouse dwelling units connected by
common party walls.[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land adequately sized to
accommodate the construction of townhouse dwelling units in accordance with the
density standards contained elsewhere in these regulations.[Added 2-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 2-2008]
TRAILER —Includes any towed vehicle used for carrying goods, equipment, and/
or machinery.
TRUCKING TERMINAL—An area and building(s) where trucks load and unload
cargo and freight and where cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated
into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation.
§ 235-5 BATAVIA CODE § 235-5
235:20
Trucking terminals may include the storage or parking of trucks awaiting cargo as
well as facilities for servicing of trucks.
UNDERGROUND TANK — Any tank completely covered with earth or other
backfill material.
UPGRADIENT — Portions of a lot defined by areas of higher land surface
elevation with respect to the elevation of other portions of the same lot. In general,
groundwater flows from areas of higher elevation (upgradient areas) to areas of
lower elevation (downgradient areas). (See definition for "downgradient.")
USE — The specific purpose for which land, water, a structure or a building is
designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for use of
land for a purpose which is not allowed or is prohibited by this chapter.
UTILITY, PUBLIC — Any person, firm, corporation or governmental subdivision
duly authorized to furnish to the public, under public regulation, electricity, gas,
water, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, steam, telephone, telegraph or cable
television, or other similar service.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage and/or distribution of
goods and materials.29
YARD — An unoccupied, open space on the same lot with any principal or
accessory buildings or structures.
YARD, FRONT — The unoccupied, open space within and extending the full
width of the lot from the front lot line to the front line of the principal building
which is nearest to such front lot line.
YARD, REAR — The unoccupied, open space within and extending the full width
of the lot from the rear lot line to the part of the principal building which is nearest
to such lot line.
YARD, SIDE — The unoccupied, open space within the lot extending the full
distance from the front yard to the rear yard and from the side lot line to the part of
the principal building which is nearest to such side lot line.
ZONE OF CONTRIBUTION—The surface and subsurface land area surrounding
a pumping municipal well that supplies direct recharge to the well.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — That Board appointed by the Town Board
specifically to hear all appeals as provided by these regulations and other duties
specifically set forth in this chapter, New York State Town Law or as assigned to it
by the Town Board.
ZONING PERMIT—A permit issued by the zoning officer stating that the purpose
for which a building or land area is to be used is in conformance with the uses
permitted and all other requirements of this chapter.
29. Editor's Note: The former definition of "wind energy conversion system, production model," added 6-15-2005, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008.
§ 235-5 ZONING § 235-5
235:21

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 235-6. Classification of districts and overlay zones. [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 2-2008]
The Town of Batavia is hereby divided into the following zoning districts and overlay
zones:
AG-R Agricultural-Residential District
R Residential District
H Hamlet Residential District
C Commercial District
HC Hamlet Commercial District
I Industrial District
IP Industrial Park District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
PBD Planned Business Development District
FPO Floodplain Overlay Zone (Information Only)
WPO Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone
§ 235-7. Zoning Map.
Said zoning districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map titled "Zoning Map of
the Town of Batavia, New York." The official copy of the Zoning Map is on file at the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 235-8. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any boundaries shown on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow streets, rights-of-way,
watercourses or lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such
district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions, as shown on the Zoning Map.
(2) Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as following approximate
streets, rights-of-way, or watercourses, the center lines thereof shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
(3) Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they follow the edge of
lakes, ponds, reservoirs or other bodies of water, mean high water lines thereof
shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.
(4) Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
§ 235-6 ZONING § 235-8
235:23
§ 235-9. Lots in two or more districts.
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot under single ownership on the
effective date of this chapter, leaving part subject to permissive regulations and part
subject to prohibitive regulations, the Board of Appeals, after public hearing, may permit
an extension of the use of that lot into the district where it is prohibited provided
the extension does not extend more than 50 feet into that district. Furthermore, the
Board may impose conditions affecting such extension if required to protect neighboring
property.
§ 235-10. Existing lots of record.
A single-family dwelling, mobile home, and/or customary accessory buildings may be
placed on any vacant lot of record existing prior to the effective date of this chapter
and having a minimum of 100 feet in width and 20,000 square feet in area or, if such
lot is located within a water district, a minimum of 75 feet in width and 16,000 square
feet. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area, width or yard size, provided that the other requirements of this chapter are met.
The minimum yard requirements for single-family dwellings on existing lots shall be as
follows:
B. If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty exists as to the exact
location of a district boundary, the Board of Appeals shall determine the location of
said lines.
A. Front: 50 feet.
B. One side: 15 feet.
C. Remaining side: eight feet.
D. Rear: 30 feet.
§ 235-8 BATAVIA CODE § 235-10
235:24
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 235-11. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or
modifications as herein provided by the following general supplementary regulations.
The dimensions and restrictions set forth in Zoning Schedule A are incorporated herein
and made a part of this chapter.30
§ 235-12. Buildings, uses and lots.
A. One principal building and use per lot. There shall not be more than one principal
building and one principal use on any one lot in the Agricultural (AG), Agricultural-
Residential (AG-R), and the Residential (R) Districts except as provided for in the
following:
(1) An approved multifamily dwelling project;
(2) A single-family dwelling accompanying a nonresidential use, or uses,
permitted on a lot in Agricultural (AG), Agricultural-Residential (AG-R) and
Residential (R) Districts, provided there is only one use of a commercial nature
on the lot; or
(3) A single-family dwelling accompanying a nonresidential use, or uses,
requiring a special use permit in Agricultural (AG), Agricultural Residential
(AG-R) and Residential (R) Districts, if approved by the Planning Board as
part of the special use permit application process, provided there is only one
use of a commercial nature on the lot.
B. Yard and open space for every building. No yard or other open space provided
about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these
regulations shall be included as any part of the yard or open space for any other
building. Also, no yard or any other open space on one lot shall be considered as a
yard or open space for a building on any other lot other than as provided for in
§ 235-41 for cluster residential development.
C. Separation or subdivision of a lot. Where a lot is formed hereafter from the part of
a lot already occupied by a building, such separation or subdivision shall be effected
so as not to violate any of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the
existing building, including yards and other required spaces in connection
therewith. No zoning permit shall be issued for the erection of a building on the
new lot thus created unless there is full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
D. Irregularly shaped lots. Where a question exists as to the proper application of any
of the requirements of this chapter to a particular lot or parcel because of the
peculiar or irregular shape of the lot or parcel, the matter shall be referred to the
Zoning Board of Appeals and dealt with in accordance with the applicable
provisions of § 235-62.
30. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-11 ZONING § 235-12
235:25
§ 235-13. Supplementary yard regulations; buffer strips; topsoil removal;
excavations; height exceptions.
E. Lots under water or subject to flooding.
(1) No more than 25% of the minimum area requirements of a lot may be met by
land which is always under water or land which falls within the federally
designated one-hundred-year flood hazard area.
(2) Land which is under water and is open to use by persons other than the owner
shall be excluded from the computation of the minimum area of a lot.
(3) Land in the bed of a stream not exceeding five feet in width at mean water
level, and land in a pond not exceeding 150 square feet in area, shall not be
considered as under water for the purpose of computing lot area.
(4) Where any part of a lot is separated by the main body of water, such separate
land shall not be included in computing lot area.
F. Required road frontage. No zoning permit shall be issued for any structure unless
the lot upon which that structure is to be built has the required frontage on a road,
as defined herein, which frontage provides the actual access to such structure, and
which road shall have been suitably improved to Town Board standards or a bond
posted therefor as provided in § 280-a of the New York State Town Law.
G. Parts of lot not counted toward area requirements. No part of such lot less in width
than 1/2 of the minimum requirements for the district in which it is located shall be
counted as part of the minimum required lot area.
H. Adjacent lots. Where two or more adjacent lots are at the time of the effective date
of this chapter in the same ownership, they shall not be considered a single lot,
unless they are described as one parcel in a deed recorded at the Genesee County
Clerk's office.
I. Yards on corner lots. Any yard adjoining a street shall be considered front yard for
the purpose of this chapter and shall comply with all the requirements for a front
yard in the district in which located. The remaining yards shall be considered side
yards.
A. Porches and decks. A porch or deck shall be considered a part of the building in
determining the yard requirements or amount of lot coverage.
B. Projecting horizontal architectural features. Architectural features, such as
windowsills, belt courses, chimneys, cornices, eaves or bay windows, shall not
project more than four feet into any required yard.
C. Fire escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard.
D. Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any district, no fence, wall, hedge, or
other structure or planting more than three feet in height shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting road lines and a
straight line joining said road lines at points which are 40 feet distant from the point
of intersection, measured along said road lines. This subsection shall not apply to
§ 235-12 BATAVIA CODE § 235-13
235:26
existing trees, provided that no branches are closer than six feet to the ground.
E. Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be considered accessory structures within
the provisions of § 235-14 of this chapter and shall be set back from lot lines at least
the minimum distance required for other buildings and structures. Swimming pools
shall be enclosed with adequate fencing and gates as required by the New York
State Uniform Code.
F. Buffer strip. Wherever a buffer strip is required by this chapter, it shall meet the
following standards:
(1) It shall be at least 15 feet in depth and six feet in height.
(2) It shall be a type of planting (as determined by the Planning Board) of such
type, height and spacing as will screen the activities on the lot from view of a
person standing at street level on the adjoining lot.
(3) A wall or fence of which the location, height, and design have been approved
by the Planning Board may, upon good cause being shown, be substituted for
the required planting and the minimum width of the buffer strip may be
reduced accordingly.
G. Topsoil. No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or for
use other than on the premises from which the topsoil is taken, except in connection
with the construction or alteration of a building or structure on such premises and
excavating or grading incidental thereto.
H. Excavation during construction. In any construction, open excavations shall be
limited to a maximum of 60 days, with appropriate fencing, barricades or covering.
I. Waste containers/dumpsters. The location of all waste containers and/or dumpsters
for multifamily and nonresidential uses shall be determined by the Planning Board
through the site plan review process. Relocation of existing waste containers and/or
dumpsters shall also be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board may require screening of waste containers/dumpsters. This
provision shall not apply to the temporary placement of garbage cans awaiting
collection or the temporary use of dumpsters or roll-offs during a cleaning, moving
or construction project.
J. Height exceptions.
(1) District building height regulations shall not apply to flagpoles, radio or
television antennas, transmission towers or cables, spires or cupolas,
chimneys, elevator or stair bulkheads, penthouses, parapets or railings, water
tanks or cooling towers, or any similar structures, provided that such structures
are located on the roof and in their aggregate coverage occupy no more than
10% of the roof area of the building and provided such structure(s) poses no
hazards to aircraft operations.
(2) District building height regulations shall not apply to radio or television
antennas and commercial communications towers provided such structure(s)
poses no hazards to aircraft operations.
§ 235-13 ZONING § 235-14
235:27
§ 235-14. Location of accessory buildings and structures.
§ 235-15. Nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and lots.
A. Accessory buildings are permitted as follows:
(1) A one-story accessory building having a total floor area of 250 square feet or
less and a building height of not more than nine feet shall not be located closer
than five feet to the rear and side lot lines and shall not be located within the
required front yard. [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
(2) The location of accessory buildings having a total floor area greater than 250
square feet or a building height of greater than nine feet shall be in compliance
with the required front, side and rear yard areas of the respective districts.
[Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
B. Accessory structures (other than buildings) are permitted as follows:
(1) Accessory structures (other than buildings) equal to or less than 15 feet in
height, including satellite dishes with a diameter of three to 13 feet, shall not
be located closer than 15 feet to the side and/or rear lot line and shall not be
located within the minimum required front yard. Satellite dishes less than three
feet in diameter may be located anywhere on a lot provided the minimum front
and side yard setbacks are maintained along with a minimum five-foot setback
from the rear property line.
(2) Accessory structures (other than buildings) greater than 15 feet in height,
including production model wind energy conversion systems (windmills),
antennas and satellite dishes greater than 13 feet in diameter, shall be located
in compliance with the required yard area of the respective districts and shall
be located in the rear yard.
A. Lawful existing uses, buildings, structures and lots. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, the lawful use of land, a building or a structure existing at the
effective date of this chapter may be continued although such use, building or
structure does not conform to the regulations specified in this chapter for the zone
in which such land, building or structure is located; provided, however, that:
(1) No lot shall be reduced to a nonconforming size.
(2) A nonconforming lot shall not be further reduced in size.
(3) A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged, extended or
increased unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance.
(4) An existing mobile home which is occupied as a one-family dwelling on any
lot in an AG, AG-R, R, C or PUD District may be replaced with another
mobile home provided that the following criteria, as well as the criteria in
§ 235-54A, are met. The new mobile home may be larger than the existing
nonconforming mobile home. Otherwise, however, the new mobile home shall
not increase the degree of nonconformity that exists with the existing
nonconforming mobile home.
§ 235-14 BATAVIA CODE § 235-15
235:28
§ 235-16. Uses not permitted.
Uses which are not specifically allowed by this chapter are prohibited.
§ 235-17. Minimum enclosed living area.
(5) A nonconforming use may not be expanded.
(6) No existing conforming use shall be changed to a nonconforming use.
(7) Such uses must comply with all applicable state, federal and other local laws
or regulations.
B. Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned when there
occurs a cessation of any such use or activity and a failure on the part of the tenant
or owner to reinstate such use within a period of one year from the date of cessation
or discontinuance.
C. Restoration and repair. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration and
repair or continuation of use of a nonconforming building or structure destroyed or
partly destroyed by a disaster, provided that restoration is commenced within eight
months after the date of destruction and is completed within 16 months after the
date of destruction.
D. Reversion. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.
E. Alterations. A nonconforming building or structure may not be improved during its
life to an extent exceeding, in aggregate cost, 50% of the assessed value of the
building unless said building is changed to conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
F. District changes. If a nonconforming use is established by a transfer of an area from
one district to another after the effective date of this chapter, then the foregoing
provisions shall apply to any nonconforming use created by such change.
A. One-family dwellings shall have a minimum enclosed living area (not including a
garage but also not limited to only habitable floor area) of at least 720 square feet.
B. Two-family dwellings shall have a minimum enclosed living area of at least 720
square feet for the first unit and the second unit as follows:
Number of Bedrooms Per Unit Minimum Square Footage
Efficiency 300
1 550
2 650
3 800
4 1,000
5+ As determined by Planning Board
C. Multiple-family dwellings shall have a minimum enclosed living area per unit as
§ 235-15 ZONING § 235-17
235:29
§ 235-18. Minimum dimensional criteria.
All one- and two-family dwelling units located on individual lots shall have a minimum
outside width of at least 20 feet. This provision shall not prohibit the construction of
smaller additions or projections from larger units (less than 20 feet wide) provided a
twenty-foot minimum width is clearly established for the overall unit.
§ 235-19. Front yard grade for dwellings.
The surface grade of front yards of dwellings measured at the midpoint of the front wall
shall be at least one foot above the elevation of the road's center line, unless adequate
site drainage is provided otherwise and approved by the appropriate authority having
jurisdiction over the road (Town or County Highway Superintendent or New York State
Department of Transportation).
§ 235-20. Stabling agricultural animals.
There shall be no stabling of animals or storage of manure, fertilizer, or similar odoror
dust-producing substance within the R District. Such stabling or storage shall be
permitted in the AG, AG-R, I, IP or C Districts provided the following restrictions are
observed:
§ 235-21. Fences.
follows:
Number of Bedrooms Per Unit Minimum Square Footage
Efficiency 300
1 550
2 650
3 800
4 1,000
5+ As determined by Planning Board
A. No such stabling or storage shall take place within 500 feet of an R District.
B. No such stabling or storage shall take place within 100 feet of a lot line.
A. Fences erected on residential lots in the Town of Batavia shall adhere to the
following standards:
(1) Before a fence (other than a temporary one) shall be erected, a zoning permit
must be obtained from the Building Inspector. A request for a permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan which shall show the height and location of the
fence in relation to all other structures and buildings and in relation to all
streets, lot property lines and yards. These restrictions shall not be applied so
as to require a permit for, nor restrict, the erection, alteration, or reconstruction
of fences for agricultural uses on farms or temporary fences (i.e., snow fences,
garden fences, etc.), provided such temporary fences shall not exceed four feet
§ 235-17 BATAVIA CODE § 235-21
235:30
§ 235-22. Land abutting a residential use.
Where in any district a commercial or industrial use is created adjacent to an existing
residential use, a buffer strip shall be established by the nonresidential use along the lot
line adjacent to the residential use.
§ 235-23. Outside solid-fuel-burning devices.
Outside solid-fuel-burning devices shall not be installed in an R District or within
500 feet of such district. When installed outside the R District (and the required fivehundred-
foot buffer), such units shall be installed and operated in a manner as will not
allow smoke or fumes to enter buildings on surrounding properties.
in height, shall be at least 50% open construction and shall not pose a hazard
to persons or traffic circulation. A temporary fence shall be removed once it is
no longer being used or is necessary for its intended purpose.
(2) Fences may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to exceed three
feet above ground level when located within 20 feet of the street right-of-way.
(3) Fences may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to exceed eight
feet above ground level when located more than 20 feet from the street rightof-
way line.
(4) These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection of a wall for
the purpose of retaining earth.
(5) Fencing used to enclose a tennis court may be permitted up to 10 feet in height
provided that such fencing is not closer than 25 feet to a side or rear property
line.
(6) No fence shall be erected in a special flood hazard area, except for fences
connected with an agricultural use when it can be demonstrated that such fence
would not restrict the flow of floodwaters nor have an adverse impact on any
buildings.
(7) The finished side of the fence shall face the adjoining properties.
B. Commercial and industrial fences shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board as part of the site plan approval process.
§ 235-21 ZONING § 235-23
235:31

ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
§ 235-24. (Reserved)31
§ 235-25. Agricultural-Residential District (AG-R). [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 2-2008]
The Agricultural-Residential (AG-R) District is designed primarily to preserve farmland
and secondarily to preserve the rural nature of the Town. Agricultural and residential
uses have a number of inherent conflicts between them. The purpose of this district is to
minimize these conflicts by separating the uses by providing an area where agricultural
uses are the primary use and low-density residential development is a secondary use.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Agricultural-Residential
District:
(1) Agricultural uses.
(2) One- and two-family dwellings.
(3) Mobile homes (see § 235-54).
(4) Religious institutions.
(5) Public parks, public playgrounds, and municipal uses.
(6) Private stable.
(7) Schools.
(8) Home Occupation I (see § 235-44).
(9) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
(10) Cluster residential development (see § 235-41).
B. Uses requiring special use permit. The following uses are permitted in an
Agricultural-Residential District upon the issuance of a special use permit:
(1) Multifamily dwellings, townhouse development and twin home development
(see § 235-41.1).
(2) Home Occupation II (§ 235-44).
(3) Noncommercial wind energy system.
(4) Outdoor recreation facility.
(5) Club.
(6) Airport landing strip.
31. Editor's Note: Former § 235-24, Agricultural District (AG), was repealed 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008.
§ 235-24 ZONING § 235-25
235:33
(7) Kennel.
(8) Community center.
(9) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(10) Public stable.
(11) Commercial greenhouse.
(12) Commercial excavation (see § 235-40).
(13) Cemetery.
(14) Campground (see § 235-43).
(15) Animal hospital.
(16) Residential care facility.
(17) Auction house.
(18) Day-care center.
(19) Bed-and-breakfast.
(20) Boardinghouse.
(21) Animal waste storage facilities (see § 235-46).
(22) Animal shelter.
(23) Pond (see § 235-48).
(24) Farm equipment sales, service and repair (see § 235-37).
(25) Skilled trade shop (see § 235-47).
(26) ECHO unit (see § 235-51).
(27) Self-service storage facility.
(28) Commercial communication tower (see § 235-52).
(29) Landscaping contractor's yard (see § 235-53).
(30) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
C. Uses requiring special use permit on arterial highways. The following uses are
permitted in the Agricultural-Residential District upon the issuance of a special use
permit, provided the affected lot and proposed use front directly upon an arterial
highway and the lot involved is not located within 300 feet of a lot with an existing
residential use (other than residential uses located on the involved lot) (such
measurements shall be made between the nearest respective lot lines):
(1) Hotel/motel.
§ 235-25 BATAVIA CODE § 235-25
235:34
§ 235-26. Residential District (R). [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
The Residential District is designed to accommodate primarily residential uses on lots
with a minimum area of 16,000 square feet (provided public water or sewer is available)
or 20,000 square feet (no public water or sewer available). The purpose of this district is
to encourage residential growth in areas of the Town which have existing concentrations
of residential uses. The Residential District will allow for more economical provision of
public services such as water and sanitary sewer should the need arise at some future
date.
(2) Motor vehicle repair shop (see § 235-37).
(3) Hospital.
(4) Indoor recreation facility.
(5) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
D. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.32
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Residential District:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Religious institutions.
(3) Public parks, public playgrounds, and municipal uses.
(4) Agricultural uses, excluding the stabling of animals or the storage of manure,
fertilizer, or similar odor- or dust-producing substances.
(5) Schools.
(6) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
B. Uses requiring special use permit. The following uses are permitted in the
Residential District upon issuance of a special use permit:
(1) Multifamily dwellings, townhouse development and twin home development
(see § 235-41.1).
(2) Home Occupation I (see § 235-44).
(3) Home Occupation II (see § 235-44).
(4) Outdoor recreation facility.
(5) Community center.
(6) Residential care facility.
(7) Public utility (see § 235-38).
32. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-25 ZONING § 235-26
235:35
§ 235-26.1. Hamlet Residential District (HR). [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
(8) Cluster residential development (see § 235-41).
(9) Day-care center.
(10) Boardinghouse.
(11) Bed-and-breakfast.
(12) Pond (see § 235-48).
(13) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
C. Uses requiring special use permit on arterial highways. The following uses are
permitted in the Residential District upon the issuance of a special use permit,
provided the affected lot and proposed use front directly upon an arterial highway:
(1) Hotel/motel.
(2) Hospital.
(3) Indoor recreation facility.
(4) Self-service storage facility.
(5) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
D. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.33
A. Purpose. The purpose of the HR - Hamlet Residential District is to encourage a mix
of residential uses and styles on lots of varying sizes, in order to create and maintain
residential neighborhoods with high potential for socialization.
B. Permitted uses:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Agricultural uses, excluding the stabling of animals or the storage of manure,
fertilizer, or similar odor- or dust-producing substances.
(3) The following public and semipublic uses:
(a) Public and private parks not operated for profit.
(b) Public buildings such as fire, police, or water stations.
(4) Schools.
(5) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
33. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-26 BATAVIA CODE § 235-26.1
235:36
§ 235-27. Commercial District (C). [Amended 5-17-2006; 2-20-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
The Commercial (C) District is designed to provide areas within the Town for
concentrations of commercial uses. These districts are located along major highways to
provide for maximum development potential.
C. Uses requiring a special use permit:
(1) Multifamily dwellings, townhouse or twin home development (see
§ 235-41.1).
(2) Home Occupation I (see § 235-44).
(3) Hospital, nursing home or convalescent home.
(4) Public utilities, excluding telecommunications facilities.
(5) Community center.
(6) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(7) Day-care center.
(8) Boardinghouse.
(9) Bed-and-breakfast.
(10) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
D. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.34
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Commercial District:
(1) Retail/service trade.
(2) Restaurant (excluding drive-in restaurants).
(3) Hotel/motel.
(4) Commercial greenhouse.
(5) Office buildings.
(6) Wholesale trade.
(7) Theaters.
(8) Banks (excluding drive-in banks).
(9) Agricultural uses.
(10) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
34. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-26.1 ZONING § 235-27
235:37
B. Uses requiring special use permit. The following uses are permitted in the
Commercial District upon the issuance of a special use permit:
(1) Drive-in business, including drive-in restaurants and drive-in banks (see
§ 235-37).
(2) Motor vehicle repair shop (see § 235-37).
(3) Gasoline station (see § 235-37).
(4) Gasoline station-market (see § 235-37).
(5) Indoor recreation facility.
(6) Light industrial.
(7) Motor vehicle sales, service and repair.
(8) Recreational vehicle and mobile home sales and service.
(9) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(10) Residential uses, provided the predominant land use within 500 feet of the
proposal is also residential.
(11) Warehouse.
(12) Shopping center.
(13) Day-care center.
(14) Contractor's yard.
(15) Car wash.
(16) Self-service storage facility.
(17) Farm equipment sales, service and repair (see § 235-37).
(18) Recyclables handling and recovery facility.
(19) Pond (see § 235-48).
(20) Off-premises advertising sign (see § 235-39).
(21) Commercial communication tower (see § 235-52).
(22) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
(23) Outdoor recreation facility.
(24) Noncommercial wind energy system.
C. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.35
35. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-27 BATAVIA CODE § 235-27.1
235:38
§ 235-27.1. Hamlet Commercial District (HC). [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for business development in the
hamlet of East Pembroke business area, including retail, office and service uses,
public and semipublic uses, as well as other business uses that are compatible with
the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Such businesses are intended to serve a
small amount of transient vehicular traffic, but mostly the neighboring residential
community. This district is intended to accommodate a mix of uses within the
district as well as multiple uses within individual lots.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Hamlet Commercial
District:
(1) Retail/service trade.
(2) Restaurant (excluding drive-in restaurants).
(3) Professional and business offices.
(4) Mortuary or funeral home.
(5) Banks (excluding drive-in banks).
(6) Residential uses.
(7) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
C. Uses requiring special use permit.
(1) Drive-in business, including drive-in restaurant and drive-in banks (see
§ 235-37).
(2) Motor vehicle repair shop (see § 235-37).
(3) Gasoline station (see § 235-37).
(4) Gasoline station-market (see § 235-37).
(5) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(6) Day-care center.
(7) Multifamily dwellings, townhouse or twin home development (see
§ 235-41.1).
(8) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
D. Dimensional requirements. See Zoning Schedule A.36
E. Multiple uses permitted. Multiple uses may be permitted upon a single lot, or in a
single building, subject to site plan review.
36. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-27.1 ZONING § 235-28
235:39
§ 235-28. Industrial District (I). [Amended 2-14-2001; 10-19-2005; 2-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 2-2008]
The Industrial (I) District is designed to provide areas within the Town which are
appropriate for industrial-type uses. In limiting industrial uses to the Industrial District,
it is the Town's intention to minimize the potential adverse impacts of such uses.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial District:
(1) Warehouse.
(2) Manufacturing (enclosed).
(3) Wholesale trade.
(4) Retail/service trade.
(5) Existing residential uses.
(6) Agricultural uses.
(7) Adult uses (see § 235-49).
(8) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
B. Uses requiring special use permit. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial
District upon the issuance of a special use permit:
(1) Junkyard (see § 235-42).
(2) Industrial park.
(3) Motor vehicle repair shop (see § 235-37).
(4) Recyclables handling and recovery facility.
(5) Self-service storage facility.
(6) Manufacturing (unenclosed).
(7) Contractor's yard.
(8) Truck stop.
(9) Trucking terminal.
(10) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(11) Heavy machinery and truck sales and service (see § 235-37).
(12) Disposal transfer station.
(13) Pond (see § 235-48).
(14) Off-premises advertising sign (see § 235-39).
(15) Commercial communication tower (see § 235-52).
§ 235-28 BATAVIA CODE § 235-28
235:40
§ 235-29. Industrial Park District (IP). [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
The Industrial Park (IP) District is designed to provide areas within the Town for the
design of and development as industrial parks. The IP District will encompass properties
that typically are not accessed directly from a major highway but instead are serviced
by a road system designed and intended for use by operations within or immediately
adjacent to the industrial park. The IP District is designed to blend commercial and
enclosed industrial uses, thus maximizing the development potential by encouraging
land uses which will complement, rather than detract from, one another. Given the
industrial park setting, the required minimum lot frontages, lot widths and yard setbacks
are less than those required within the general Industrial (I) Districts.
(16) Kennels.
(17) Accessory buildings, structures and uses related to those uses allowed by
special use permit (only site plan review is required for approval).
(18) Commercial excavation.
(19) Noncommercial wind energy system.
C. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.37
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial Park (IP) District:
(1) Warehouse.
(2) Manufacturing (enclosed).
(3) Wholesale trade.
(4) Commercial or professional office or service.
(5) Research and development facility.
(6) Governmental facilities.
(7) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(8) Recyclables handling and recovery facility.
(9) Pond (see § 235-48).
(10) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
B. Uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are permitted in the
Industrial Park (IP) District upon the issuance of a special use permit: [Amened
4-20-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Retail store.
(2) Restaurant.
37. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-28 ZONING § 235-29
235:41
§ 235-30. Mobile Home Park District (MHP).
§ 235-31. Planned Unit Development District (PUD).38
(3) Hotel or motel.
(4) Gasoline station (see § 235-37).
(5) Gasoline station-market (see § 235-37).
(6) Noncommercial wind energy system.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Mobile Home Park District is to provide an area within
the town for development of additional mobile home parks and for campgrounds.
B. Requirements. A mobile home park may be located in the Mobile Home Park
District upon the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in § 235-63,
provided the proposed mobile home park meets the requirements and conditions set
forth in Chapter 150, Mobile Home Parks, of this Code.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development District is to permit greater
flexibility, more creative and imaginative design and utilization of innovative land
development techniques while promoting more economical and efficient use of
land, buildings, circulation systems and utilities; to provide for both individual
building sites and common property which are planned and developed as a unit; to
provide harmonious land uses which offer a high level of amenities; to permit a
variety of residential types and/or nonresidential uses; and to preserve natural and
scenic qualities of the site during the development process.
B. General requirements.
(1) Minimum area. The minimum area required to qualify for a planned unit
development shall be 10 contiguous acres of land.
(2) Ownership. The tract of land for a planned unit development may be owned,
leased or controlled either by a single person or corporation or by a group of
individuals or corporations. A petition must be filed by the owner, or jointly
by owners, of all property included in a project. In the case of multiple
ownership, the approved planned unit development plan is binding on all
owners.
(3) Location. The Planned Unit Development District shall be applicable to any
zoning district or parts of zoning districts where the applicant can demonstrate
that the characteristics of his holdings and plan will meet the objectives of this
section.
(4) Common open space. Common open space in a planned unit development may
be one or more sites for use in common by all of the occupants within the
project area or by the residents of the town as a whole, depending upon
dedication of such sites. Such common open space may be retained in private
ownership or received in dedication by the town. If the open space remains in
38. Editor's Note: Specific planned unit development regulations are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-29 BATAVIA CODE § 235-31
235:42
private ownership, arrangements for the operation, maintenance, improvement
and liability of such common property and facilities must be approved by
the Town Board. No common open space, so designated by the proposal and
approved by the Town Board, may be thereafter developed or disposed of
except with the approval of the Town Board.
(5) Permitted uses. Any uses identified as permitted uses or uses allowed by
special use permit as set forth in this chapter for any district may be permitted
in a planned unit development.
(6) Mix of uses. The mix of permissible uses shall be determined by the Town
Board.
C. Application procedure and approval process.
(1) Conceptual review. Before submission of a petition for rezoning as a planned
unit development, the developer is encouraged to meet with the Town
Planning Board to determine the feasibility and suitability of his proposal
before entering into any binding commitments or incurring substantial
expenses of site plan preparation and the required documentation.
(2) Rezoning procedure.
(a) Submission of petition. A petition for the establishment of planned unit
development districts shall be submitted to the Town Clerk by the
developer [see Subsection C(2)(d) of this section].
(b) Notification and referral. Within five working days, the Town Clerk shall
notify the Town Board of the petition and shall refer the petition and all
supporting documentation to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendations.
(c) Planning Board review. Within 62 days of receipt of the petition, the
Planning Board shall review it and recommend approval, approval with
modifications or disapproval thereof to the Town Board. Failure to act
within 62 days or such longer period as may be consented to by the
developer shall constitute approval of said petition by the Planning
Board.
(d) Submission requirements. The developer shall submit a minimum of four
sets of such plans and drawings (additional sets may be required). These
four sets shall be submitted to the Town Clerk. The preliminary plans
shall be accompanied by such maps, charts and written material necessary
for the Boards to make a preliminary judgment on the suitability and
impact of the proposed planned unit development on the town.
Preliminary plans should include the following:
[1] A preliminary site plan of the property covered by the petition
showing the approximate size and location of the various
development areas (road rights-of-way, single-family housing areas,
multifamily housing areas, commercial and open space areas, etc.);
the number and type of residential structures and dwelling units
§ 235-31 ZONING § 235-31
235:43
within each residential area; the approximate square footage of
nonresidential use within each nonresidential area; the amount of
open space; traffic circulation; and the surrounding land uses.
[2] A written preliminary description of the proposal, including the total
number of acres in the site; the estimated number and type of
housing units; the estimated residential and nonresidential density;
the major planning assumptions and objectives; the probable effect
on adjoining properties; and the effect on the overall town
development plan and the effect on this chapter.
(e) Review considerations. In review of the preliminary plans, the Planning
Board shall consider the manner with which the proposal fits the general
pattern of land use established by this chapter and the impact on the
established land uses in the area, overall density of development, traffic
circulation, the provision of open spaces, and the effect on schools and
other municipal facilities.
(f) Town Board review and approval. Upon receipt of the Planning Board's
recommendation, the Town Board may, after a public hearing and review
of the proposed zone change by the County Planning Board, pursuant to
General Municipal Law §§ 239-l and 239-m, amend this chapter so as to
establish and define the boundaries of the planned unit development. If
the rezoning request is approved for the planned unit development, such
action does not authorize improvements to the rezoned land.
(3) Final plan.
(a) Ownership. Before final approval of the planned unit development, the
developer must show evidence of the full legal ownership in the land.
(b) Submission of final plan. Upon approval of the zone change, the applicant
has five years in which to submit a final plan to the Town Clerk.
(c) Notification and referral. Within five working days, the Town Clerk shall
notify the Town Board of the filing of the final plan and shall refer the
final plan and all supporting documentation to the Planning Board for its
review and recommendation.
(d) Planning Board review. Within 62 days of receipt of the final plan, the
Planning Board shall review the final plan and recommend approval,
approval with modifications or disapproval to the Town Board. Failure to
act within 62 days or such longer period as may be consented to by the
developer shall constitute approval of the final plan by the Planning
Board.
(e) Submission requirements. The applicant shall submit a minimum of four
complete sets of the final plan and drawings (additional sets may be
required). These four sets shall be submitted to the Town Clerk. The final
plan shall be accompanied by a detailed justification for the proposal,
including such maps, charts and written material necessary for the Town
Board to make an impartial judgment on the suitability and impact of the
§ 235-31 BATAVIA CODE § 235-31
235:44
proposed planned unit development on the town. Such material shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
[1] A mapped development plan of the property covered by the
development showing the size and location of the various
development areas (road rights-of-way, single-family housing areas,
multifamily housing areas, commercial and open space areas, etc.),
the location of proposed residential structures and dwelling units
within each residential area, the square footage of nonresidential use
within each nonresidential area and the amount of open space.
[2] A written description of the proposal, including the major planning
assumptions and objectives, the probable effect on adjoining
properties, the effect on the overall town development plan and the
effect on this chapter.
[3] Such additional written material, graphs or charts as are necessary to
present the total number of acres in the site, the number and type of
housing units, the gross and net residential densities, the
approximate selling and/or rental prices of the units, and square feet
of nonresidential floor area, including the approximate selling and/
or rental price, the development schedule expressed in units per
month (or year or any other appropriate time sequence), the phasing
plan (if any), the approximate completion date of the entire project,
and the estimated total construction cost of the project upon
completion.
[4] Such other written or graphic material as is necessary for the
Planning Board to judge the impact of the proposal on the town.
Such material shall include, but not be limited to, the need for new
public facilities and the adequacy of existing facilities, including a
statement of the intent to which the developer intends to provide
needed facilities, a fiscal impact statement, including a summary of
new costs and revenues to the town due to the development, the
projected new population, and the method of assuring that all open
spaces will be permanently maintained and devoted to open space
uses.
(f) Review considerations. In review of the final plan, the Planning Board
shall consider the manner with which the proposal fits the general pattern
of land use established by this chapter and the protection of the
established and permitted uses in the area. It shall consider the location of
main and accessory buildings and their relation to one another; the
circulation pattern of the site and the amount, location, and access of
parking and off-street loading space facilities; the height and bulk of
buildings; the provision of open spaces, landscaped areas, signs, and
similar features of the site plan and the safeguards provided to minimize
possible detrimental effects of the proposed development on adjacent
property and the surrounding neighborhood; the manner of conformance
with the official development policies of the town; the effect on schools
and other municipal facilities; and the manner in which natural and scenic
§ 235-31 ZONING § 235-31
235:45
§ 235-31.1. Planned Business Development District (PBD). [Added 2-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 2-2008]
characteristics of the site are preserved.
(g) Town Board review and approval. Upon receipt of the Planning Board's
recommendation, the Town Board shall, after a public hearing and review
of the final plan by the County Planning Board, pursuant to General
Municipal Law §§ 239-l and 239-m, approve, approve with modifications
or disapprove the final plan. The Town Board shall make its decision in
accordance with official town development policies and may impose
conditions relating to that plan. The decision of the Town Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and a copy mailed
to the applicant by regular mail.
D. Design standards.
(1) Area requirements. The least restrictive area, yard, coverage, height, density
and supplementary regulation requirements applicable to a specific use under
this chapter shall apply, except where the Planning Board finds that it is in the
public interest to modify these requirements and the Town Board approves
such modifications.
(2) Traffic and circulation.
(a) All proposed public roads shall meet the design and construction
specifications set forth by the Town Highway Superintendent and/or
Engineer.
(b) Special consideration should be given to pedestrian movement from the
standpoint of safety, convenience and amenity. Sidewalks, curbs and
gutters should be considered in the design of the overall circulation
system.
(3) Common open space. All common open space should be preserved and
maintained for the intended purpose through one or more of the following
methods:
(a) Public dedication.
(b) Establishment of a homeowners' association.
(c) Retention of responsibilities, control and maintenance by the developer.
(4) Security. Performance and maintenance bonds or other security may be
required in the discretion of the Town Board.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Business Development (PBD) District is to:
(1) Establish an area for new commercial, industrial, recreational and/or mixed
use development on a large scale that will provide the Town and region with
employment opportunities, additional tax base and other community benefits,
while minimizing impacts on public services;
§ 235-31 BATAVIA CODE § 235-31.1
235:46
(2) Prevent piecemeal development that would compromise the availability and
future marketability of a large area for significant new development;
(3) Accommodate continued agricultural use in an area that is highly suited for
agriculture;
(4) Provide greater flexibility, more creative and imaginative design and
utilization of innovative land development techniques while promoting more
economical and efficient use of land, buildings, circulation systems and
utilities;
(5) Provide for both individual building sites and common property which are
planned and developed as a unit; to provide harmonious land uses which offer
a high level of amenities;
(6) Permit a variety of industrial, commercial and/or recreational uses; and
(7) Preserve natural and scenic qualities of the site during the development
process.
B. Requirements. Any development proposed for the Planned Business Development
District shall meet the following requirements:
(1) A coordinated development plan that addresses the requirements in this section
and advances the purposes stated in Subsection A shall be presented for a
contiguous land area that comprises at least 100 acres within the Planned
Business Development District. Smaller developments would require an area
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) The preservation of open space and the preservation of trees, outstanding
natural topography and sensitive environmental features shall be an integral
part of the plan, while allowing sufficiently intensive development to support
the extension of infrastructure to the PBD.
(3) The development shall make creative and efficient use of land and related
physical development resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and
thereby lowering costs for construction and maintenance.
(4) Adequate public services. No development shall be approved within the
Planned Business Development District unless the Town Engineer submits a
satisfactory report to the Planning Board regarding the following:
(a) The project will be connected to municipal water and sewer.
(b) The project will not overburden the municipal water and sewer system.
(c) Adequate levels of water pressure are available for fire service.
(d) A traffic impact study, detailing impacts and mitigation measures, has
been prepared by each developer.
(e) Any costs associated with improvements or upgrades to public facilities
may be included in the developer's construction costs and carried out by
the developer under the supervision of the Town Engineer.
§ 235-31.1 ZONING § 235-31.1
235:47
(5) Utilities. New public and private utilities and those relocated or replaced shall
be underground, unless specifically exempted by the Planning Board.
(6) Topography, landscaping and site appearance.
(a) Landscaping shall contribute to prevention of water runoff and erosion
problems. Temporary or permanent protection shall be provided during
construction to prevent such problems.
(b) All developments within the district shall be designed to take maximum
advantage of the topography of the land, to provide for water storage and
control of water runoff, to protect natural drainage courses, to reduce the
amount of grading and maximize the conservation of trees and topsoil.
(c) The design of the perimeter landscaping and improvements of each
development should be visually harmonious and compatible with
adjoining development.
(7) Development in phases. If the applicant wishes to construct the development
in phases, or if the Planning Board wishes to require that development be
phased, the applicant may submit final site plans for only those phases for
review per the approved phasing plan, provided that such final site plans are
consistent with the coordinated development plan and approved preliminary
site plan for the entire site. Any plan anticipated to require more than 24
months to be completed shall be required to be completed in phases, and a
phasing plan must be developed. The Code Enforcement Officer may withhold
the issuance of building permits if the approved phasing plan is not being
followed.
(8) Performance. The Planning Board may require bonding, a letter of credit or
other instrument to ensure that public and private improvements are carried
out as specified in the plans and approvals, as provided for in § 235-63C(8).
(9) Expiration. If no evidence of progressive activity has occurred within two
years of the date of approval or upon expiration of any extension of time for
starting development granted by the Planning Board, the Planning Board may,
with twenty-day-advance-notice to the applicant, declare the approved plan to
be null and void. Upon the request of the applicant, the Planning Board shall
automatically grant a two-year extension for starting the development, and
may thereafter consider further extensions in its discretion.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted in the Planned Business Development
District:
(a) Warehouse.
(b) Manufacturing (enclosed).
(c) Wholesale trade.
(d) Commercial or professional office or service.
§ 235-31.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-31.1
235:48
(e) Research and development facility.
(f) Governmental facilities.
(g) Public utility (see § 235-38).
(h) Recyclables handling and recovery facility.
(i) Pond (see § 235-48).
(j) Agriculture.
(k) Agricultural products processing or distribution facilities.
(l) Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
(2) Uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are permitted in the
Planned Business Development District upon the issuance of a special use
permit and provided the parcel fronts on, and is directly accessed from, a state
highway:
(a) Retail store.
(b) Restaurant.
(c) Hotel or motel.
(d) Gasoline station (see § 235-37).
(e) Gasoline station-market (see § 235-37).
D. Area regulations. See Zoning Schedule A.39
E. Procedures.
(1) Applicant. The applicant may be an individual, corporation or a group of
individuals or corporations. An application shall be filed by the owner or
jointly by the owners of all property included in a project. In the case of
multiple ownership, the approved plan shall be binding on all owners.
(2) Application for site plan approval for a planned business development.
Application for a site development plan for a planned business development
shall be made to the Planning Board. The applicant shall furnish basic data
pertaining to the boundaries of the proposed development and the existing
zoning, topography, drainage and soil conditions. A site development plan
shall be provided in sufficient detail as may be required for an understanding
of the type, uses and design of the proposed development. Information shall be
provided to demonstrate that adequate public services exist or will exist to
serve the proposed development.
(3) Planning Board review of site plan.
(a) The Planning Board shall review the proposed site plan in accordance
39. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-31.1 ZONING § 235-31.1
235:49
with the criteria and procedures established in § 235-63C.
(b) The Planning Board shall also consider the following criteria in its review
of a proposed planned business development within the PBD District:
[1] The suitability of the tract for the general type of development
proposed and the physical characteristics of the land.
[2] The relation of the proposed development to surrounding areas,
existing and probable future development, including the extension
of utilities to adjacent properties and the interconnection of road
access to adjacent properties.
[3] The relation to major roads, utilities and other facilities and services.
[4] The adequacy of evidence on unified control and suitability of any
proposed agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, sureties,
dedications, contributions, guaranties or other instruments or the
need for such instruments or for amendments in those proposed.
[5] The suitability of plans proposed or the desirability of amendments,
with reasons therefor.
(4) Public hearing on the application for site plan approval. Within 62 days of
receipt of the application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing, after
public notice, on the application for site plan approval for the initial planned
business development. A public hearing shall be optional for subsequent
development within an approved planned business development that may be
subject to site plan review pursuant to § 235-63C.
(5) Changes in approved final plans. Changes in the types of uses within an
approved planned business development and other changes to approved final
plans and reports may be approved by the Planning Board only upon findings
identical to those required for original approval.
(6) Upon approval of final plans and reports, building permits shall be issued in
the same manner as for building permits generally, provided that any
requirements concerning the order and location in which building permits are
to be issued in the particular planned business development shall be observed.
Except as provided below, final plans and reports as approved shall be binding
on the applicants and any successors in title so long as PBD zoning applies to
the land.
(7) Expiration of time limits on planned business development site plan approvals.
(a) The Planning Board may require that certain actions be taken within
specified time frames, as a condition of approval of the site development
plan.
(b) If actions required in any approval of a site plan in a PBD are not taken
within any time limits set in connection with such approval, the Planning
Board shall review the circumstances and prepare a written report
specifying the circumstances and recommending that:
§ 235-31.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-31.1
235:50
§ 235-32. Floodplain Overlay Zone (FPO).
§ 235-33. Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone (WPO).
[1] Site plan approval for the entire area be continued with revised time
limits;
[2] Site plan approval be continued for part of the area, with or without
revised time limits;
[3] Site plan approval be rescinded; or
[4] Other appropriate actions taken.
(c) Such recommendations shall include proposals for appropriate action in
respect to any legal instruments in the case.
A. The Floodplain Overlay Zone is shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Batavia
for information purposes only to identify potential areas of special flood hazard, to
ensure coordinated review of zoning and flood damage prevention regulations, and
to minimize the threat of flood damages. Exact boundaries of the special flood
hazard areas can be found on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's most
current Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or equivalent map for the Town of
Batavia (Community Number 360278).
B. In addition to this chapter, areas within special flood hazard areas are regulated by
Chapter 112, Flood Damage Prevention, of this Code, which is administered by the
Building Inspector or other designee of the Town Board. These requirements are in
addition to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
A. Purpose. The Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone (WPO) is established to preserve
and protect those areas of the town which are important to ensuring a safe and
healthful drinking water supply for the Batavia area, local residents, employees and
the general public through the preservation of the town's groundwater sources. The
designation of two Wellhead Protection Areas (WPA) within the Wellhead
Protection Overlay Zone and the careful regulation of activities with these zones
will reduce the potential for groundwater contamination. The Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone will preserve and maintain the existing and potential groundwater
supplies, aquifers, and aquifer recharge areas of the town and protect them from
adverse development or land use practices. The Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone
will also conserve the natural resources of the town and prevent pollution.
B. General process. The Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone shall be considered as
overlaying other districts as shown on the Zoning Map for the Town of Batavia.
Any use not permitted in the underlying zoning districts shall not be permitted in
the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone. Any uses permitted in underlying zoning
districts shall be permitted in the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, except where
the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone prohibits or imposes greater or additional
restrictions and requirements. In those instances where the Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone prohibits a use, such use shall not be allowed. In those instances
where the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone contains additional or greater
restrictions or regulations, such uses shall not be allowed until such restrictions and/
§ 235-31.1 ZONING § 235-33
235:51
or regulations are complied with. In any cases where conflicts arise between these
regulations and any other existing regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall
apply.
C. Zone boundaries. Where the bounds of a particular Wellhead Protection Overlay
Zone or any Wellhead Protection Areas as delineated on the Zoning Map are in
doubt, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question or his
official designee to show that the boundaries differ from those that are indicated. At
the request of the owner(s) whose land has been designated as part of a Wellhead
Protection Overlay Zone, the town may engage a professional hydrogeologist or
geologist to determine more accurately the location and extent of an aquifer or
recharge area and may charge the owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the
investigation. Based upon acceptable documentation that the boundary of a
Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone should be modified, the Town Board may
consider amendment of such district boundary on the Town of Batavia Zoning Map
pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter.
D. Determination of presence and significance of the Wellhead Protection Overlay
Zone. For the purposes of this Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, there are hereby
established within the Town of Batavia certain Wellhead Protection Areas which
consist of any aquifer, the land above an aquifer, and significant aquifer recharge
areas. The establishment of these areas is confirmed by information set forth in the
City of Batavia Wellhead Protection Study (DATE) and recommendations by the
Wellhead Protection Project Technical Committee and the Water Quality Advisory
Committee. These Wellhead Protection Areas are delineated on the Wellhead
Protection Area Map and are described as follows:
(1) Wellhead Protection Area 1 (WPA1). As delineated, Wellhead Protection
Area 1 shall include those areas within the Primary Wellhead Protection Area
delineated WPA1 on the Wellhead Protection Area Map.
(2) Wellhead Protection Area 2 (WPA2). As delineated, Wellhead Protection
Area 2 shall include those areas outside of Wellhead Protection Area 1 but
within the area delineated as Secondary Wellhead Protection Area or Wellhead
Protection Area 2 (WPA2) on the Wellhead Protection Area Map.
E. Compliance with SEQR for actions within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone.
Wellhead Protection Area 1 (WPA1) is hereby designated as a critical
environmental area pursuant to the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQR), 6 NYCRR 617.4(h) and 617.12(12). As such, any unlisted action under
SEQR shall automatically be reviewed as a Type 1 action. Refer to 6 NYCRR
617.11 for specific review criteria for Type 1 actions.
F. Use regulations for the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone.
(1) Prohibited uses and activities. Within all of the Wellhead Protection Areas of
the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, the following uses and activities are
specifically prohibited:
(a) Sanitary landfills, including construction and demolition debris landfills;
(b) Junkyards or motor vehicle salvage operations;
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:52
(c) Outside storage of road salt or other de-icing chemicals;
(d) Disposal of snow that contains de-icing materials and that has been
transported from areas outside the Wellhead Protection Overlay District;
(e) Storage of animal manure, not being used for the primary purpose of
agriculture;
(f) Surface land application of septage, sludge, or human excreta; and
(g) The discharge, surface land application or disposal of any hazardous
substance, hazardous waste, petroleum, or radioactive material.
(2) Permitted uses. All uses currently permitted in the underlying district are
permitted in the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone subject to the additional
requirements as indicated in Subsection F(3).
(3) Additional requirements for the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone. The
following requirements and standards shall be observed for proposed land uses
other than single- and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses located
within any portion of the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone or particular
Wellhead Protection Areas, described as follows:
(a) Runoff/drainage.
[1] Post-development conditions for a proposed use within a Wellhead
Protection Overlay Zone shall result in no increase in the frequency
and occurrence of stormwater runoff from predevelopment
conditions. In addition, the off-site impacts of erosion and
sedimentation from the proposed use shall not be any greater during
and following land disturbance activities than under predevelopment
conditions.
[2] Stormwater runoff shall be treated to prevent water quality
degradation of the receiving water body, including groundwater.
[3] All stormwater runoff from impervious surface areas shall be
diverted to a nearby surface water body. If a nearby surface water
body is unavailable or if other physical constraints prevent such
diversion, all stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces shall be
recharged into the groundwater on the site via infiltration trenches
or infiltration basins.
[4] The stormwater recharge area shall be at the farthest point practical
from the municipal wells.
[5] Supplemental stormwater management practices, such as open
vegetated swales, vegetated buffer zones or filter strips, may be used
to compliment the infiltration trenches and infiltration basins.
Supplemental stormwater management practices shall not be used as
a substitute for infiltration trenches and infiltration basins.
[6] The design of infiltration trenches, infiltration basins, open
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33
235:53
vegetated swales, vegetated buffer zones and filter strips shall be
in accordance with the design criteria for these stormwater
management techniques as described in Chapter 6 of the Department
of Environmental Conservation (DEC) manual "Reducing the
Impacts of Stormwater Runoff from New Development."
[7] Dry wells shall be used only where other methods may not be
feasible, as determined by the Planning Board, due to physical
constraints of the site. Dry wells shall be equipped with oil, grease,
and sediment traps.
[8] Practices for controlling erosion and sedimentation shall be selected
from the New York Guidelines for Urban Erosion and Sediment
Control and the DEC manual "Reducing the Impacts of Stormwater
Runoff from New Development."
[9] The applicant shall prepare a stormwater management and erosion
control plan using the outline presented in Chapter 4 of the DEC
manual "Reducing the Impacts of Stormwater Runoff from New
Development." The stormwater management and erosion control
plan prepared by the applicant shall include, at a minimum, the
following components:
[a] Background information about the scope of the project;
[b] A statement of stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control objectives;
[c] A comparison of post-development stormwater runoff
conditions with predevelopment conditions. The applicant shall
submit calculations of the volume of stormwater runoff and
peak stormwater discharge rates under predevelopment and
post-development conditions for each of the following: the oneyear,
two-year, ten-year and one-hundred-year twenty-fourhour
storm event. The applicant shall use the methodology
described in the Soil Conservation Service's TR-20 or TR-55;
[d] A description of proposed structural and vegetative stormwater
management measures, including treatment for the first flush,
to ensure that the quantity, temporal distribution, and quality of
stormwater runoff during and after development is not
substantially altered from predevelopment conditions. The
applicant shall apply the standards and criteria for designing
stormwater facilities to capture and treat the first flush as
described in Chapters 5 and 6 of the DEC manual "Reducing
the Impacts of Stormwater Runoff from New Development";
[e] A description of the temporary erosion and sediment control
facilities to be used during land clearing, land grading, and the
construction phase;
[f] A description of permanent erosion and sediment control
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:54
facilities;
[g] A description of the implementation schedule for staging of all
stormwater management facilities that includes coordination
with staging of erosion and sediment control facilities and
construction activities; and
[h] A maintenance plan that describes the type and frequency of
maintenance required by the stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, arrangements for
ensuring long-term maintenance of stormwater management
and erosion and sediment control facilities, backup contingency
plans, and the person(s) responsible for implementing the
maintenance plan and performing the described maintenance.
[10] The Planning Board may require that, in addition to the preparation
of a stormwater management and erosion control plan, the applicant
prepare a concise summary report that presents the pertinent
information and conclusions contained in the stormwater
management and erosion control plan.
(b) Petroleum storage. Proposed uses within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone are required to meet the following standards for storage of
petroleum in new or replacement storage tanks and/or containers:
[1] The storage of petroleum in underground or aboveground tanks with
a combined storage capacity of over 1,100 gallons shall be in
accordance with the standards of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations for Petroleum
Bulk Storage, 6 NYCRR 614. Additional design requirements for
underground and aboveground storage tanks shall include the
following:
[a] Piping for all underground storage tanks and all aboveground
storage tanks shall be equipped with secondary containment
constructed of product-tight materials.
[b] Piping for all underground storage tanks and all aboveground
storage tanks shall be equipped with a leak monitoring system.
[c] All aboveground tanks shall be equipped with a dike, berm or
other secondary containment structure constructed of material
that is impervious to the product stored in the tank. This
containment structure shall be designed to contain at least
120% of the volume of the largest tank enclosed by the
containment structure.
[d] All outdoor storage areas, loading docks, and product transfer
areas shall be equipped with a permanent covering of roof to
protect tanks from adverse weather conditions and to prevent
stormwater from accumulating in the containment areas.
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33
235:55
[e] All loading docks and product transfer areas shall be equipped
with a spill pump which empties into a holding tank to catch
and store any spilled petroleum and accumulated stormwater
within the containment area until such time as it can be
removed and properly treated and/or disposed of.
[f] All aboveground tanks shall be equipped with visual gauges to
monitor fluid levels.
[g] Storage areas shall be secured against unauthorized entry.
[2] Indoor storage areas for petroleum shall meet all applicable local,
state and federal requirements and the design requirements listed
below. Indoor storage areas for petroleum used for on-site
consumption and the indoor storage of petroleum in quantities
necessary for household use (operating lawn care equipment,
recreational vehicles, snow blowers, etc.) shall be exempt from the
design requirements for indoor storage areas.
[a] Petroleum shall be stored in containers equipped with a lid.
[b] All storage areas shall be equipped with a pad and a dike, berm
or other secondary containment structure constructed of
material that is impervious to the product stored in the tank.
This containment structure shall be designed to contain at least
120% of the volume of the largest container enclosed by the
structure.
[c] No storage areas shall be located in proximity to floor drains.
[d] Storage areas shall be secured against unauthorized entry.
[3] A spill control plan shall be prepared for any facility that stores
petroleum. Facilities that only store petroleum for on-site
consumption and the storage of petroleum in quantities necessary for
normal household use (operating lawn care equipment, recreational
vehicles, snow blowers, etc.) shall be exempt from the requirement
to prepare a spill control plan. The spill control plan shall be posted
in a conspicuous location. The spill control plan shall include, at a
minimum, the following components:
[a] A site plan illustrating the direction of stormwater and
groundwater flow;
[b] A description of operational procedures;
[c] A description of potential spill sources;
[d] The spill response training program for the employees;
[e] The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons
responsible for responding to the spill;
[f] The procedures for containing and cleaning up the spill; and
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:56
[g] The procedure for notifying the Town of Batavia Fire
Department, Town of Batavia Town Supervisor, Town of
Batavia Water and Sewer Personnel, and other appropriate
local and state officials of a spill, leak or other reportable
discharge as defined in 6 NYCRR 613.
[4] Following site development, periodic inspections of facilities
involved in petroleum bulk storage may be performed to ensure that
these facilities pose no threat to the water supply. To conduct such
periodic inspections, the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
will notify the owner and/or his/her designee(s) by telephone and in
writing of the planned inspection. The owner and/or his/her
designee(s) shall grant the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
access to the site and the petroleum bulk storage facilities for the
purpose of a periodic inspection at a mutually agreeable time within
72 hours of notice of the inspection. This aforementioned
requirement for prior notification may be waived and the site
accessed immediately by the Building Inspector if he/she has reason
to suspect an imminent threat exists to the public health, safety and/
or welfare. The purpose of these inspections is to ascertain whether
petroleum bulk storage facilities are in good operating condition and
the facility is in compliance with the applicable requirements and
standards of this section.
(c) Hazardous substance storage. Proposed uses within the Wellhead
Protection Overlay Zone are required to meet the following standards for
storage of hazardous substances in new or replacement storage tanks or
containers:
[1] The underground storage or outdoor, aboveground storage of
hazardous substances, including pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers, is prohibited.
[2] Indoor storage areas for quantities of hazardous substances,
including pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, that total more than
250 pounds dry weight or 50 gallons liquid shall meet all applicable
federal and state requirements and the additional design standards
and requirements listed below. The indoor storage of hazardous
substances, including pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers, in their
original, sealed containers for the purposes of resale, shall only be
exempt from the following three requirements and standards for
indoor storage areas as specified in this Subsection F(3)(c),
Hazardous substance storage: Subsection F(3)(c)[2][c], [d] and [e].
[a] All products shall be stored in product-tight containers
equipped with a lid.
[b] Each container shall be clearly and visibly labeled.
[c] Drip pans shall be located under the spigots of drums or
containers that are stored in a horizontal position on racks to
catch spills/leaks. Drip pans shall be routinely emptied and the
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33
235:57
contents recycled, reused, or disposed of appropriately.
[d] All storage areas shall be equipped with a pad and a dike, berm
or other containment structure constructed of material that is
impervious to the product stored in the tank, This containment
structure shall be designed to contain at least 120% of the
volume of the largest containers enclosed by the structure.
[e] Storage areas shall be inspected by the applicant at least once a
week for signs of leaks or spills and the aisle space between
containers shall be adequate to allow for inspections. A
summary report, noting the results of weekly inspections, shall
be prepared every six months and sent to the Building
Inspector.
[f] Absorbent materials such as kitty litter, sawdust, soil, or clay
shall be kept on hand for emergency cleanups and containment
in the event of a spill.
[g] No storage areas shall be located in proximity to floor drains.
[h] Storage areas shall be secured against unauthorized entry.
[i] An accurate log or inventory of materials stored on site shall be
maintained and provided to the Building Inspector annually.
[3] A spill control plan shall be approved and shall be posted in a
conspicuous location. The indoor storage of hazardous substances,
including pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, in quantities
necessary for normal household use or agricultural use, shall be
exempt from the requirement to prepare a spill control plan. The
spill control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following
components:
[a] A site plan illustrating the direction of stormwater and
groundwater flow;
[b] A description of operational procedures;
[c] A description of potential spill sources;
[d] The spill response training program for the employees;
[e] The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons
responsible for responding to the spill; and
[f] The procedure for notifying the Town of Batavia Fire
Department, Town of Batavia Town Supervisor, Town of
Batavia Water and Sewer Personnel, and other appropriate
local and state officials of a spill, leak or other reportable
discharge as defined in 6 NYCRR 595 and 597.
[4] Following site development, periodic inspections of facilities that
use or store hazardous substances may be performed to ensure that
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:58
these facilities pose no threat to the water supply. To conduct such
periodic inspections, the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
will notify the owner and/or his/her designee(s) by telephone and
in writing of the planned inspection. The owner and/or his/her
designee(s) shall grant the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
access to the site and the hazardous substance storage facilities for
the purpose of a periodic inspection at a mutually agreeable time
within 72 hours of notice of the inspection. This aforementioned
requirement for prior notification may be waived and the site
accessed immediately by the Building Inspector if he/she has reason
to suspect an imminent threat exists to the public health, safety
and/or welfare. The purpose of these inspections is to ascertain
whether aboveground storage containers for hazardous substances
are in good operating condition and the facility is in compliance with
the applicable requirements and standards of this section.
(d) Individual sewage treatment system design requirements.
[1] Individual sewage treatment systems shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the Genesee County Sanitary Code and
any applicable rules and regulations of the New York Health
Department or Department of Environmental Conservation.
[2] A proposed use in the Wellhead Protection Overlay District is also
required to meet the following standards for the design of residential
and nonresidential individual sewage treatment systems:
[a] No floor drains shall be connected to the septic system.
[b] All individual sewage treatment systems installed to serve uses
other than one- and two-family dwelling units shall be
equipped with oil/grease separators to prevent clogging of the
leaching field by fats, grease, and oil.
(e) Monitoring wells.
[1] At is sole discretion, the Planning Board may require the provision
of monitoring wells as a condition of site plan approval for uses
located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District. When
monitoring wells are required, a minimum of three groundwater
monitoring wells shall be installed prior to site development for the
purposes of evaluating predevelopment and post-development
groundwater quality, groundwater flow direction, and groundwater
elevation.
[2] As other regulations and setback requirements permit, one well shall
be installed near an upgradient property boundary, one well shall be
installed near a downgradient property boundary, and one well shall
be installed between the two upgradient and downgradient wells to
facilitate the calculation of groundwater flow direction.
[3] The specific location of the monitoring wells shall be determined by
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33
235:59
a professional geologist, hydrogeologist, engineer, or other qualified
expert trained and experienced in hydrogeology. The location of the
monitoring wells shall be approved by the Planning Board prior to
site development.
[4] Prior to site development, a groundwater sample shall be collected
from each of the monitoring wells and submitted to a New York
State certified analytical laboratory for analysis of nitrate-nitrogen,
sodium, chloride, coliform bacteria and other appropriate parameters
that represent each of the petroleum or hazardous substances
proposed to be used, stored or disposed of on site. Groundwater
elevations shall also be recorded and groundwater flow direction
shall be calculated.
[5] Three months after site development has been completed, a
groundwater sample shall be collected from each of the monitoring
wells and submitted to a New York State certified analytical
laboratory for analysis of each of the parameters tested for under
predevelopment conditions. Groundwater elevations shall also be
recorded and groundwater flow direction shall be calculated.
[6] An initial summary report shall be prepared that describes
predevelopment and post-development groundwater quality,
groundwater elevation and groundwater flow direction. This initial
summary report shall be submitted to the Building Inspector within
six months of the completion of site development.
[7] Following the submission of the initial summary report, the
applicant shall begin a monitoring program that includes one
sampling event each year during the wet season, defined as the
months of March, April, May, September, October and November.
Groundwater samples shall be collected from each of the monitoring
wells and submitted to a New York State certified analytical
laboratory for analysis of the parameters evaluated under
predevelopment conditions and/or additional parameters to reflect a
change in the type of substances used, stored, or disposed of on site.
Groundwater elevations shall be recorded, and groundwater flow
direction shall be calculated. An annual summary report that
describes trends in groundwater quality and groundwater flow
direction shall be provided to the Building Inspector within three
months of the annual sampling event.
[8] The costs of installing and operating the monitoring wells, including
sampling and laboratory analysis, and preparing the required
summary reports shall be borne by the owner or applicant. Access to
the monitoring wells shall be provided to the Planning Board and/or
its designee(s) for purposes of any additional water quality sampling
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
(f) Floor drains. Floor drains for other than one- and two-family dwellings
are required to be connected to a holding tank or an oil and grit separating
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:60
tank that is connected to either an approved on-site wastewater treatment
system or a municipal sanitary sewer system. Floor drains which are
connected to the sanitary sewer must meet discharge limits and permit
requirements established by the authority having jurisdiction.
(g) Hazardous waste storage and disposal.
[1] Proposed uses within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone are
required to meet the following standards for hazardous waste
disposal:
[a] The underground storage or outdoor, aboveground storage of
hazardous waste is prohibited.
[b] The owner or applicant shall demonstrate the availability and
feasibility of indoor storage and proper disposal methods which
are in conformance with all applicable local, state and federal
laws for any hazardous waste to be produced in quantities
greater than those associated with normal household or
agricultural use. The owner or applicant shall also demonstrate
that wastes will be properly handled and stored until disposed
of by a licensed waste hauler.
[2] If a spill control plan is required by this chapter for the storage of
petroleum or hazardous substances, the spill control plan shall
include provisions for responding to an accidental discharge of
hazardous waste and shall include, at a minimum, the following
additional components that specifically address hazardous waste:
[a] A description of potential hazardous waste spill sources;
[b] The hazardous waste spill response training program for the
employees;
[c] The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the person or
persons responsible for responding to the hazardous waste spill;
[d] The procedures for containing and cleaning up the hazardous
waste spill; and
[e] The procedure for notifying the Fire Department, Building
Inspector, Town of Batavia officials and other appropriate local
and state officials of a hazardous waste spill, leak or other
reportable discharge as defined in 6 NYCRR 372, Hazardous
Waste Manifest System and Related Standards for Generators,
Transporters, and Facilities.
[3] Following site development periodic inspections of facilities that use
or store hazardous substances may be performed to ensure that these
facilities pose no threat to the water supply. To conduct such
periodic inspections, the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
will notify the owner and/or his/her designee(s) by telephone and in
writing of the planned inspection. The owner and/or his/her
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33
235:61
designee(s) shall grant the Building Inspector or his/her designee(s)
access to the site and the hazardous substance storage facilities for
the purpose of a periodic inspection at a mutually agreeable time
within 72 hours of notice of the inspection. This aforementioned
requirement for prior notification may be waived and the site
accessed immediately by the Building Inspector if he/she has reason
to suspect an imminent threat exists to the public health, safety and/
or welfare.
(h) Road salt storage and application.
[1] Safe alternatives to road salt, defined as sodium chloride, such as
calcium chloride and sand, shall be used whenever possible. Signs
shall be posted along roadways that receive no salt or reduced salt
application to inform motorists.
[2] A proposed use within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone is
required to meet the following standards:
[a] The outdoor storage of road salt is prohibited; and
[b] The use of more than a 1:5 ratio of salt to sand (20% salt is a
sand and salt mixture) is discouraged.
(i) Pesticide application.
[1] A proposed use within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone is
required to meet the following standards:
[a] The application of liquid or solid pesticides, herbicides, or
chemical fertilizers shall be performed in accordance with the
recommendations and label of the manufacturer.
[b] Nonagricultural use of liquid or solid fertilizers, pesticides, and
herbicides shall be in conformance with the Best Management
Practices described in materials developed by the Cornell
Cooperative Extension which are available from the Municipal
Clerk's office and the Planning Board.
[c] Empty containers and unused pesticides and herbicides shall be
disposed of properly.
[d] Property owners who enlist the services of a commercial
pesticide or herbicide applicator shall ensure that the applicator
is certified and licensed by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
[e] Agricultural use of liquid or solid fertilizers, including the land
application of manure, and the use of liquid or solid pesticides
and herbicides shall be in conformance with the Best
Management Practices described in the DEC manual
"Controlling Agricultural Nonpoint Source Water Pollution in
New York State - A Guide to the Selection of Best
§ 235-33 BATAVIA CODE § 235-33
235:62
§ 235-33.1. Table of uses. [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
A summary of the permitted uses and uses allowed with a special use permit for each
zoning district is provided in Schedule B, which is incorporated herein and made a part
of this chapter.40
Management Practices to Improve and Protect Water Quality"
and/or Best Management Practices as developed by the New
York State Soil and Water Conservation Committee and
implemented by the use of farm plans prepared by the Genesee
County Soil and Water Conservation District.
[2] As applicable, all pesticide and herbicide use and application shall
be under permit as provided in the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law, Article 33.
[a] Disposal of containers or unused pesticides and herbicides is
prohibited except in accordance with the permit issued as
provided in the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law, Article 33.
[b] Disposal of water used for makeup water or for washing of
equipment is prohibited except pursuant to permit issued as
provided in the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law, Article 33.
[c] Use of streams or watercourses for makeup water or washing
equipment used in conjunction with pesticides and herbicides is
prohibited.
40. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-33 ZONING § 235-33.1
235:63

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 235-34. Off-street parking space requirements.
For every building hereafter erected, altered or changed in use, there shall be provided
at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces set forth under this section.
All off-street parking for nonresidential and multifamily use shall be designed in such a
manner as to allow vehicles to exit onto a street without backing out onto it.
A. Residential uses.
(1) One- and two-family dwellings (inclusive of the driveway):
(a) Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit with three or fewer bedrooms;
or
(b) Three parking spaces for each dwelling unit with four or more bedrooms.
(2) Multifamily dwelling (exclusive of driveway, except with Planning Board
approval):
(a) One parking space for each efficiency unit.
(b) Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit with two or fewer bedrooms.
(c) Two and one-half parking spaces for each unit with three or more
bedrooms.
(3) Mobile home park residential parking standards are set forth in Chapter 150,
Mobile Home Parks.
(4) Home occupations: the number of parking spaces required for the existing
residential use (see above), plus whatever additional parking spaces are
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
B. Hotel/motel: three parking spaces, plus one space for every guest room.
C. Places of public assembly: one parking space for every three seats.
D. Offices and banks: four parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
E. General retail: five parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
F. Restaurant, eating and drinking establishment (other than drive-in, see Subsection
H below): one parking space for every three seats.
G. Industrial, wholesale, warehouse, storage, freight, and trucking uses: one parking
space for every motor vehicle used directly in the business, plus additional
employee and visitor parking as required by the Planning Board.
H. Drive-in, service and unspecified uses: as required by the Planning Board, based
upon use intensity, turnover, customers, employees and vehicles used.
§ 235-34 ZONING § 235-35
235:65
§ 235-35. Off-street loading space requirements.
Every building occupied for the purpose of business or industry shall provide adequate
space for off-street loading and unloading vehicles as determined by the Planning Board.
§ 235-36. Modification of parking and loading requirements.
The Planning Board, under its powers of site plan review and approval, may modify the
requirements for parking and loading spaces herein upon good cause being shown.
§ 235-37. Motor vehicle, farm and heavy equipment related uses.
Gasoline stations, gasoline station-markets, motor vehicle repair shops, motor vehicle
sales and service, truck stop, trucking terminal, heavy machinery and truck sales and
service, farm equipment sales and service, recreational vehicles sales and service and
drive-in business shall require a special use permit and shall comply with the following:
§ 235-38. Public utility facilities.
Public utility installations (other than commercial communication towers, see § 235-52)
shall require a special use permit and shall comply with the following:
A. Such uses shall be effectively buffered from existing residential uses in a manner
that is acceptable to the Planning Board. [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
B. Lot size shall be at least 40,000 square feet.
C. Lot frontage shall be at least 200 feet.
D. Lot depth shall be at least 150 feet.
E. Pumps, other service devices, and aboveground fuel and oil storage shall be located
at least 30 feet from all lot lines.
F. Any underground storage of fuel and oil of sufficient volume not regulated by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation shall be located at
least 30 feet from all lot lines.
G. Motor vehicle and equipment parts and dismantled vehicles and equipment shall be
stored within a building or structure, or within a fence of a height to be determined
by the Planning Board, within its sole discretion, so as to prevent public view of
such items from any direction. All work connected with the uses covered by this
section shall be performed to the extent possible indoors.
H. There shall be no more than two access driveways from any street. Maximum width
of each access driveway shall be 30 feet.
A. Such facility shall be surrounded by a fence approved by the Planning Board.
B. The facility shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the Planning Board.
C. To the extent practicable, equipment shall be stored so as not to be visible from
surrounding properties.
§ 235-35 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38
235:66
§ 235-38.1. Wind energy systems. [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
D. Any other requirements as determined by the Planning Board.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve and protect public health and
safety without significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a
wind energy system and to allow for the orderly development of land, and to protect
property values and aesthetic conditions. This section does not repeal, annul,
impair, or interfere with any existing ordinance or local law.
B. Authority. The Town Board of the Town of Batavia enacts this section under the
authority granted by:
(1) Article IX of the New York State Constitution, § 2(c)(6) and (10).
(2) New York Statute of Local Governments, § 10(1) and (7).
(3) New York Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10, Subdivision 1(i) and (ii) and § 10,
Subdivision 1a(6), (11), (12), and (14).
(4) New York Town Law § 130, Subdivision 1 (Building Code), Subdivision 3
(Electrical Code), Subdivision 5 (Fire Prevention), Subdivision 7 (Use of
streets and highways), Subdivision 7-a (Location of Driveways), Subdivision
11 (Peace, good order and safety), Subdivision 15 (Promotion of public
welfare), Subdivision 15-a (Excavated lands), Subdivision 16 (Unsafe
buildings), Subdivision 19 (Trespass), and Subdivision 25 (Building lines).
(5) The supersession authority of New York Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1d(3), specifically as it relates to determining which body shall
have the power to grant variances under this section to the extent such grant of
power is different than under Town Law § 267.
(6) New York Town Law § 64, Subdivision 17-a (Protection of aesthetic
interests), and Subdivision 23 (General powers).
(7) The State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA").
C. Intent. The Town of Batavia intends to accommodate the use of alternative and
sustainable energy sources, including wind, while protecting the quality of life of
residential neighborhoods and the viability of existing businesses, including
agriculture. These regulations are intended to permit noncommercial wind energy
systems subject to suitable restrictions regarding setbacks and height. Commercial
wind energy systems are not permitted at this time but may be permitted in the
future with the Town's passage of additional zoning amendments to accommodate
such systems.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that is
operated primarily (51% or more) to put energy into the electric grid, and/or has a
nameplate capacity of more than 50 kilowatts (kW), and/or a total height of more
than 175 feet, and/or a blade length of more than 30 feet.
§ 235-38 ZONING § 235-38.1
235:67
ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE (EMI) — The interference to
communication systems created by the scattering of electromagnetic signals.
NONCOMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system that
is operated primarily (51% or more) for on-site (may be for more than one parcel)
consumption, and has a nameplate capacity of 50 kW or less, and a total height of
175 feet or less, and a blade length of 30 feet or less. These are also defined as wind
energy conversion systems (WECS) or small wind energy production facilities.
ROTOR DIAMETER — The largest diameter formed by the blades when
assembled and mounted on the wind energy system.
SHADOW FLICKER — The alternating pattern of sun and shade caused by wind
tower blades casting a shadow.
STRAY CURRENT — The inappropriate application of current to the ground or
earth. For the purpose of this section, it is the measurable addition of current to
ground resulting from improper installation or deterioration of the electrical portion
of a wind energy system. The National Electrical Safety Code set the conditions that
grounding connection points shall be so arranged that under normal circumstances
there will be no objectionable flow of current over the grounding conductor. The
National Electrical Safety Code set the conditions that earth (ground) should not
be part of a supply circuit for both safety and service reasons. The most current
revision of the National Electrical Safety Code shall apply.
TOTAL HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of a wind
turbine blade when the tip is at its highest point.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM—Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers
energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any base, blade,
foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire,
substation, maintenance or control facilities, or any other components used in the
system. A wind energy system can consist of one or more wind towers. Wind
energy systems do not include small lawn decoration, pond aerators, or remaining
portions of mechanical water pumping windmills.
WIND TOWER — The monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a
wind turbine generator.
E. Compliance. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain, modify, or
operate a wind energy system that is not in compliance with this section or with any
condition contained in a special use or zoning permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
F. Commercial wind energy systems shall not be allowed in any area or zone within
the Town of Batavia.
G. Permit requirements.
(1) Special use permit. A special use permit is required for noncommercial wind
energy systems and for any wind energy system or a component thereof,
except for noncommercial wind energy systems located in county-adopted,
state-certified agricultural districts for primary on-farm use.
(2) Zoning permit. A zoning permit and site plan review are required for the
installation of any wind tower that is part of a wind energy system.
§ 235-38.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38.1
235:68
(3) Ownership. In cases where the owner of the property is not the applicant/
owner of the wind energy conversion system, a clear order of liability will be
established. A signed and notarized legal document from the owner of record
of the property on which a wind energy system will be located shall be
required which acknowledges liability for compliance to all requirements of
this section if the applicant/owner of the wind energy system is unable to
comply.
(4) Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter expires if:
(a) The wind energy system is not installed and functioning within two years
from the date the permit is issued; or
(b) The wind energy system is out of service or otherwise unused for a
continuous twelve-month period.
(5) Fees.
(a) The application for a special use permit for a noncommercial wind energy
system, except for noncommercial wind energy systems located in
country adopted, state-certified agricultural districts, must be
accompanied by the fee required for a special use permit.
(b) The application for a zoning permit for each tower in a noncommercial
wind energy system must be accompanied by the fee required for a
zoning permit.
H. Restoration requirement (see also "Restoration" section under "Agricultural
mitigation").41
(1) A wind energy system that is out of service for a continuous twelve-month
period or any wind energy system found to be unsafe by the Building Code
Enforcement Officer and not repaired by the owner to meet federal, state and
local safety standards within six months will be deemed to have been
abandoned. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of
abandonment in the form of a letter to the owner of a wind energy system that
is deemed to have been abandoned. The Zoning Enforcement Officer will
withdraw the notice of abandonment if the owner provides information within
30 days from the date of the notice that causes the Zoning Enforcement Officer
to determine that the wind energy system has not been abandoned.
(2) The owner of a wind energy system must provide the Zoning Enforcement
Officer with a written notice of termination of operations if the operation of a
wind energy system is terminated.
(3) Within three months of receipt of a notice of abandonment or within six
months of providing a notice of termination of operations, the owner of a wind
energy system must:
(a) Remove all wind turbines, aboveground improvements, and outdoor
storage;
41. Editor's Note: See § 235-38.IV(3).
§ 235-38.1 ZONING § 235-38.1
235:69
(b) Remove all foundations, pads, and underground electrical wires to a
depth of four feet below the surface of the ground;
(c) Remove all hazardous material as defined by NYSDEC from the property
and dispose of the hazardous material in accordance with federal and state
law; and
(d) Ensure that all disturbed areas are decompacted and the topsoil replaced
to original depth reestablishing original contours where possible.
I. Special use permit or zoning permit requirements. In addition to those criteria set
forth under other sections of this chapter, the Planning Board shall consider the
following factors when setting conditions upon special use permits or site plans
issued for all wind energy systems and may hire a professional engineer or
consultant to assist in the review of an application at the applicant's expense:
(1) Proposed ingress and egress.
(2) Proximity to transmission lines to link the system to the electric power grid.
(3) Number of wind towers and their location.
(4) Nature of land use on adjacent and nearby properties.
(5) Location of other wind energy systems in the surrounding area.
(6) Surrounding topography.
(7) Proximity to residential structures, residential zoning districts, or areas
identified for future residential use.
(8) Design characteristics that may reduce or eliminate visual obtrusiveness.
(9) Possible adverse effects on migratory birds, and other animals and wildlife.
(10) Possible adverse effects of stray voltage, interference with broadcast signals,
shadow flicker, and noise.
(11) Impact on the orderly development, property values, and aesthetic conditions.
(12) Possible adverse effects on groundwater quality or quantity.
(13) Recommendations of the County Planning Board.
(14) Any other factors that are relevant to the proposed system.
J. Standards.
(1) Location.
(a) A wind energy system may only be located in areas that are zoned
Agricultural-Residential (AG-R), Commercial (C), Industrial (I),
Industrial Park (IP) or Planned Business Development (PBD).
(2) Setbacks. Each wind tower in a wind energy system must be set back twice the
height of each wind tower or 10 rotor diameters, whichever is longer (as
§ 235-38.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38.1
235:70
measured from the center of the base of the tower), from the following:
(a) From any state forest, public park, or any other area that has been set
aside for the sole purpose of preserving a unique wildlife habitat or
natural formation recognized by a state, federal or local government.
(b) From important bird areas.
(c) From the property line of the parcel on which the wind tower is located.
(d) Of any public access building that is on any parcel.
(e) From the right-of-way of any public road.
(f) From any residence or building that is on any parcel.
K. Spacing and density. A wind tower must be separated from any other wind tower
by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the wind tower and by a
sufficient distance so that the wind tower does not interfere with the other wind
tower.
L. Structure. A wind tower must be of monopole construction to the extent practicable.
If monopole construction is not practicable, a wind tower must be of freestanding
construction to the extent practicable. If monopole or freestanding construction is
not practicable, a wind tower may be guyed.
M. Height. The total height of a wind energy system shall not exceed 175 feet. Other
maximum building/structure height restrictions within other sections of this chapter
are not applicable.
N. Clearance. The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of a wind turbine blade
when the blade is at its lowest point must be at least 30 feet.
O. Access and safety.
(1) Security. A wind tower, including any climbing aids, must be secured against
unauthorized access by means of a locked barrier. A security fence shall be
required at a minimum height of eight feet.
(2) Climbing aids. Monopole wind towers shall have all climbing aids and any
platforms locked and wholly inside the tower.
(3) Operational safety. Wind towers shall have an automatic braking, governing
or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, overspeeding and
excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades and turbine
components.
(4) Lightning. All wind towers shall provide a continuous electrical path to the
ground to protect the tower from lightning.
(5) Access roads. All wind energy systems shall use existing roads to provide
access to the facility site or, if new roads are needed, minimize the amount of
land used for new roads and locate them so as to minimize adverse
environmental impacts.
§ 235-38.1 ZONING § 235-38.1
235:71
P. Electrical wires.
(1) Location. All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system must be
located underground and must be located in a manner that does not interfere
with reasonably expected farm practices (see also "Construction" section
under "Agricultural mitigation").42
(2) Transmission lines. All wind energy systems shall combine transmission lines
and points of connection to local distribution lines.
(3) Substations. All wind energy systems shall connect the facility to existing
substations or, if new substations are needed, minimize the number of new
substations.
(4) Stray current. Properly installed wind energy systems will not generate this
form of electrical pollution, often referred to stray or ground current. A
measurement before and after installation to insure no gain in existing
electrical pollution is required for all wind energy systems over 10kw. Wind
energy systems of any size may be measured on an on/off basis to resolve any
complaint of electrical pollution. Mitigation must be immediate with the wind
energy system shut down until complete. Compliance with the National
Electric Safety Code for both installation and testing protocol is required.
Q. Lighting. A wind tower and turbine may not be artificially lighted unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), other
governmental agency, recognized safety guidelines (i.e., Mercy Flight), or the
Planning Board. If lighting is required, the lighting must comply with FAA
minimum requirements and, whenever possible, be at the lowest intensity allowed.
If more than one lighting alternative is available, the Town Planning Board reserves
the right to choose the least obtrusive lighting option available.
R. Buildings and outdoor storage. Any ancillary buildings and any outside storage
associated with a wind energy system must, to the extent reasonably possible, use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the facility
into the natural setting and existing environment (i.e., in an agricultural setting
accessory buildings could be designed to look like barns). Appropriate landscaping
or architecture shall be provided to screen accessory structures from roads and
adjacent residences.
S. Aesthetics.
(1) Appearance, color, and finish. The exterior surface of any visible components
of a wind energy system must be a nonreflective, neutral color.
(2) Visual impact assessment. The applicant shall complete a visual
environmental assessment form (Visual EAF - SEQR), as well as a visual
impact assessment of any proposed wind energy systems or any proposed
modifications to existing wind energy systems. The visual impact assessment
shall include assessment of visual impact from abutting properties and streets
of the tower base, guy wires, accessory buildings and any other element of the
42. Editor's Note: See § 235-38.1V(2).
§ 235-38.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38.1
235:72
wind energy system identified by the Town or County Planning Board or
Town Board.
T. Signs. No wind tower, turbine, building, or other structure associated with a wind
energy system may be used to advertise or promote any product or service. A
weather-resistant sign plate no greater than two square feet in size containing the
current owner or operator, emergency phone number, and current address of such
owner/operator shall be located on the exterior surface of the tower or of the fence
surrounding each tower and viewable by a Zoning Enforcement Officer. No other
word or graphic representation, other than appropriate warning signs, may be
placed on a wind turbine, tower, building, or other structure associated with a wind
energy system so as to be visible from any public road.
U. Agricultural mitigation. The following shall apply to construction areas for wind
energy systems located in county-adopted, state-certified agricultural districts. The
applicant is required to coordinate with the New York State Department of
Agriculture and Markets (Ag. and Markets) to develop an appropriate schedule for
milestone inspections to assure that the goals are being met. When required by the
Town, the applicant shall hire an environmental monitor to oversee the construction
and restoration in agricultural fields. The person or company hired as an
environmental monitor shall be approved by the Town and paid by the applicant.
(1) Siting.
(a) Minimize impacts to normal farming operations by locating structures
along field edges where possible.
(b) Locate access roads which cross agricultural fields along ridge tops where
possible to eliminate the need for cut and fill and reduce the risk of
creating drainage problems.
(c) Avoid dividing larger fields into smaller fields, which are more difficult
to farm, by locating access roads along the edge of agricultural fields
where possible.
(d) All existing drainage and erosion control structures such as diversions,
ditches, and tile lines shall be avoided or appropriate measures taken to
maintain the design and effectiveness of the existing structures. Any
structures disturbed during construction shall be repaired to as close to
original condition as possible, as soon as possible, unless such structures
are to be eliminated based on a new design.
(2) Construction.
(a) The surface of access roads constructed through agricultural fields shall
be level with the adjacent field surface.
(b) Where necessary, culverts and waterbars shall be installed to maintain
natural drainage patterns.
(c) All topsoil must be stripped from agricultural areas used for vehicle and
equipment traffic and parking. All vehicle and equipment traffic and
parking shall be limited to the access road and/or designated work areas
§ 235-38.1 ZONING § 235-38.1
235:73
such as tower sites and laydown areas. No vehicles or equipment will be
allowed outside the work area without prior approval from the landowner
and, when applicable, the environmental monitor.
(d) Topsoil from work areas (tower sites, parking areas, "open-cut" electric
cable trenches, along access roads) shall be stockpiled separate from
other excavated material (rock and/or subsoil). At least 50 feet of
temporary workspace is needed along "open-cut" electric cable trenches
for proper topsoil segregation. Topsoil stockpile areas shall be clearly
designated in the field and on the on-site "working set" of construction
drawings. Stockpiles will be located far enough from access roads and
work areas to eliminate the possibility of vehicles inadvertently
compacting this soil.
(e) In cropland, hayland and improved pasture, a minimum depth of 48
inches of cover will be required for all buried electric wires. In
unimproved grazing areas and land permanently devoted to pasture, a
minimum depth of 36 inches of cover will be required. In areas where the
depth of soil over bedrock ranges from zero to 48 inches, the electric
wires shall be buried entirely below the top of the bedrock or at the depth
specified for the particular land use, whichever is less. At no time will the
depth of cover be less than 24 inches below the soil surface.
(f) All excess subsoil and rock shall be removed from the site. On-site
disposal of such material may be allowed if approved by the landowner
and, when applicable, the environmental monitor, with appropriate
consideration given to any possible agricultural or environmental
impacts. (NOTE: Any permits necessary for disposal under local, state
and/or federal laws and regulations must be obtained by the contractor,
with the cooperation of the landowner when required.)
(g) In pasture areas, work areas will be fenced to prevent livestock access,
consistent with landowner agreements.
(h) All pieces of wire, bolts, and other unused metal objects will be picked
up and properly disposed of as soon as practical after the unloading and
packing of turbine components so that these objects will not be mixed
with any topsoil. (NOTE: Any permits necessary for disposal under local,
state and/or federal laws and regulations must be obtained by the
contractor, with the cooperation of the landowner when required.)
(i) Travel of all heavy equipment (including concrete trucks and erection
cranes) will be limited to designated access roads and gravel crane pads
at all times.
(j) Excess concrete will not be buried or left on the surface in active
agricultural areas. Concrete trucks will be washed outside of active
agricultural areas. (NOTE: Any permits necessary for disposal under
local, state and/or federal laws and regulations must be obtained by the
contractor, with the cooperation of the landowner when required.)
(3) Restoration.
§ 235-38.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38.1
235:74
(a) Restoration scheduling will be consistent with the seasonal limitations
identified by Ag. and Markets and will be incorporated into the project's
agricultural district notice of intent (if applicable) as well as the
stormwater management plan (general permit).
(b) Following construction, all disturbed agricultural areas will be
decompacted to a depth of 18 inches with a deep ripper or heavy-duty
chisel plow. In areas where the topsoil was stripped, soil decompaction
shall be conducted prior to topsoil replacement. Following decompaction,
all rocks four inches and larger in size will be removed from the surface
of the subsoil prior to replacement of the topsoil. The topsoil will be
replaced to original depth and the original contours will be reestablished
where possible. All rocks four inches and larger shall be removed from
the surface of the topsoil. Subsoil decompaction and topsoil replacement
should be avoided after October 1, unless approved on a site-specific
basis by the landowner in consultation with Ag. and Markets. All parties
involved should be cognizant that areas restored after October 1 may not
obtain sufficient growth to prevent erosion over the winter months. If
areas are to be restored after October 1, some provision should be made
to restore any eroded areas in the springtime, to establish proper growth.
(c) All access roads will be regraded to allow for farm equipment crossing
and to restore original surface drainage patterns, or other drainage pattern
incorporated into the design.
(d) All restored agricultural areas shall be seeded with the seed mix specified
by the landowner, in order to maintain consistency with the surrounding
areas.
(e) All surface or subsurface drainage structures damaged during
construction shall be repaired to as close to preconstruction conditions as
possible, unless said structures are to be removed as part of the project
design.
(f) Following restoration, all construction debris will be removed from the
site.
(4) Two-year monitoring and remediation.
(a) The applicant will provide a monitoring and remediation period of no less
than two years immediately following the completion of initial
restoration. The two-year period allows for the effects of climatic cycles
such as frost action, precipitation and growing seasons to occur, from
which various monitoring determinations can be made. The monitoring
and remediation phase will be used to identify any remaining agricultural
impacts associated with construction that are in need of mitigation and to
implement the follow-up restoration. The applicant will provide to the
Town all testing, data and reports necessary to document compliance with
Subsection U(4)(a) through (e) herein.
(b) General conditions to be monitored include topsoil thickness, relative
content of rock and large stones, trench settling, crop production,
§ 235-38.1 ZONING § 235-38.1
235:75
drainage and repair of severed fences, etc. Impacts will be identified
through on-site monitoring of all agricultural areas impacted by
construction and through contact with respective farmland operators and
Ag. and Markets.
(c) Topsoil deficiency and trench settling shall be mitigated with imported
topsoil that is consistent with the quality of topsoil on the affected site.
Excessive amounts of rock and oversized stone material will be
determined by a visual inspection of disturbed areas as compared to
portions of the same field located outside the construction area. All
excess rocks and large stones will be removed and disposed of by the
applicant.
(d) When the subsequent crop productivity within affected areas is less than
that of the adjacent unaffected agricultural land, the applicant as well as
other appropriate parties will help to determine the appropriate
rehabilitation measures to be implemented. Because conditions which
require remediation may not be noticeable at, or shortly after, the
completion of construction, the signing of a release form prior to the end
of the remediation period will not obviate the applicant's responsibility to
fully redress all project impacts.
(e) Subsoil compaction shall be tested using an appropriate soil penetrometer
or other soil compaction measuring device. Compaction tests will be
made for each soil type identified on the affected agricultural fields. The
subsoil compaction test results within the affected area will be compared
with those of the adjacent unaffected portion of the farm representative
subsoil density of the unaffected areas; additional shattering of the soil
profile will be performed using the appropriate equipment. Deep
shattering will be applied during periods of relatively low soil moisture to
ensure the desired mitigation and to prevent additional subsoil
compaction. Oversized stone/rock material which is uplifted to the
surface as a result of the deep shattering will be removed.
V. Noise. Audible noise due to the operation of any part of a wind energy system shall
not exceed 45 decibels (dBA) for any period of time when measured at any
residence, school, hospital, church, public park, public library or place of public
assembly. Audible noise due to the operation of any part of a wind energy system
shall not exceed 30 decibels (dba) when measured inside any residence.
W. Electromagnetic interference (EMI). No individual tower facility shall be installed
in any location where proximity with existing broadcast, retransmission or
reception antenna (including residential antenna) for radio, television, wireless
phone or other personal communication systems would produce electromagnetic
interference with signal transmission or reception. Alternatively, wind energy
systems shall be properly filtered or shielded in order to avoid electromagnetic
interference and shall comply with rules and regulations of the Federal
Communication Commission contained in 47 CFR Parts 15 and 18.
X. Insurance. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall provide the
Town proof of a level of insurance, to be determined by the Town Board in
§ 235-38.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-38.1
235:76
§ 235-39. Signs. [Amended 2-19-2003; 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
consultation with the Town's insurer and attorney, to cover damage or injury that
might result from the failure of a tower or towers or any other part or parts of the
generation and transmission facility. If the insured is not the owner of the property,
the applicant must show the owner of the property as coinsured and must allow
for the property owner to continue coverage if the applicant is unable to continue
coverage.
Y. Tax exemption. The Town hereby exercises its right to opt out of tax exemption
provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 487, pursuant to the authority granted by
Paragraph 8 of that law.
Z. Inspections. The Town Code Enforcement Officer or designated representative
shall have the right at any reasonable time to enter the premises on which a wind
energy system has been placed to inspect any and all parts of said installation. After
conducting said inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may order the owner of
the wind energy system to render it inoperative for reasons related to safety, noise,
electrical pollution or electromagnetic interference. If unable to contact the owner,
the Code Enforcement Officer may execute an emergency shutdown procedure
which has been provided in advance by the owner/applicant in the form of a clear
and concise check sheet as part of the permit process. All liability for the execution
of an emergency shutdown shall be with the owner of the wind energy system.
AA. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity which may violate any provision
of this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 235-65 of Town of Batavia Zoning Ordinance.
Any person, firm, corporation or entity which may violate any provision of this
section shall become liable to the Town for any actual expense or loss or damage
occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation; in addition to any actual losses
or damages sustained by the Town, such expense shall also include but not be
limited to statutory costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney fees in the event
legal action is commenced to enforce this section. The imposition of penalties
herein prescribed shall not preclude the Town or any person from instituting
appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent a violation of this section or to
restrain or enjoin the use or occupancy of premises or any part thereof in violation
of this section.
BB. Severability. The provisions of this section are severable, and the invalidity of any
section, subdivision, paragraph, or other part of this chapter shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remainder of the chapter.
A. General standards. Except as provided in Subsection B, every sign (other than those
identified in Subsection B below) shall require a zoning permit.
(1) Also, every sign shall be designed, attached, supported, and located in such a
manner as to:
(a) Not impair public safety.
(b) Not restrict clear vision between a sidewalk and street, a driveway and a
street or between two streets.
§ 235-38.1 ZONING § 235-39
235:77
(c) Not be confused with any traffic sign or signal.
(d) Not prevent free access to any door, window, or fire escape.
(2) Signs may be illuminated by a steady light provided that lighting does not
illuminate adjacent property. Flashing, oscillating and revolving signs are not
permitted, unless necessary for public safety or welfare.
B. Signs permitted in all districts without a zoning permit:
(1) Identification signs.
(a) One number and/or nameplate identifying residents, mounted on house,
apartment or mailbox, not exceeding one square foot in area.
(b) One lawn sign identifying residents, not exceeding one square foot, or
two square feet if double-faced. Such signs are to be nonilluminated
except by a light which is an integral part of a lamppost if used as a
support, with no advertising message thereon.
(c) One sign identifying the name of the farm owner or name of the farm not
exceeding 24 square feet in area and located not less than five feet from a
lot line.
(2) One "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not exceeding an area of six square feet.
Such sign shall not be greater than six feet in height and shall be located not
less than five feet from a lot line. Such signs shall be removed upon
completion of the sale or rental.
(3) Directional signs. No more than two directional signs shall be permitted per
street entrance to any lot. There shall be no limit to the number of directional
signs providing directional information interior to a lot. The maximum total
area for directional signs shall be eight square feet.
(4) Temporary signs. A sign used on a temporary basis to identify or announce an
activity or function such as a construction project and the specialists
concerned, elections, sporting events, carnivals, garage sales, meetings, etc.
Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall not be located less than
five feet from a lot line. Temporary signs shall be removed within 10 days after
the activity or function ends. Garage sales and farm produce sales temporary
signs used more than 60 days per year shall require a permit as set forth in
Subsection D(3).
(5) Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted in all nonresidential zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25% of the window
area on which such signs are displayed. Window panels separated by
mullions shall be considered as one continuous window area.
(b) Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area permitted for
other sign types.
(c) Any window sign hung or mounted within 12 inches of the interior of the
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:78
window will be assessed against the allowable twenty-five-percent total
window coverage area.
(6) Noncommercial speech signs; Residential Districts (AG-R, R, HR).
Noncommercial speech signs may be permitted in any residential district
without a sign permit, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot shall be
two.
(b) Of the total number of signs, only one shall be a window sign. No window
sign shall exceed 25% of the total window opening, or two square feet,
whichever is smaller.
(c) A building-mounted sign may not exceed two square feet in total area.
Any building mounted sign shall be located in proximity to an exterior
entrance.
(d) A freestanding sign, unless otherwise specified herein, shall:
[1] Not exceed six square feet in sign area;
[2] Not exceed four feet in height above grade;
[3] Maintain a minimum ground clearance of two feet;
[4] Not be closer to any lot line than five feet;
[5] Not interfere with vehicle site distances either from, along or to a
public way; and
[6] Not be illuminated, except indirectly.
(7) Noncommercial speech signs; Business and Industrial Districts (C, I, IP, PBD,
HC). Noncommercial speech signs associated with a residential use in a
business or industrial district shall comply with the standards specified in
Subsection B(6) above. Noncommercial speech signs associated with
nonresidential uses may be allowed in any business or industrial district
without a sign permit, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot shall be
two.
(b) Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
(c) Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not be closer to any lot
line than five feet.
(d) Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not exceed six feet in
height above grade level.
(e) Building-mounted noncommercial speech signs shall be located on the
first floor front facade of the structure.
(f) Noncommercial speech signs shall not be illuminated, except indirectly.
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:79
C. Permit requirements.
(1) Permits required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained
from the Zoning Officer for the erection and maintenance of all signs erected
or maintained within this jurisdiction and in accordance with other ordinance
or local laws of this jurisdiction. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a
permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign
involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner
and in a manner in accordance with all the other provisions of this section.
(2) Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign
or sign structure requiring such permit, construction documents shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer showing the dimensions, materials and required
details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other
pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be
erected and by engineering calculations signed and sealed by a registered
design professional where required by the New York State Building Code.
(3) Changes to signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or relocated
except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until a proper permit, if
required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of moveable parts or
components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes shall not be
deemed a structural alteration.
(4) Permit fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted within this jurisdiction.
D. Other signs permitted in Agricultural, Agricultural-Residential, Residential or
Hamlet Residential Districts. The following signs are permitted in AG-R, R or HR
Districts upon issuance of a zoning permit:
(1) One home occupation or skilled trade shop sign not exceeding four square feet
in area and located not less than five feet from a lot line.
(2) One sign identifying a mobile home park in an Agricultural-Residential
District, not exceeding 20 square feet in area and located not less than five feet
from a lot line.
(3) One sign identifying farm produce sales or garage sales not exceeding 12
square feet in area and located not less than five feet from a lot line when used
60 or more days per year.
(4) One sign identifying a school, church, public park or public building, not
exceeding 40 square feet in area on any one side and located not less than five
feet from a lot line.
(5) One business sign for uses which have a valid special use permit to operate.
Such sign may either be wall-mounted with a maximum size of 20 square feet
or freestanding with a maximum size of eight square feet per side.
Freestanding signs shall be limited in height to 25 feet and not be located
within 10 feet of a property line. The final location/placement of all signs for
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:80
uses allowed by special use permits in the AG-R and R Districts shall be
determined by the Planning Board.
E. Other signs permitted in Commercial, Industrial, or Industrial Park Districts. The
following business signs are permitted in C, I, or IP Districts upon issuance of a
zoning permit. Site plan review is required for all totally new signs. Replacement
signs (same type, size and location) require a zoning permit but are not subject to
site plan review.
(1) Two business signs, one of which may be freestanding (except for shopping
centers), shall be allowed for each permitted use. If attached, such signs shall
not exceed a total area of 200 square feet or an area equal to 10% of the wall
area of the building or portion thereof devoted to such use or activity,
whichever is less. No sign shall project more than one foot from the facade of
the building.
(2) Freestanding business signs shall be permitted. Such signs shall conform to the
following provisions relating to their number and size:
(a) Each commercial or industrial use, except as limited by Subsection
E(2)(b), may have one freestanding business sign, except businesses
located on through lots which may have two. Such freestanding sign shall
have a sign area proportional to the size of the building as set forth below,
shall be not more than 35 feet in height, and shall be located not less than
five feet from a lot line.
Size of Building
(square feet)
Maximum Size of Freestanding Sign
(square feet, one side)
Less than 5,000 50
5,000 to 34,999 75
35,000 to 100,000 100
Greater than 100,000 150
(b) Freestanding signs in a shopping center or industrial park shall be limited
to one directory sign at any location thereon not exceeding five square
feet in area for each acre of land in the shopping center or industrial park,
provided that no such sign shall exceed 50 square feet in area.
(3) Off-premises directional signs for businesses located in the Town of Batavia
not exceeding 32 square feet in size and limited to two signs per use shall be
permitted. Such signs shall be located not less than five feet from a lot line.
(4) Off-premises advertising signs are allowed by special use permit in
compliance with Subsection G.
(5) Portable signs. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
In addition, any temporary sandwich-type, sidewalk, or curb sign over 12
square feet in area and/or over four feet in height is considered to be a portable
sign. Such signs shall be located not less than five feet from a lot line.
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:81
(6) Awning signs. Awning signs shall be permitted in all nonresidential zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area equal to 25% of
the background area of the awning or awning surface to which such a sign
is affixed or applied, or the permitted area for wall or fascia signs,
whichever is less.
(b) Neither the background color of an awning, nor any graphic treatment or
embellishment thereto, such as striping, patterns or valances, shall be
included in the computation of sign copy area.
(7) Canopy signs. Canopy signs shall be permitted in all nonresidential zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) The permanently affixed copy area of canopy signs shall not exceed an
area equal to 25% of the face area of the canopy or architectural
projection upon which such sign is affixed or applied and shall not exceed
the total sign area allowed.
(b) Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a building, canopy
or architectural projection shall not be included in the computation of sign
copy area. However, any numbers or verbiage will be included in the
computation of the sign copy area.
(8) Under-canopy signs. Under-canopy signs shall be permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Under-canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one such sign per
public entrance to any occupancy, and shall be limited to an area not to
exceed four square feet.
(b) Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above any sidewalk or
pedestrian way a minimum of 10 feet.
(9) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted in all nonresidential
zoning districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding signage on any
street frontage limited to one sign per occupancy along any street frontage
with a public entrance to such an occupancy, and shall be limited in
height and area to 1.5 square feet per each one lineal foot of building
frontage, except that no such sign shall exceed an area of 60 square feet.
(b) No such sign shall extend vertically above the highest point of the
building facade upon which it is mounted.
(c) Such signs shall not extend over a public sidewalk in excess of two feet,
measured from the face of the building or supporting structure to the
outside edge of the sign.
(d) Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above any public
sidewalk a minimum of 10 feet measured from grade to the bottom of the
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:82
sign.
(10) A-frame (temporary).
F. Signs for development complexes.
(1) Master sign plan required. All landlord or single owner controlled multipleoccupancy
development complexes such as shopping centers, multiple-family
housing units or planned industrial parks shall submit to the Planning Board a
master sign plan prior to issuance of individual sign permits. The master sign
plan shall establish standards and criteria for all signs in the complex that
require permits, and shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Proposed sign locations.
(b) Materials.
(c) Type of illumination.
(d) Design of freestanding sign structures.
(e) Size.
(f) Quantity.
(g) Uniform standards for nonbusiness signage, including directional and
informational signs.
(2) Development complex sign. In addition to the freestanding business
identification signs otherwise allowed by this section, every multipleoccupancy
development complex shall be entitled to one freestanding sign per
street front, at the maximum size permitted for business identification
freestanding signs, to identify the development complex. No business
identification shall be permitted on a development complex sign. Any
freestanding sign otherwise permitted under this section may identify the name
of the development complex.
(3) Compliance with master sign plan. All applications for sign permits for
signage within a multiple-occupancy development complex shall comply with
the master sign plan. The Zoning Officer shall ensure that individual signs are
in conformance with the master sign plan prior to issuing permits for the
individual signs.
(4) Amendments. Any amendments to a master sign plan must be signed and
approved by the owner(s) within the development complex before such
amendment will become effective.
G. Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising signs shall be located and
maintained only in the C, I and IP Districts upon issuance of a special use permit
and in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
(1) Only one off-premises advertising sign shall be permitted per parcel of
property and such parcel must meet the minimum required lot dimensions
(e.g., lot frontage, lot area, etc.) for the district in which it is located.
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:83
(2) Off-premises advertising signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of sign area
nor exceed 35 feet in height.
(3) Off-premises advertising signs of 25 square feet or less in sign area may be
placed not closer than 10 feet to a property line. Off-premises advertising signs
greater than 25 square feet in sign area must meet all the minimum required
yard setbacks for the respective district.
H. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs, whether on premises or off premises, shall be removed
at the expense of the property owner when the use is discontinued. This shall
include portable, temporary and permanent signs.
(2) Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged, extended, relocated or altered in
any way, except to make them conform to provisions of this chapter. This
provision shall not restrict routine maintenance of nonconforming signs
involving replacement of electrical parts and repainting.
I. Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited and shall not be
permitted, erected, or maintained in any zoning district, and the owner thereof shall,
upon written notice of the Building Inspector, forthwith, in the case of immediate
danger, or otherwise within 10 days, make such sign conform to the provisions of
this chapter or remove it. If the order is not complied with, the Building Inspector
may cause said sign to be removed at the expense of the owner.
(1) Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by
obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstruction or detraction from the
visibility of any traffic control device on public streets and roads.
(2) Signs which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a required door, window,
fire escape or other required exit way.
(3) Signs which make use of words such as "Stop," "Look," "Danger," and other
words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
(4) Any sign which has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description (except time and temperature
revolving signs as allowed) or other apparent visible movement achieved by
electrical or kinetic means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by
action of normal wind current.
(5) Signs or other exterior advertising structures displaying any obscene, indecent,
or immoral matter.
(6) Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or
private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
(a) The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs.
(b) The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of the
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:84
vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer and do
not break the silhouette of the vehicle.
(c) The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and
licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used
or available for use in the daily function of the business to which such
signs relate.
(d) Vehicles and trailers are not used primarily as static displays, advertising
a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or distribution points
for commercial products or services for the general public.
(7) Balloons, inflatable devices, streamers, sandwich board signs or pinwheels,
except those temporarily displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or
community event. For the purposes of this subsection, "temporarily" means no
more than 21 days in any calendar year.
J. Definitions (see also graphic representations).43 For the purpose of this section, the
terms used herein are defined as follows:
ABANDONED SIGN—A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner
intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise defined
by state law.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and
regulated by this Code, include the following types:
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED —Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical or electromechanical input and/
or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period
of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of
nonillumination. For the purposes of this section, flashing will not be
defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of
illumination exceeds four seconds.
(a)
PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT — Animated signs or
animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by
simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns
designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
(b)
(1)
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input.
Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays
that respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
(2)
43. Editor's Note: The graphic representations are on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:85
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but
that does not include signs as defined herein. See also "Awning"; "Backlit awning";
"Canopy, attached"; and "Canopy, freestanding."
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported
by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a nonrigid material and/or fabric
on a supporting retractable framework.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also "Wall" or "Fascia sign."
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning with a translucent covering material and a
source of illumination contained within its framework.
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
BILLBOARD — See "Off-premises sign" and "Outdoor advertising sign."
BUILDING ELEVATION — The entire side of a building, from ground level to
the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
CANOPY, ATTACHED — A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and
cantilevered from such building. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy
may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
CANOPY, FREESTANDING — A multisided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a freestanding
canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy. For reference, see figure.44
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by means
of manual or remote input, including signs which are:
COMBINATION SIGN — A sign that is supported partly by pole and partly by a
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered
by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
(3)
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed manually.
(1)
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on
a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an
external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display.
See also, "Electronic message sign or center."
(2)
44. Editor's Note: The figures are on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:86
building structure.
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements
comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a street
address only.
DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN—A freestanding sign identifying a multipleoccupancy
development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park,
which is controlled by a single owner or landlord, approved in accordance with
§ 235-39F(2) of this chapter.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of
providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER — An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically
programmed.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FACADE — See "Building facade."
FASCIA SIGN — See "Wall sign."
FLASHING SIGN — See "Animated Sign, electrically activated."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or
more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. For visual reference,
see figure.45
FRONTAGE (BUILDING) — The length of an exterior building wall or structure
of a single premises oriented to the public way or other properties that it faces.
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY) — The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
GROUND SIGN — See "Freestanding sign."
IDENTIFICATION SIGN—A sign used to identify a specific property by address,
occupant or use.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light either
projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its
surface(s) (externally illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including window
signs as defined by this section. Interior signs, with the exception of window signs
as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
MANSARD — An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an
exterior building facade.
45. Editor's Note: The figures are on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:87
MENU BOARDS—Any sign attached to the restaurant building listing menu food
items.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGN — A sign which contains a message that
is not related to any business purpose, but which expresses an opinion, political
message or other noncommercial statement.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See "Outdoor advertising sign."
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of the property on which it is displayed.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent sign erected, maintained or
used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or
noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale
or lease of the property on which it is displayed.
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof.
POLE SIGN — See "Freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign shall not
be considered to be a political sign.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface.
PROJECTING SIGN—A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects
more than 12 inches from a building face or wall or from a structure whose primary
purpose is other than the support of a sign. For visual reference, see figure.46
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the property or premises upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves 360° about an axis. See also
"Animated sign, mechanically activated."
ROOFLINE — The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended facade
or parapet, the upper most point of said facade or parapet.
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted on mansard
facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall
not be considered to be roof signs. For a visual reference example of a roof sign,
and a comparison of differences between roof and fascia signs, see figure.47
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial
or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
46. Editor's Note: The figures are on file in the Town offices.
47. Editor's Note: The figures are on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-39
235:88
pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags displayed
from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be signs.
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The area
of any double-sided or "V" shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face
only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle. The area of all
other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50% of the sum of the area of all
faces of the sign.
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals
identifying a street address only.
SIGN FACE — The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural features of
a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or any areas that are
separated from the background surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a
distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure supporting a sign.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, or a portion thereof.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or
any sign not permanently embedded in the ground or not permanently fixed to
a building or sign structure that is permanently embedded in the ground are
considered temporary signs.
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN OR UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to
the underside of a canopy or marquee.
V SIGN — Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected upon
In the case of panel- or cabinet-type signs, the sign face shall include the
entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which the sign
copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between separate panels or
cabinets.
(1)
In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the sign face shall
include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except where interrupted
by a reveal, border, or a contrasting surface or color.
(2)
In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or graphic
elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the sum
of the geometric figures or combination of regular geometric figures drawn
closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements comprising the
sign copy, but not the open space between separate groupings of sign copy on
the same building or structure.
(3)
In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border, or
displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the building
or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the contrasting
background or within the painted or illuminated border.
(4)
§ 235-39 ZONING § 235-39
235:89
§ 235-40. Commercial excavation.
Except when incidental to the construction of a building on the same lot, the excavation,
processing or sale of sand, gravel or clay or other natural mineral deposits or the
quarrying of any kind of rock formation shall require a special use permit from the
Planning Board as provided for in § 235-63.
common or separate structures, positioned in a "V" shape with an interior angle
between faces of not more than 90° with the distance between the sign faces not
exceeding five feet at their closest point.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 12 inches from the
building or structure wall, including signs affixed to architectural projections from
a building, provided the copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the
face of the building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to
which it is affixed. For visual reference and comparison examples of differences
between wall or fascia signs and roof signs, see figure.48
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or within 12 inches directly behind the
surface of a window with its message intended to be visible to and readable from
the public way or from adjacent property.
ZONING OFFICER — The agent or representative of the Town of Batavia, or his
delegates or deputies, responsible for the enforcement of the ordinances and codes
of the Town.
A. Major excavation.
(1) State permit. In order to obtain said special use permit, the applicant shall
furnish evidence of a valid permit from the New York State (NYS)
Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to Title 27, Article 23 of
the Environmental Conservation Law.
(2) Reclamation. The applicant shall further be required to comply with the
reclamation standards established by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation while carrying out such use.
B. Minor excavation. As part of the application process for a special use permit, the
applicant's plan shall be presented to the Genesee County Soil and Water
Conservation District for its review and comments. Also, before issuing a special
use permit, the Planning Board must find that such excavation will not endanger the
stability of adjacent land or structures or the quality or quantity of groundwater and
that it does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety, or welfare by reason
of excessive dust, noise, traffic, erosion, siltation or other condition. In granting said
special use permit, the Planning Board shall specify any reasonable requirement,
including the following:
(1) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(2) Minimum setback requirements. All buildings shall be located not less than
48. Editor's Note: The figures are on file in the Town offices.
§ 235-39 BATAVIA CODE § 235-40
235:90
100 feet from any street or property line. The top of the slope of all excavation
operations shall be located or shall occur not less than 100 feet from any street
or property line. The setback area shall not be used for any use in conjunction
with the excavation and appurtenant activities except for one public notice sign
identifying the use of the property, fencing, berms, buffers, access roads and/
or parking.
(3) Slope. During mining the banks of all excavations shall be maintained at a
slope not to exceed the normal angle of repose of such material.
(4) Drainage. All surface drainage and any waste matter shall be controlled to
prevent any silt, waste products, process residues, etc., from flowing onto
public roads or adjacent property or into any stream. Excavation areas shall be
planned and graded to avoid collections of stagnant water.
(5) Dust. All storage areas, yards, service roads, or other untreated open areas
within the boundaries of the excavation area shall be so maintained and
improved as to minimize dust or other windblown air pollutants.
(6) Roadside landscape. Existing trees and ground cover along public road
frontage shall be preserved, maintained and supplemented in the entire area of
the roadside setback for the purpose of screening and noise reduction. If,
however, the existing topography and natural vegetation does not lend itself to
an economically feasible supplement plan, the operation can, if properly
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs, grade back the overburden around the
perimeter of the excavation site to create a berm for the purpose of screening
and noise reduction. No berm shall be constructed within 25 feet of any rightof-
way line or property boundary lines.
(7) Fencing. Fencing may be required depending upon the existence of an earthen
berm, the nature of the operations, distance from developed areas, distance
from property lines, depth of pit water and slope of pit walls.
(8) Topsoil. All topsoil and subsoil shall be stripped from the excavation areas and
stockpiled and seeded for use in accordance with the reclamation plan. The
location of topsoil to be stored shall be identified. Such stockpiles shall be
treated to minimize the effects of erosion by wind or water upon public roads,
streams, or adjacent property.
(9) Erosion. The applicant's plan shall also include a provision for the control of
soil erosion.
(10) Hours of operation. All operations shall be conducted between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. with no Sunday or holiday operations, except in the
case of public or private emergency (i.e., flooding, spills, utility line breaks,
etc.) or whenever any reasonable or necessary repairs to equipment are
required to be made.
(11) Blasting and/or processing. Operations involving blasting and on-site
processing of mineral deposits shall not be allowed.
(12) Reclamation plan. The applicant shall submit a reclamation plan.
§ 235-40 ZONING § 235-40
235:91
§ 235-41. Cluster residential development. [Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
The Planning Board shall have the authority to require or allow a cluster residential
development, also referred to as a "conservation subdivision," of one- and/or two-family
dwellings, as specified in the New York State Town Law § 278, in any district that
permits residences, provided that the following conditions are observed, in addition to
the requirements in Chapter 204, Subdivision of Land:
(a) "Reclamation plan" means the applicant's proposal for reclaiming the
affected land, including a graphic and written description of the proposed
use for all affected land, the method of reclamation and a schedule for
performing reclamation.
(b) Where feasible, reclamation shall be a continuing operation. Grading,
topsoil replacement and replanting of the area designated for restoration
shall continue during the permit period. All reclamation work shall be
complete within one year after the termination of operations, at the
expense of the operator.
(13) Performance bond. A performance bond or some other financial security may
be required in the discretion of the Planning Board to assure that the conditions
stipulated in the approval of the special use permit are carried out. Any such
security shall be in a form and amount acceptable to the Planning Board.
C. Duration of special use permit.
(1) The special use permit for a minor excavation shall be issued for a period of
one year, subject to a subsequent annual review and recertification by the
Planning Board based on a written request for such continuance, which request
shall be submitted to the Town Building Inspector at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of each such one-year period. A public hearing shall not be required
for such annual recertification, except upon motion of the Planning or Town
Board.
(2) The special use permit for a major excavation shall continue as long as its New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation permit remains in
effect, it complies with the terms thereof, and it meets the reclamation
standards established by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(3) If on-site mining or processing operations are not carried out continuously for
one year for a major or minor excavation, the site shall be considered
abandoned, and, prior to any further excavation or processing, a new special
use permit shall be required.
A. (Reserved)
B. The developer shall provide for the permanent protection of open space in a manner
that is acceptable to the Town Board. In no case shall such lands be less than 25%
of the total project area. All such lands shall be suitable, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, for the intended use.
§ 235-40 BATAVIA CODE § 235-41
235:92
§ 235-41.1. Multifamily dwellings, townhouses and twin homes. [Added 2-20-2008
by L.L. No. 2-2008]
C. The developer shall seek preliminary, nonbinding, informal conditional approval of
the Planning Board of the design and arrangement of streets, lots, open spaces, and
other elements of the project prior to filing the application for subdivision approval.
D. The maximum building height and maximum lot coverage requirements as set forth
in Zoning Schedule A49 of this chapter for the district involved apply to the entire
cluster development project, whereas the minimum frontage and side and rear yard
requirements for the applicable district apply only to the outer lots of said cluster
residential development. All other area requirements as set forth in Zoning
Schedule A may be modified by the Planning Board.
E. The permitted number of dwelling lots shall not exceed the number that would be
permitted if the land were subdivided into lots for single-family dwellings that fully
conform to the minimum lot sizes established in Schedule A.50
A. Each multiple residence building, twin home dwelling or townhouse structure shall
be constructed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the Multiple
Residence Law and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, as applicable. Such structure shall, however, conform to the local Code if the
Town has established more stringent requirements.
B. Each multiple residence, twin home dwelling or townhouse development shall have
a lot area of not less than two acres.
C. There shall be a lot area of not less than 4,000 square feet for each dwelling unit
located on the lot.
D. The minimum enclosed living area for each dwelling unit shall be in conformance
with the requirements of § 235-17. Twin homes shall meet the requirements for
two-family dwellings.
E. No building shall contain more than eight dwelling units.
F. Each dwelling unit shall have its own separate full bathroom.
G. All multiple residence, twin home dwelling and townhouse developments shall
provide safe and efficient pedestrian circulation and site lighting.
H. All multiple residence buildings, twin home dwellings and townhouse structures
shall be served by publicly owned, operated and maintained water supply and
sanitary sewage disposal facilities.
I. Each building shall be provided with suitable containers for the storage of
recyclable materials and refuse collections. Such containers shall be screened from
public view by use of fences or solid walls.
J. Access to public roads.
49. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
50. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-41 ZONING § 235-41.1
235:93
(1) All multiple residence, twin home dwelling and townhouse developments shall
have direct access from the common parking area(s) to a dedicated highway.
(2) No individual dwelling unit shall have direct access to a dedicated highway.
K. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Each parking space
shall have a minimum width of 10 feet, and a minimum length of 20 feet. Not less
than one parking space for each dwelling unit shall be enclosed.
L. In addition to the required parking spaces for each dwelling unit, one additional
space shall be provided in common parking lots for every four dwelling units for
the convenience of residents and their guests. The location of common parking lots
shall be determined by the Planning Board as part of the site plan review process.
M. Each dwelling unit shall have a rear yard adjacent to the unit which shall be
reasonably secluded from view from neighboring property or streets and which
shall include at least 500 square feet of usable open space.
N. No multiple residence, twin home dwelling or townhouse development shall have
more than two stories or be more than 35 feet in height. Spires, chimneys, cupolas,
flagpoles and antennas are exempt from this limitation, provided that the antennas
are visually integrated into the building lines.
O. No multiple residence, twin home dwelling or townhouse building shall be less than
18 feet in width.
P. No exterior wall shall exceed 50 feet in length unless there is a lateral offset of at
least four feet in its alignment.
Q. Except for an accessory structure to an individual dwelling unit, the minimum
distance between a multiple residence or townhouse dwelling structure and any
other structure on a proposed development site shall be 40 feet, and the minimum
distance between a twin home dwelling and any other structure on a proposed
development site shall be 20 feet.
R. No swimming pool shall be located within 40 feet of a multiple residence or
townhouse dwelling structure or 20 feet from a twin home dwelling.
S. Not less than 20% of the land area within a multiple residence, twin home dwelling
or townhouse development, excluding parking areas and vehicle access facilities,
shall be established and maintained as open space for the use and enjoyment of
residents and their guests.
T. The coverage of all buildings and structures within a multiple residence, twin home
dwelling or townhouse development shall not exceed 25% of the area of the entire
site.
U. No structure within a multiple residence, twin home dwelling or townhouse
development shall be set back less than 20 feet from any common parking area.
V. No structure within a multiple residence, twin home dwelling or townhouse
development shall be set back less than 50 feet from a public road and not less than
50 feet from the external property line for the development. However, side yard
§ 235-41.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-41.1
235:94
§ 235-42. Junkyards.
No person shall establish, operate, or maintain a junkyard until he has obtained a special
use permit in compliance with § 235-63 and shall have obtained an annual license in
compliance with Chapter 138, Junkyards, of this Code.
§ 235-43. Recreational vehicles and campgrounds.
setbacks for individual lots shall be zero feet from the property line wherever
two townhouse, twin home dwelling or multifamily dwelling units are joined by a
common wall along the parcel boundary.
W. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 235-21, the height of a privacy fence built upon
a deck or other structure shall be limited to a height of four feet from the surface of
the deck or other structure.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles may only be temporarily occupied as a dwelling as
follows:
(a) As provided in Subsection B.
(b) For not more than two separate periods, per year, not exceeding two
weeks each, one recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary
dwelling while parked on the same lot as a permanent dwelling.
(c) With a temporary use permit, a recreational vehicle may be used as a
temporary dwelling for a period not to exceed six months and subject to
the following conditions:
[1] Approval shall be granted by the Genesee County Health
Department.
[2] Any connections must be removed and the recreational vehicle
moved to an approved parking location upon expiration of such
permit.
(2) An unoccupied recreational vehicle may be stored anywhere except in the
required front or side yard areas of a lot not less than 15 feet from any lot line
or public right-of-way. When so stored, no connections shall be permitted.
B. Campgrounds.
(1) Location. A campground shall be located and maintained only in AG-R and
MHP Districts upon issuance of a special use permit and in accordance with
the standards set forth in this chapter.
(2) Existing campgrounds. In addition to the nonconforming use regulations set
forth in § 235-15, all existing campgrounds must comply with this section
whenever any addition, expansion or alteration (changes affecting lot size or
layout, streets and utilities) of the use or operation is proposed.
(3) Standards and requirements for the construction of campgrounds. Before a
§ 235-41.1 ZONING § 235-43
235:95
special use permit for a campground is issued under § 235-63, the Planning
Board shall determine that the proposed use is designed and arranged in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) Site. The campground shall be located on a well-drained site which is
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage so as to be free at all times from
stagnant pools of water.
(b) Lots. Each campground shall be divided into lots. The total number of
lots shall not exceed 12 per gross acre. Each lot shall have a total area of
not less than 2,500 square feet with a minimum width of 30 feet. Only
one recreational vehicle or tent shall be permitted to occupy any one lot.
Each lot shall have a stand of sufficient size and durability to provide for
the placement and removal of a recreational vehicle and for the retention
of such recreational vehicle in a stable condition. The stand shall be
suitably graded to permit rapid surface drainage.
(c) Setbacks. All recreational vehicles or occupied tents situated in
campgrounds shall not be located nearer than a distance of:
[1] Twenty-five feet from an adjacent property line, except residential
property.
[2] One hundred feet from any adjacent residential property line.
[3] One hundred feet from the right-of-way of a public street/highway.
[4] Ten feet from the nearest edge of any street located within the park.
(d) Accessibility. Each campground shall be easily accessible from an
existing public road with entrances and exits designed and strategically
located for safe and convenient movement into and out of the
campground to minimize conflicts with the movement of traffic on a
public road. All entrances and exits shall be at right angles to existing
public roads and of sufficient width to facilitate the turning movements
of recreational vehicles.
(e) Street system.
[1] Each campground shall have improved streets to provide convenient
access to all lots and other important facilities within the
campground.
[2] The street system shall be so designed to permit safe and convenient
vehicular circulation within the campground.
[3] All streets shall have the following minimum width:
[a] One-way traffic movement: 12 feet.
[b] Two-way traffic movement: 20 feet.
[4] Except in cases of emergency, no parking shall be allowed on such
streets.
§ 235-43 BATAVIA CODE § 235-43
235:96
§ 235-44. Home occupations.
[5] Adequate access shall be provided for each lot. Such access shall
have a minimum width of 10 feet.
(f) Utilities. All campground sewer and water facilities shall comply with the
regulations of the Genesee County Department of Health and the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation. All other utilities
shall comply with the New York State Uniform Code and the authority
having jurisdiction.
(g) Open space. Any campground designed for 20 or more sites shall provide
a common open area suitable for recreation and play purposes. Such open
space shall be conveniently located. The open space area shall be at least
10 percent of the gross land area of the campground but not less than one
acre.
(h) Improvements. Lighting, landscaping and buffer areas may be required
by the Planning Board and shall be in keeping with surrounding
development, the unique features of the site and the health and safety of
occupants of the campground.
(i) Management. Every campground shall be managed from an office
located on the premises. The management shall maintain the campground
in a clean and attractive manner and take reasonable steps to protect the
health, safety and comfort of all persons accommodated therein.
(j) Removal of wheels. Unless written consent is received from the Planning
Board, it shall be unlawful to remove wheels from any recreational
vehicle or otherwise permanently affix such recreational vehicle to the
ground. Such removal shall be grounds for the revocation of the special
use permit for such campground.
(k) Fence. The Planning Board is authorized to require that some or all of the
campground be fenced if circumstances warrant. The Planning Board
shall decide what type of fencing is suitable.
(l) Where dwellings on surrounding properties are located within 1,000 feet
of the campground, it shall be the responsibility of the campground owner
to maintain relative quiet during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(m) Campground special use permits.
[1] Pursuant to § 235-63D, the Building Inspector shall inspect at least
annually the operation of a campground to make sure it complies
with provisions of this chapter and any and all conditions prescribed
by the Planning Board when issuing the special use permit.
[2] Before receiving a special use permit for a campground, the owner
thereof shall make an adequate showing that the subject property
complies with the provisions of this section.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this provision is to allow for home occupations which are
§ 235-43 ZONING § 235-44
235:97
compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located. Some home
occupations by the extent of the investment required therefor and/or the nature
of their operation have a tendency of increasing beyond the scope of a home
occupation and thereby violating the use provisions of the zoning district in which
such home occupation exists and adversely affecting surrounding property values.
B. Process. An applicant shall apply to the Building Inspector for a determination as
to whether his/her proposed home occupation is a Category I or II. Home
occupations classified as Home Occupation I are considered permitted uses in the
AG, AG-R and C Districts and may be issued a zoning permit by the Building
Inspector. In the R District a Home Occupation I shall require the issuance of a
special use permit by the Planning Board. Home Occupation II uses shall require
the issuance of a special use permit in all districts where home occupations are
allowed. Expansion of an existing Home Occupation I use to a Home Occupation II
shall require the issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Board.
C. Conditions. The following conditions are intended to ensure both that the home
occupation is secondary to the residential use and that it is compatible with the
residential character of the neighborhood:
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on inside the principal dwelling and/or
inside a building or other structure accessory thereto.
(2) No alteration to the exterior of the principal dwelling and/or the accessory
building or structure shall be made which changes the residential character
thereof.
(3) Nonresident family members shall not be employed in any Home Occupation
I and no more than two nonresident persons shall be employed actually on site
at the residence in a Home Occupation II.
(4) Not more than 25% of the floor area of the principal dwelling may be used for
the home occupation, and the total floor area to be utilized (not including
accessory buildings and structures) shall not exceed 500 square feet.
(5) There shall be no exterior advertising of the home occupation, except for a
sign no larger than four square feet for which a permit has been obtained
pursuant to the provisions of § 235-39C(1).
(6) There shall be no exterior storage of materials used in the home occupation.
(7) No home occupation shall result in:
(a) Dissemination of noise, vibration, smoke, observable gas or fumes, or
other atmospheric pollutant beyond the boundaries of the immediate site
of the building in which such use is conducted.
(b) Hazard of fire, explosion, release of toxic or harmful substances
(including solvents and waste products) or other physical hazard to any
person, building, vegetation, or groundwater.
(c) Radiation or interference with radio or television reception beyond the
boundaries of the immediate site of the building in which such use is
§ 235-44 BATAVIA CODE § 235-44
235:98
§ 235-45. Roadside stands.
§ 235-46. Animal waste storage facilities.
All proposals for installation and/or modification of animal waste storage facilities shall
be submitted to the Genesee County Soil and Water Conservation District (GCSWCD)
or United States Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) for its review and
determination as to acceptability. If a proposal is acceptable to GCSWCD or NRCS then
the Planning Board will consider the potential impacts posed by such a facility upon
surrounding land uses prior to taking final action.
§ 235-47. Skilled trade shop.
The purpose of this provision is to allow for residents within the AG-R District who
are self-employed skilled trades persons to operate a shop for fabrication of fixtures,
cabinets, etc., for installation by them at their various job sites. It is recognized that
operation of such shops without adequate regulations and conditions may pose adverse
impacts upon neighboring residential uses.
conducted, or the testing of material or instruments in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance.
(8) Adequate parking shall be provided as set forth in § 235-34. Such off-street
parking shall be located not less than 10 feet from any property line.
(9) No residential lot shall contain more than one home occupation. No residential
lot shall contain a home occupation together with a skilled trade shop or any
other nonresidential use requiring a special use permit.
A. Roadside stands may be located in any district.
B. Goods sold shall primarily be home grown.
C. There shall be a front yard setback of at least 20 feet and side yard setbacks of at
least 25 feet each.
D. Stands shall be of a portable nature and must be removed when not in use.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided for a minimum of three vehicles with additional
provisions if traffic warrants.
F. Two signs of not more than 12 square feet each may be permitted, located not less
than 10 feet from a lot line.
A. Process. An applicant may apply to the Planning Board for a special use permit to
establish a skilled trade shop in the AG-R District.
B. Conditions. The following conditions are intended to ensure both that the skilled
trade shop is secondary to the residential use and that it is compatible with the
residential character of the neighborhood:
(1) The skilled trade shall be carried on inside the principal dwelling and/or inside
a building or other structure accessory thereto.
§ 235-44 ZONING § 235-47
235:99
§ 235-47.1. Auction houses. [Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for an auction house in the AG/R
and C Districts, provided that the following requirements are met, in addition to the
standards and procedures for special use permits included in § 235-63.
(2) No alteration to the exterior of the principal dwelling and/or the accessory
building or structure shall be made which changes the residential character
thereof.
(3) No more than one nonresident person shall be employed in the skilled trade
shop.
(4) Not more than 25% of the floor area (with a maximum of 500 square feet) of
the principal dwelling may be used for the skilled trade shop. Occupation of
accessory buildings to be utilized shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
(5) There shall be no exterior advertising of the skilled trade shop, except for a
sign no larger than four square feet for which a permit has been obtained
pursuant to the provisions of § 235-39C(1).
(6) There shall be no exterior storage of materials used or products/fixtures made
in the skilled trade shop.
(7) No skilled trade shop shall result in:
(a) Dissemination of noise, vibration, smoke, observable gas or fumes, or
other atmospheric pollutant beyond the boundaries of the immediate site
of the building in which such use is conducted.
(b) Hazard of fire, explosion, release of toxic or harmful substances
(including solvents and waste products) or other physical hazard to any
person, building, vegetation, or groundwater.
(c) Radiation or interference with radio or television reception beyond the
boundaries of the immediate site of the building in which such use is
conducted, or the testing of material or instruments in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance.
(8) Adequate parking shall be provided as set forth in § 235-34. Such off-street
parking shall be located not less than 10 feet from any property line.
(9) No residential lot shall contain more than one skilled trade shop. No residential
lot shall contain a skilled trade shop together with a home occupation or any
other nonresidential use requiring a special use permit.
(10) The Planning Board may require as a condition of the special use permit that
the applicant install and maintain a buffer strip and/or fencing between the
proposed skilled trade shop and neighboring residential uses if the Board
determines such condition is a reasonable mitigation factor.
A. The site must be located on a New York State highway that can handle the
anticipated traffic volume before and after auctions.
§ 235-47 BATAVIA CODE § 235-47.1
235:100
§ 235-48. Ponds.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the construction of ponds that are adequately
designed and located so as to not pose adverse impacts upon surrounding land uses. Farm
water supply, conservancy, stormwater/erosion control and fire protection or other ponds
may be located within the AG, AG-R, C, I and IP Districts upon issuance of a special
use permit provided the following criteria are met:
§ 235-49. Adult uses.
B. The use as an auction house shall not be detrimental to adjacent properties when
considering traffic, safety, parking, noise, light, or glare.
C. Outdoor lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent light from directly hitting
adjacent property or any public right-of-way. The site plan shall indicate the style
and location of all outdoor lighting.
D. There shall be no outdoor storage permitted except for during the three days before
and after an advertised auction.
A. The proposed pond is located not less than 100 feet from any property line.
B. The proposed pond design is considered acceptable by the Genesee County Soil and
Water Conservation District.
C. The pond is constructed in conformance with the design specifications in
Subsection B of this section, including any reseeding or revegetation requirements.
A. Purposes. The Town of Batavia has conducted a study of the potential secondary
affects posed by adult businesses. This study, along with other similar studies, has
shown that buildings and establishments operated as adult uses pose secondary
effects that are detrimental and harmful to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of a community. In order to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the residents of the Town of Batavia, this section is intended to control
those secondary effects of adult businesses by restricting adult uses to
nonresidential areas of the town and otherwise regulating their operation.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment, including but not
limited to an adult bookstore, adult eating or drinking establishment, adult theater,
adult motel, adult massage establishment, nude model studio or other adult
commercial establishment, or any combination thereof, as defined below:
ADULT BOOKSTORE:
A bookstore which has as a substantial portion (equal to or greater than
25%) of its stock-in-trade and/or floor area as hereinafter defined any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which is
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
[1]
(a)
(1)
§ 235-47.1 ZONING § 235-49
235:101
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
Photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
[2]
For the purpose of determining whether a substantial portion (equal to or
greater than 25%) of an establishment includes an adult bookstore, the
following factors shall be considered:
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers
and allocated to such uses; and
[1]
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers
and allocated to such uses as compared to the total floor area and
cellar space accessible to customers in the establishment.
[2]
(b)
For the purpose of determining whether a bookstore has a substantial
portion (equal to or greater than 25%) of its stock in materials defined
in Subsection (1)(a)[1] or [2] hereof, the following factors shall be
considered:
The amount of stock accessible to customers as compared to the total
stock accessible to customers in the establishment;
[1]
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers
containing such stock; and
[2]
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers
containing such stock as compared to the total floor area and cellar
space accessible to customers in the establishment.
[3]
(c)
ADULT EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An eating or
drinking establishment which regularly features any one or more of the
following:
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities; or
(a)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and
(b)
Employees who as part of their employment, regularly expose to patrons
specified anatomical areas, and which is not customarily opened to the
general public during such features because it excludes minors by reason
of age.
(c)
(2)
ADULT THEATER:
(a) A theater which regularly features one or more of the following:
(3)
§ 235-49 BATAVIA CODE § 235-49
235:102
PERSON — A person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal
representative, acting individually or jointly.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
[1]
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities, and which is not customarily opened to the general
public during such features because it excludes minors by reason of
age.
[2]
"Adult theater" shall include commercial establishments where such
materials or performances are viewed from individual enclosures.
(b)
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a
fixed place of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition
shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home or medical clinic
or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, duly licensed
massage therapist, or duly licensed physical therapist, or barbershops or beauty
parlors in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck and
shoulders. This definition shall also exclude health clubs which have facilities
for physical exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise
rooms, and which do not receive their primary source of revenue through the
administration of massages.
(4)
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is regularly provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration,
other than as part of a course of instruction offered by an educational
institution established pursuant to the laws of New York State.
(5)
OTHER ADULT COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A facility, other
than an adult bookstore, adult eating or drinking establishment, adult theater,
adult motel, adult massage establishment, nude model studio, commercial
studio, or business or trade school, which features employees who, as part
of their employment, regularly expose to patrons specified anatomical areas
and which is not customarily open to the general public during such features
because it excludes minors by reason of age.
(6)
Less than completely and opaquely concealed human genitals, pubic region,
human buttock, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; or
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely concealed.
(2)
§ 235-49 ZONING § 235-49
235:103
§ 235-50. Driveway entrances and exits onto highways.51
No person, firm or corporation shall, after the effective date of this chapter, cut, construct
or locate any driveway entrance or exit into a highway in the Town of Batavia without
having first received written permission to do so from the appropriate Highway
Department or authority having jurisdiction, namely the New York State Department
of Transportation, Genesee County Highway Department, Town of Batavia Highway
Department, Town of Batavia Planning Board or Town Board. Three copies of such
written permission shall be submitted, one to each of the following: Town of Batavia
Highway Superintendent, Town Building Inspector, and Town Clerk. If the proposed
driveway is in a designated wetland, then the appropriate Department of Environmental
Conservation permits shall also be required and three copies provided as above.
§ 235-51. ECHO unit.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — For the purpose of defining adult
establishments:
SUBSTANTIAL — An amount equal to or greater than 25% of the total.
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
Actual or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
sodomy; or
(2)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock,
anus or female breast.
(3)
C. Restrictions affecting adult uses. Adult uses, including but not limited to an adult
bookstore, adult motion-picture theater, adult mini-motion-picture theater, and
adult entertainment cabaret, shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions
(all distance measurements are from respective property and/or district lines):
(1) No such adult uses shall be within 200 feet of another existing adult use.
(2) No such adult use shall be located within 100 feet of the boundaries of any
Agricultural-Residential (AG-R), Agricultural (A), Residential (R) or Mobile
Home Park (MHP) Zoning District or within 500 feet of any existing
residential use located on another lot.
(3) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a preexisting school or
church, day-care center, park, playground or community center.
(4) No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except the Industrial
District.
D. Prohibition regarding public observation. No adult use shall be conducted in any
manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public
way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply
to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
51. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 127, Highways; Vehicles and Traffic, Art. IV.
§ 235-49 BATAVIA CODE § 235-51
235:104
A. The purpose and intent of this provision is to allow by special use permit the
installation of elderly cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units on the same lots
with single-family dwelling units in the Agricultural-Residential (AG-R) District.
The reasoning behind providing this type of housing option is to:
(1) Foster and support extended families;
(2) Permit adult children to provide small, temporary homes for their aging
parents who are in need of support, while maintaining as much of the
independence of the two generations as possible;
(3) Reduce the degree to which elderly homeowners have to choose between
increasing isolation in their homes and institutionalization in nursing homes;
(4) Encourage the continued development and use of small homes specifically
designed and built for elderly people which include such features as easy
adaptation to handicapped accessibility, safe exit features, and fire-resistant
construction;
(5) Permit ECHO housing in a manner that protects the property values and
character of neighborhoods by ensuring that the units are compatible with the
neighborhood and are easily removable; and
(6) Enable the elderly living in homes too large for their needs to move to more
appropriate housing and thereby make larger homes available to house larger
families.
B. Application process. Application for a special permit for an ECHO unit shall be
made to the Building Inspector in accordance with the standards and procedures set
forth in § 235-63, subject to the following additional provisions:
(1) These special use permits do not run with the land inasmuch as they represent
the nonpermanent (temporary) placement of an ECHO unit for a period of time
which is determined by the actual occupancy of the ECHO unit and the
principal use (single-family dwelling).
(2) The applicant must certify that he or she understands that the permit is issued
solely for the use of the named occupants; has made plans for the removal of
the unit; agrees to provide the annual recertification required by this section;
and recognizes the possible sanctions for failure to promptly remove the
ECHO unit upon termination or revocation of the special use permit.
(3) Failure to remain in compliance with the requirements set forth in this section
may result in revocation of the special use permit.
C. Occupancy.
(1) At the time the special permit is issued, at least one intended occupant of the
ECHO unit must be at least 60 years of age, and any other occupant must be at
least 55 years of age. Subsequently, if the occupant who is 60 no longer
occupies the ECHO unit, and all other conditions continue to apply, the special
permit may be continued for the other occupant, even if the person is less than
60 years of age.
§ 235-51 ZONING § 235-51
235:105
(2) At least one occupant of the principal dwelling and at least one occupant of the
ECHO unit must be related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(3) In no case shall there be more than two occupants of an ECHO unit.
(4) The special use permit shall be issued to the owner of the principal dwelling
and lot and shall specify the occupants of the ECHO unit by name.
D. Construction and installation. The unit shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with Chapter B of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the New York State Energy Code and any other applicable laws,
ordinances and/or regulations of the Town of Batavia. No additional buildings or
structures shall be allowed on a lot which would hinder the removal of an ECHO
unit. The applicant shall provide the necessary documentation from the Genesee
County Health Department that the water supply and wastewater treatment systems
are adequate for both the principal dwelling and ECHO unit.
E. Size of unit. The minimum floor area of an ECHO unit shall be 300 square feet, the
maximum floor area 1,000 square feet, and the maximum height 16 feet or one
story.
F. Placement of an ECHO unit. The ECHO unit shall only be placed in a side or rear
yard and shall comply with all minimum yard setback and maximum lot coverage
requirements (see Zoning Schedule A).52
G. Lot size. An ECHO unit shall only be installed on a lot which meets the current
minimum lot size for the AG-R District; installation on undersized preexisting lots
shall not be allowed (see Zoning Schedule A).
H. Parking. In addition to the parking required for the principal dwelling, one parking
space per additional vehicle (minimum of one additional space) shall be required
together with the provision of a turnaround as required in § 235-34.
I. Number of dwelling units per lot. ECHO units shall only be placed on a lot with a
single-family dwelling, limited to one ECHO unit per lot.
J. Removal. The ECHO unit shall be removed within 90 days of the date its
occupancy ceases to comply with the requirements of this section [i.e., death or
permanent change of residence of the original occupant(s) of the ECHO unit]. Once
the ECHO unit is removed, the site shall be restored so that no visible evidence
remains of the ECHO unit and its accessory elements. If the ECHO unit has not
been removed by the end of this ninety-day period, in addition to the existing
penalties of this chapter, additional actions may be taken to ensure removal,
including removal and salvage by the town with a lien imposed to defray any costs
incurred. The Planning Board, upon a showing of extraordinary circumstances
making removal of the ECHO unit impossible during the ninety-day grace period,
may grant one extension of up to 90 days for removal of the ECHO unit.
K. Annual recertification. Each year, two weeks prior to the anniversary date of the
original issuance of a special use permit for an ECHO unit, the property owner shall
52. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-51 BATAVIA CODE § 235-51
235:106
§ 235-52. Commercial communication towers.
No commercial communication tower or antenna(s) shall hereafter be used, erected,
moved, reconstructed, changed or altered unless in conformity with these regulations.
provide certification to the Building Inspector that all the terms, conditions and
requirements associated with said special use permit are being fully complied with.
A. Shared use of existing towers and/or structures. At all times, shared use of existing
towers and/or structures (i.e., a water tower, building, etc.) shall be preferred to the
construction of new commercial communication towers. An applicant shall be
required to present an adequate report inventorying existing towers within
reasonable distance of the proposed site and outlining opportunities for shared use
of existing facilities as an alternative to a proposed new commercial communication
tower.
(1) The installation of a commercial communications antenna(s) on an existing
structure located within the AG, AG-R and C Districts shall be considered a
permitted use not subject to site plan review, provided the following criteria
are met:
(a) The existing structure is not increased in height or otherwise modified so
as to change its visual appearance;
(b) The antenna(s) does not extend above such structure more than 10 feet;
and
(c) The applicant provides the necessary documentation to the Building
Inspector to verify the existing structure and proposed antenna(s)
installation would comply with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(2) An applicant proposing to share use of an existing tower and/or structure shall
be required to document intent from an existing tower/structure owner to allow
shared use.
B. New or altered towers and/or structures.
(1) The Planning Board may, at its sole discretion, consider a new or altered
(including towers or structures which are modified, reconstructed or changed)
commercial communication tower/structure where the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that shared usage of an existing tower/
structure is impractical. The applicant shall be required to submit a report
demonstrating good faith efforts to secure shared use from existing towers/
structures as well as documentation of the physical and/or financial reasons
why shared usage is not practical. Written requests and responses for shared
use shall be provided.
(2) The applicant shall be required to submit a site plan in accordance with
§ 235-63 (site plan review provisions need to be added) for all commercial
communication towers that are proposed to be erected, moved, reconstructed,
changed or altered. Site plan review will also be required in those instances
§ 235-51 ZONING § 235-52
235:107
when antennas are being added to existing structures not in compliance with
the criteria set forth in Subsection A of this section. In addition to § 235-63,
the site plan shall show all existing and proposed structures and improvements,
including roads, buildings, tower(s), guy wire anchors, parking and
landscaping, and shall include grading plans for new facilities and roads.
C. Supporting documentation. The Planning Board shall require that the site plan
include a completed visual environmental assessment form (Visual EAF - SEQR)
and documentation on the proposed intent and capacity of use as well as a
justification for the height of any tower or antenna and justification for any required
clearing. The applicant must provide a coverage/interference analysis and capacity
analysis that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency
reuse and spacing needs of the cellular system and to provide adequate portable
cellular telephone coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately
served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district. The Planning Board
may require submittal of a more detailed visual analysis based on the results of the
Visual EAF in addressing this subsection and Subsections J and K of this section.
D. Shared usage of site with new tower. Where shared usage of an existing tower/
structure is found to be impractical, as determined by the sole discretion of the
Planning Board, the applicant shall investigate shared usage of an existing tower/
structure site for its ability to accommodate a new tower and accessory uses.
Documentation and conditions shall be in accordance with Subsection B(1) and (2)
of this section. Any new commercial communication tower approved for an
existing tower/structure site shall be subject to the standards of Subsections F
through N of this section.
E. New tower at a new location. The Planning Board may consider a new commercial
communication tower on a site not previously developed with an existing tower/
structure when the applicant demonstrates that shared usage of an existing tower
site is impractical, as determined by the sole discretion of the Planning Board, and
submits a report as described in Subsection B of this section.
F. Future shared usage of new towers. The applicant must design a proposed
commercial communication tower to accommodate future demand for commercial
broadcasting and reception facilities. This requirement may be waived, in the sole
discretion of the Planning Board, provided that the applicant demonstrates that
provision of future shared usage of the facility is not feasible and is an unnecessary
burden, based upon:
(1) The number of Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licenses
foreseeably available for the area;
(2) The kind of tower site and structure proposed;
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without tower spaces;
(4) Available spaces on existing and approved towers; and
(5) Potential adverse visual impact by a tower designed for shared usage.
G. Setbacks for new towers. All proposed commercial communication towers and
§ 235-52 BATAVIA CODE § 235-52
235:108
accessory structures shall be set back from abutting residential parcels, public
property or street lines a distance sufficient to contain on site substantially all
icefall or debris from tower failure and preserve the privacy of adjoining residential
properties.
(1) All commercial communication tower bases must be located at a minimum
setback from any property line at a distance at least equal to the tower height,
or the distance between the tower base and guy wire anchors, or the minimum
setback of the underlying zoning district, or a minimum setback at a distance
which shall be established in the sole discretion of the Planning Board based
on the unique characteristics of the site, whichever of the foregoing is greater.
The minimum setback requirement of this subsection may be increased at the
discretion of the Planning Board or it may be decreased in those instances
when the applicant has submitted plans for a tower designed in such a manner
as to collapse within a smaller area. Such tower design and collapse zone must
be acceptable to the Town Engineer and the Planning Board.
(2) Accessory structures must comply with the minimum setback requirements in
the underlying district.
H. Visual impact assessment. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to
undertake a visual impact assessment of any proposed new towers or any proposed
modifications of an existing tower that will increase the height of the existing tower.
Construction of a new commercial communication tower or modification of an
existing tower shall be subject to the relevant guidelines and criteria below that are
determined, by the sole discretion of the Planning Board, at the presubmission
conference to be appropriate:
(1) Assessment of before and after views from key viewpoints both inside and
outside of the town, including from state highways and other major roads,
from state and local parks and other public lands, from any privately owned
preserves and historic sites normally open to the public, and from any other
location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors or travelers.
(2) Assessment of alternative tower designs and color schemes, as described in
Subsection I below.
(3) Assessment of visual impact of the tower base, guy wires, accessory buildings
and overhead utility lines from abutting properties and streets.
I. New tower design. Alternate designs shall be considered for new towers, including
lattice and single pole structures. Plans should show that the owner of the
commercial communication tower has agreed to permit other persons to attach other
communication apparatus which does not interfere with the primary purposes of the
commercial communication tower, provided that such other persons agree to
negotiate a reasonable compensation to the owner from such liability as may result
from such attachment. The design of a proposed new tower shall comply with the
following:
(1) Unless specifically required by other regulations, all towers shall have a
neutral, earth tone, sky tone or similar finish that will minimize the degree of
visual impact that the new tower may have. Artificial lighting, including
§ 235-52 ZONING § 235-52
235:109
strobes, beacons and other hazard-avoidance lighting, shall be limited to that
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other governmental
agency, recognized safety guidelines and the Planning Board.
(2) Any new tower shall be designed and constructed to have the minimum height
and carrying capacity needed to provide future shared usage (co-locating of a
minimum of two additional antennas).
(3) The Planning Board may request a review of the application by the Town
Engineer, or other engineer selected by the Planning Board, for evaluation of
need for and design of any new tower. The costs associated for such review
shall be borne by the applicant.
(4) Accessory facilities shall maximize use of building materials, colors and
textures designed to blend with the natural surroundings.
(5) No portion of a tower may be used for signs or advertising purposes, including
company name, banners, streamers, etc.
(6) The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Planning Board
that certifies the operation of the proposed commercial communication tower
facility will not interfere with usual and customary transmission or reception
of radio, television or other communication equipment.
(7) Space on communication towers shall be made available for public safety
purposes (i.e., Genesee County Public Safety Radio System) at no cost to
public safety agencies.
J. Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible, and no cutting of trees exceeding four inches in diameter (measured
at a height of four feet off the ground) shall take place prior to approval of the
special permit. Clear cutting of all trees in a single contiguous area exceeding
20,000 square feet shall be prohibited.
K. Screening. Deciduous or evergreen tree plantings may be required to screen
portions of the tower and accessory structures from nearby residential property as
well as from public sites known to include important views or vistas. Where the site
abuts residential or public property, including streets, the following vegetative
screening shall be required: for all commercial communication towers, at least one
row of native evergreen shrubs or trees capable of forming a continuous hedge at
least 10 feet in height within two years of planting shall be provided to effectively
screen the tower base and accessory facilities. In the case of poor soil conditions,
planting may be required on soil berms to assure plant survival. Plant height in these
cases shall include the height of any berm.
L. Access. Adequate emergency and service access shall be provided. Maximum use
of existing roads, public or private, shall be made. Road construction shall, at all
times, minimize grounds disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the toe of fill,
the top of cuts, or no more than 10 feet beyond the edge of any pavement. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance
and reduce soil erosion potential.
§ 235-52 BATAVIA CODE § 235-52
235:110
§ 235-53. Landscaping contractor's yard.
The purpose of this provision is to allow for operation of storage yards for landscaping
contractors within the AG-R District. It is recognized that operation of such business is
somewhat similar in operation to agricultural uses and that without adequate regulations
and conditions it may pose adverse impacts upon neighboring residential uses.
M. Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with § 235-34. No parking space
shall be located in any required yard.
N. Fencing. Sites of proposed new commercial communication towers and sites where
modifications to existing towers are proposed shall be adequately enclosed by a
fence eight feet in height from finished grade, unless the applicant demonstrates to
the sole discretion of the Planning Board that such measures are unnecessary to
ensure the security of the facility. Such security fencing shall surround the tower
base as well as each guy anchor.
O. Maintenance and/or performance bond. Prior to approval of any application, the
Planning Board, in its sole discretion, may require the applicant and/or owner to
post and file with the Town Clerk a maintenance and/or performance bond or other
form of security acceptable to the Town Attorney in an amount sufficient to cover
the installation, maintenance and/or construction of said tower during its lifetime
and provide for its removal. The amount required shall be determined in the sole
discretion of the Planning Board, based upon the unique characteristics of the tower
and site. In furtherance of the foregoing, the applicant and/or owner shall cooperate
with the Planning Board in supplying all necessary construction and maintenance
data to the Board prior to approval of any application to accomplish the foregoing.
P. Removal of obsolete/unused facilities. Approval of a new commercial
communication tower facility shall be conditioned upon the applicant's agreement
to remove such facility once it is no longer used. Removal of such obsolete and/or
unused commercial communication tower facilities shall take place within 12
months of cessation of use. The applicant shall submit an executed removal
agreement with his application to ensure compliance with this requirement.
A. Process. An applicant may apply to the Planning Board for a special use permit to
establish a landscaping contractor's yard in an AG-R District.
B. Conditions. The following conditions are intended to ensure the landscaping
contractor's yard is compatible with the agricultural and residential character of the
AG-R District:
(1) The landscaping contractor's yard shall comply with all the minimum required
yard setbacks for the AG-R District by maintaining such minimum yard
setback requirements as buffer areas in which no storage of equipment,
vehicles, materials (rock, stone, bricks, fencing, fixtures, etc.), tools and other
items related to his/her business is allowed.
(2) No direct retail sales shall be permitted on site.
(3) There shall be no exterior advertising of the landscaping contractor's yard,
except for a sign no larger than four square feet for which a permit has been
§ 235-52 ZONING § 235-53
235:111
§ 235-53.1. Solar energy systems. [Added 11-18-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
obtained pursuant to the provisions of § 235-39C(1).
(4) The Planning Board, through site plan review, shall determine the location and
extent of storage of equipment, vehicles, materials (rock, stone, bricks,
fencing, fixtures, etc.), tools and other items related to the business.
(5) No landscaping contractor's yard shall result in:
(a) Dissemination of noise, vibration, smoke, observable gas or fumes, or
other atmospheric pollutant beyond the boundaries of the immediate site
of the building in which such use is conducted.
(b) Hazard of fire, explosion, release of toxic or harmful substances
(including solvents and waste products) or other physical hazard to any
person, building, vegetation, or groundwater.
(6) Adequate parking shall be provided as set forth in § 235-34. Such off-street
parking shall be located not less than 10 feet from any property line.
(7) The Planning Board may require as a condition of the special use permit that
the applicant install and maintain a buffer strip and/or fencing between the
proposed landscaping contractor's yard and neighboring residential uses if the
Board determines such condition is a reasonable mitigation factor.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide requirements for and limitations
on the installation and use of solar energy systems and to provide the opportunity
to utilize solar energy systems and equipment. This section does not repeal, annul,
impair, or interfere with any existing ordinance or local law.
B. Intent. The Town of Batavia intends to accommodate the use of solar energy
systems to provide a cleaner energy source. Solar energy is a renewable and
nonpolluting energy resource that can prevent fossil fuel emissions and reduce a
municipality's demand for energy produced by other methods.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have meanings as
indicated:
SETBACK — The distance from a front, side or rear lot line to the portion of
that lot where a solar energy system is installed. No solar energy systems shall be
permitted on the front-facing side of any building or within the setbacks required
by the applicable zoning district.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system that uses photovoltaic equipment to
convert solar energy into electricity. Examples of solar energy systems include, but
are not limited to, flush-mounted solar panels installed on the roof of a building and
freestanding or ground-mounted solar panels supported by posts fixed to the ground
and not attached to an existing building.
SOLAR FARM — An area of land used primarily for the purpose of producing
electricity by means of a solar energy system.
D. Applicability.
§ 235-53 BATAVIA CODE § 235-53.1
235:112
(1) The requirements of this section shall apply to all solar energy systems
modified or installed after the effective date of this section.
(2) All solar energy systems shall be designed, erected and installed in accordance
with all applicable codes and regulations, as referenced in the New York State
Uniform Code, the New York State Property Maintenance Code and the Code
of the Town of Batavia.
E. Where allowed. Solar energy systems and solar farms may be located in any zoning
district, but freestanding or ground-mounted solar energy systems, including solar
farms, shall require a special use permit in all zoning districts, pursuant to all
criteria set forth in § 235-63D of the Code of the Town of Batavia.
F. Multiple uses on one lot. Construction and installation of a solar energy system or
solar farm shall not be considered as creating more than one principal building and/
or one principal use on any one lot in Agricultural (AG),53 Agricultural-Residential
(AG-R), and Residential (R) Districts in violation of § 235-12 of the Code of the
Town of Batavia.
G. Compliance. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain, modify or
operate a solar energy system or solar farm that is not in compliance with this
chapter or with any conditions contained in a special use or zoning permit issued
pursuant to this chapter.
H. Permits required.
(1) Zoning permit. A zoning permit is required for all solar energy systems prior
to installation and construction within the Town of Batavia.
(2) Building permit. A building permit is required for buildings or structures
associated with solar energy systems.
I. Special use permit considerations. In addition to those criteria set forth in
§ 235-63D of the Code of the Town of Batavia, the Planning Board shall consider
the following factors when setting conditions upon a special use permit issued for a
solar energy system within the Town of Batavia:
(1) Ingress and egress.
(2) Size and location of panels.
(3) Nature of land use on existing, adjacent and nearby properties.
(4) Location of other solar energy systems in the surrounding area.
(5) Topography.
(6) Proximity to residential structures.
(7) Design characteristics.
(8) Possible adverse effects on wildlife.
53. Editor's Note: The Agricultural District (AG) was repealed 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008.
§ 235-53.1 ZONING § 235-53.1
235:113
(9) Glare and reflectivity issues.
(10) Any other factors that are relevant to the proposed system.
J. Design standards.
(1) Height. Systems, equipment and structures shall not exceed the maximum
height allowed in the applicable zoning district as set forth in Chapter 235,
Attachment 1, Schedule A, of the Code of the Town of Batavia.54
(2) Size. The size of a solar energy system or solar farm shall not exceed 20 acres.
(3) Setbacks. A solar farm shall comply with the setback requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(4) Distribution lines. New electricity distribution lines may be located above or
below the ground.
(5) Approval. All components must have a UL listing or equivalent.
(6) Security. A security fence shall surround the perimeter of a solar farm.
(7) Accessibility. The site of a solar energy system shall be accessible for all
emergency service vehicles.
(8) Signage. All signage shall be prohibited on a solar farm or its fencing except
as authorized in a special use permit.
K. Abandonment. It is the responsibility of the property owner to remove all obsolete
or unused solar energy systems or solar farms within 12 months of cessation of
operations. Reusable components are to be recycled whenever feasible.
L. Decommissioning bond. Prior to issuance of a special use permit for a solar energy
system or solar farm, the Planning Board shall determine if a bond must be required
to be issued in the name of the Town of Batavia in an amount specified by the
Planning Board after consultation with the Town Attorney and Town Engineer, to
be used by the Town for remediation in the event that all obsolete or unused solar
energy systems or solar farm components are not removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations as required herein.
M. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity which may violate any provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 235-65 of the Code of the Town of Batavia
Zoning Ordinance. Any person, firm, corporation or entity which may violate any
provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the Town for any actual expense or
loss or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation; in addition to
any actual losses or damages sustained by the Town, such expense shall also
include, but not be limited to, statutory costs, disbursements and reasonable
attorney's fees in the event that an action is commenced to enforce this chapter. The
imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Town or any person
from instituting appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent a violation of this
54. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 235-53.1 BATAVIA CODE § 235-53.1
235:114
chapter or to restrain or enjoin the use or occupancy of premises or any part thereof
in violation of this chapter.
§ 235-53.1 ZONING § 235-53.1
235:115

ARTICLE VI
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
§ 235-54. Mobile homes.
A. Permanent residence. A mobile home may be located on an individual lot in the AG
and AG-R Districts as a one-family dwelling provided the following criteria are
met:
(1) The mobile home unit shall comply with the current construction and safety
standards set forth by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and have a minimum habitable floor area of 720 square feet,
exclusive of any porches, additions or other extensions.
(2) Placement of the mobile home must comply with the minimum dimensional
and area requirements for a one-family dwelling specified in Zoning Schedule
A55 for the AG-R District and Article III, including §§ 235-12, 235-13, 235-17,
235-18 and 235-19.
(3) Mobile homes shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that extends a
minimum of 42 inches below finished grade to the underside of the floor. The
foundations shall have either a concrete footer or a trenched concrete wall. The
bottom of all excavations shall be on virgin, undisturbed earth and shall be
inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to placement of the concrete.
(4) The water supply system and sewage disposal system shall be approved by the
Genesee County Health Department.
(5) Additions, alterations and extensions to such mobile homes shall comply with
the New York State Fire Uniform Prevention and Building Code and shall be
placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Temporary residence.
(1) Restrictions.
(a) A mobile home may be temporarily occupied as a one-family dwelling on
any lot in the R, AG-R or AG District for a maximum period of two years
upon the issuance of a temporary use permit if the owner of a vacant lot
has been issued an active, valid zoning permit by the Town of Batavia for
the construction of a private dwelling on the lot in question. The
placement of such temporary mobile home shall comply with all the
dimensional and area requirements of the respective zoning district as set
forth in Zoning Schedule A and Article III, other than § 235-18.
(b) Where the existing dwelling on the lot has been damaged in such a
manner as to make it uninhabitable, the Building Inspector may grant a
nonrenewable emergency housing permit for a period of time not
exceeding one year. A temporary use permit is required for a time period
exceeding one year, but such temporary use permit and original
55. Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-54 ZONING § 235-54
235:117
§ 235-55. Mobile home parks.
nonrenewable emergency housing permit combined cannot exceed a total
time period of two years.
(2) Criteria. Mobile homes occupied as temporary dwellings shall meet the
following criteria:
(a) The mobile home units shall comply with the current construction and
safety standards set forth by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development and have a minimum habitable floor area of 600
square feet, exclusive of any porches, additions or other extensions.
(b) Placement of the mobile home must comply with the minimum area
requirements for a one-family dwelling in that district, including but not
limited to lot size and width, yard areas, parking and finished grade.
(c) Mobile homes shall be installed in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(d) The water supply system and sewage disposal system for the mobile
home shall be approved by the Genesee County Health Department.
(e) No extensions of the time period (two years) shall be granted.
(f) The mobile home must be occupied by the owner of the lot upon which it
is situated.
(g) The owner shall remove the mobile home within 30 days of the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling.
(h) There shall be no additions, alterations and extensions to mobile homes
used as a temporary residence.
A. New mobile home parks. A new mobile home park may be located, or an existing
one modified, in the Mobile Home Park District upon the issuance of a special use
permit as provided for in § 235-63, provided the proposed mobile home park meets
the requirements and conditions set forth in Chapter 150, Mobile Home Parks, of
this Code.
B. Modification of existing mobile home parks outside the Mobile Home Park District.
Existing mobile home parks outside of the MHP District may be modified in
compliance with Chapter 150, Mobile Home Parks, of this Code.
§ 235-54 BATAVIA CODE § 235-55
235:118
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 235-56. Enforcement officers.
The responsibility of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is hereby
conferred upon the Building Inspector and his/her duly authorized assistants, who shall
have the powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter, those as may be reasonably
implied therefrom and those powers conferred upon him/her by other applicable laws.
The Building Inspector and his/her duly authorized assistants shall be appointed by the
Town Board and receive such compensation as determined by the Town Board. All
references to duties and/or authority of the Building Inspector shall be deemed to also
include any duly authorized assistants.
§ 235-57. Duties of Building Inspector.
A. Applications and permits. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, or his/her
duly authorized assistants, to process applications and issue the permits required by
this chapter.
B. Inspection and review. It shall also be the duty of the Building Inspector, or his/her
duly authorized assistants, to cause any plans, buildings or premises to be examined
or inspected so as to determine whether or not they are in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. He/she shall have the right to enter any building or premises with
the consent of the owner, or by a court order, during reasonable hours in the course
of his/her duties.
C. Violations and written orders. When the Building Inspector determines that any
plans, buildings or premises are in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he/she
shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner and/or other responsible party
directing that said violation be remedied. Said written notice shall specify the nature
of the violation found to exist, the remedy ordered, the time permitted for such
remedial action, the penalties and remedies which may be invoked by the town and
the violator's rights of appeal.
D. Revocation of certificate of compliance. On service of the above-described notice
of violation, the certificate of compliance for such building or use shall be held null
and void. A new certificate of compliance shall be required for any further use of
such building or premises.
E. Records. The Building Inspector shall maintain a permanent record of all matters
considered and all action taken by him/her. Such records shall form a part of the
records of his/her office and shall be available for the use of the Town Board and
other officials of the town. The records to be maintained shall include at least the
following:
(1) Application file. A separate, permanent file shall be established for each
application for a permit required by this chapter at the time said application is
filed. Such file shall contain one signed copy of the application and all
supporting documents and plans, notations regarding pertinent dates and fees,
etc., one copy of any resolution and/or decision of the Planning Board and/or
§ 235-56 ZONING § 235-57
235:119
§ 235-58. Certificates and permits.
The following certificates and permits are hereby established for the equitable
enforcement and administration of the provisions of this chapter:
§ 235-59. Application for zoning permit.
Board of Appeals adopted in connection with the application, and the date the
permit applied for was issued or denied by the Building Inspector, together
with a copy of such permit or denial.
(2) Monthly report. The Building Inspector shall submit a monthly written report
for the Town Board. Said report shall cite all actions taken by the Building
Inspector, including all referrals made by him/her, all permits and certificates
issued and denied, all complaints of violations received, all violations found
by him/her, and any action taken by him/her in connection with each such
violation. A copy of this monthly report shall also be provided by the Building
Inspector to the Tax Assessor, Planning Board and Board of Appeals.
A. Zoning permit. The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to issue a zoning
permit for any plans involving the construction or alteration of a building or
structure or part of any building or structure, including signs, or the change in use
of any land, building or structure or part thereof, where he/she determines that such
plans comply with the provisions of this chapter. A zoning permit is not a building
permit. An applicant may need both permits.
B. Temporary use permit. Upon written direction of the Planning Board, the Building
Inspector is hereby empowered to issue a temporary use permit pursuant to
§§ 235-54B and 235-63B(4). Except as otherwise provided in § 235-54B, a
temporary use permit shall only be effective for a period not exceeding 12 months,
and such permit may be extended by the Planning Board for an additional
consecutive period not exceeding six months.
C. Emergency housing permit. The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to issue a
nonrenewable emergency housing permit when a dwelling unit is rendered
uninhabitable (e.g., fire, flooding, etc.), for a period not exceeding one year in
conformance with § 235-54B.
D. Special use permit. The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to issue a special
use permit when granted by the Planning Board as provided for in § 235-63.
E. Certificate of compliance. The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to issue a
certificate of compliance certifying that all provisions of this chapter have been
complied with in respect to the location and use of the building, structure or
premises in question.
A. Application. Applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by a layout
sketch, drawn to scale, showing the shape and dimensions of the lot to be affected,
the size and location of all buildings or structures to be constructed, altered or
extended as well as unaffected structures that shall remain, the intended use of each
building or structure, the exact location of all utility and other easements and rightsof-
way, and any other information with regard to the lot affected and neighboring
§ 235-57 BATAVIA CODE § 235-59
235:120
§ 235-60. Fees.
Fees may be charged for the processing of applications for the various permits,
amendments, and variances required and/or permitted by the provisions of this chapter,
together with site plan review and planned unit developments. The fees shall be set by
separate resolution of the Town Board and may be changed from time to time in the
same manner.
§ 235-61. Certificate of compliance.
No land shall be used, occupied or changed in use and no building hereafter erected,
altered, or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of compliance has
been issued by the Building Inspector in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 235-62. Zoning Board of Appeals.
lots as may be necessary for compliance with requirements of this chapter. The
applicant is solely responsible for the accuracy of all information, data and site
plans submitted pursuant to this chapter. Four copies of the application, together
with the layout sketch, shall be submitted. The Building Inspector shall carefully
consider the application, layout sketch and any supporting documents for
compliance with this chapter and either issue or deny the zoning permit in a timely
manner.
B. Issuance of zoning permit. The Building Inspector shall issue a zoning permit only
after the site plan, if required, has been approved by the Planning Board and any
required variances and/or special use permits have been obtained. [Amended
2-19-2003]
C. Installation of foundation. The Building Inspector shall be notified when the site is
prepared for installation of the foundation for any building or structure and shall
inspect the site to check the proposed location thereof.
D. Completion of construction. A zoning permit shall expire if construction is not
substantially completed within a period of one year from the date of said permit.
The Building Inspector may issue a six-month extension for good cause shown.
Only two such extensions shall be permitted.
E. Location of permit. The zoning permit shall be located in a place readily visible to
the public during the construction process.
A. Organization. The Town Board shall appoint five regular members to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of § 267 of the Town Law, and
two alternate member(s) as provided for by Local Law No. 1 of 2001, and shall
designate the Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a Chairperson the Board of
Appeals may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. The term of
office for regular members shall be governed by the applicable provisions of New
York Town Law, and the term of office for the alternate member(s) shall be two
years. The Chairperson of the Board of Appeals may designate an alternate member
to substitute for a regular member when such member is unable to participate on an
application or matter before the Board. When so designated, the alternate member
§ 235-59 ZONING § 235-62
235:121
shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of a regular member. Such
designation shall be entered into the minutes of the initial Board of Appeals meeting
at which such substitution is made. All provisions of state law relating to Board
of Appeals member eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office
and service on other boards, as well as any town requirements related to training,
compensation and attendance, shall also apply to alternate members. [Amended
4-18-2001]
B. Meetings, minutes and records. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the Public Officers Law.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
C. Filing requirements. Every rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk within five business days and shall be a
public record.
D. Hearing appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from
and review any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made
by the Building Inspector. The concurring vote of a majority of the entire Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Building Inspector or to grant a use or area variance. In those
instances where, due to the location of the affected property, a variance request is
subject to review under General Municipal Law § 239-m, a majority plus one vote
of the entire Zoning Board of Appeals is necessary to override a County Planning
Board recommendation of disapproval or approval with modification. Such appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau
of the town.
E. Time of appeal.
(1) Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the filing of any order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination of the Building
Inspector by filing with said official and with the Town Clerk a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought. Such notice of
appeal shall be filed on forms available from the Building Inspector or Town
Clerk. The cost of sending or publishing any notice relating to such appeal
shall be borne by the appealing party and shall be paid to the Town Clerk prior
to the hearing of such appeal.
(2) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Appeals, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with the Building
Inspector, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise then by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application,
on notice to the Building Inspector from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
§ 235-62 BATAVIA CODE § 235-62
235:122
F. Hearing on appeal.
(1) A public hearing shall be held by the Zoning Board of Appeals before deciding
an appeal. Such public hearing shall be advertised by publication in a paper of
general circulation within the town of a notice of such hearing at least five
days prior to the date thereof. When required by the provisions of § 239 of the
General Municipal Law, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall forward the
application to the County Planning Board for its review.
(2) At least 30 days before the date of the public hearing, unless such time limit is
waived by the Planning Board, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall transmit to the Planning Board a copy of the notice of hearing and all
pertinent information for those appeals involving a use variance. The Planning
Board shall inform the Zoning Board of Appeals in writing of its advisory
opinion (including recommendations) prior to the hearing. Failure of the
Planning Board to inform the Zoning Board of Appeals within the allotted time
shall be deemed to signify no recommendation on the application.
(3) At least 10 days before the date of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall send, by regular mail, a copy of the notice of hearing to all Town of
Batavia property owners whose property(ies) is located within 250 feet of the
property which is the subject of the application when the property involved is
located in an R District, or within 500 feet when the involved property is
located in any other district.
G. Time of decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide upon an appeal within
62 days after the conduct of the public hearing. Prior to rendering its decision the
Board shall first complete the SEQR process. Said time of decision may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and Zoning Board of Appeals.
H. Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals on an
appeal shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk within five business days after
the day such decision is rendered and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant by
regular mail.
I. Permitted action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Interpretations, requirements, decisions and determinations. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partially, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from
and shall make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination as in its opinion ought to have been made.
(2) Use variances.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the Building Inspector, shall have the power to grant use
variances authorizing a use of land which otherwise would not be allowed
or would be prohibited by this chapter.
(b) No such use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and
§ 235-62 ZONING § 235-62
235:123
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such
unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Zoning
Board of Appeals that for each and every use allowed under the zoning
regulations for the particular district where the property is located:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that lack
of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent financial
evidence;
[2] The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique
and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or
neighborhood;
[3] The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood; and
[4] The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(c) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant and at the same
time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(3) Area variances.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon appeal from a
decision or determination of the zoning enforcement officer, to grant area
variances from the area or dimensional requirements of this chapter.
(b) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into
consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as
weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination, the Board shall also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of
the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created
by the granting of the area variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by
some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area
variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact
on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or
district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area variance.
§ 235-62 BATAVIA CODE § 235-62
235:124
§ 235-63. Planning Board.
(c) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(4) Imposition of conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting
of both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental
to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of
minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood
or community.
J. Solar access. Pursuant to Chapter 742 of the Laws of 1979, the siting of houses to
take best advantage of solar energy and/or the construction of residential solar
equipment shall be considered in the application of the provisions of this chapter.56
Upon appeal pursuant to this section of this chapter the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider the specific conditions of the case and may make provisions for, so
far as conditions permit, the accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment
and access to sunlight necessary therefor when hearing a request for an area
variance.
K. Rehearing. A motion for the Zoning Board of Appeals to hold a rehearing to review
any order, decision or determination of the Board not previously reviewed may be
made by any member of the Board. A unanimous vote of all members of the Board
then present is required for such rehearing to occur. Such rehearing is subject to the
same notice provisions as an original hearing. Upon such rehearing the Board may
reverse, modify or annul its original order, decision or determination upon the
unanimous vote of all members then present, provided the Board finds that the
rights vested in persons acting in good faith in reliance upon the reviewed order,
decision or determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
A. Organization. The Town Board shall appoint seven members to the Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of § 271 of the Town Law and two alternate
member(s) as provided for by Local Law No. 1 of 2001, and shall designate the
Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a Chairperson the Planning Board may
designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. The term of office for regular
members shall be governed by the applicable provisions of New York Town Law,
and the term of office for the alternate member(s) shall be two years. The
Chairperson of the Planning Board may designate an alternate member to substitute
for a regular member when such member is unable to participate on an application
or matter before the Board. When so designated, the alternate member shall possess
all the powers and responsibilities of a regular member. Such designation shall be
entered into the minutes of the initial Planning Board meeting at which such
substitution is made. All provisions of state law relating to the Planning Board
member eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office and service
on other boards, as well as any town requirements related to training, compensation
56. Editor's Note: See § 263 of the Town Law.
§ 235-62 ZONING § 235-63
235:125
and attendance, shall also apply to alternate members. [Amended 4-18-2001]
B. Powers and duties:
(1) Site plan review. Review of site plans in accordance with New York State
Town Law § 274-a, as set forth in Subsection C of this section, for any
application for a zoning permit other than those for single-family dwellings
and their accessory uses and/or buildings unless otherwise required by this
chapter (i.e., special use permit).
(2) Special use permits. Granting of special use permits in accordance with New
York State Town Law § 274-b as set forth in this chapter based upon the
criteria set forth in Subsection D of this section.
(3) Review use variances. Review use variance applications referred to the
Planning Board in accordance with §§ 235-62F and at its discretion make a
recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Temporary uses and structures. Grant permits for temporary uses and
structures only as follows, provided a public hearing has been held which
meets the same notice requirements as set forth in Subsection D(3) of this
section:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in § 235-43A(1)(c), the Planning Board
may direct the Building Inspector to issue a temporary use permit for a
period of time not exceeding 12 months for incidental nonconforming
uses and structures as follows:
[1] Temporary uses incidental to a construction project.
[2] Temporary real estate sales office incidental to a subdivision.
[3] Other similar temporary incidental uses which:
[a] Do not have a detrimental effect upon the lawful use of land
and activities normally permitted in the district in question; and
[b] Contribute materially to the welfare and well-being of the town.
(b) Temporary use permits shall be conditioned upon an agreement by the
applicant to remove the use upon expiration of the permit.
(c) Temporary use permits may be reissued only once for an additional
consecutive period not exceeding six months.
C. Site plan review. The Planning Board, at a regular or special meeting, shall review
and approve, approve with modification, or disapprove a site plan in connection
with any application for a zoning permit other than those for single-family
dwellings and their accessory uses and/or buildings.
(1) Notice and public hearing. [Amended 2-19-2003]
(a) The Planning Board shall notify all property owners within the Town of
Batavia who own land that is either contiguous or directly across from the
§ 235-63 BATAVIA CODE § 235-63
235:126
involved property. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail, at least 10
days before the meeting. In those instances when the Planning Board
holds an optional public hearing (See following subsection.) on a site plan
review, this notice to contiguous property owners is not required.
(b) The Planning Board may, in its sole discretion, hold a public hearing as
part of the site plan review process. When a public hearing is held as part
of the site plan review, the public hearing shall be held at a time fixed
within 62 days from the date of the application for site plan review is
received by it and public notice thereof shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town at least five days prior to the date of
the hearing. The Planning Board shall mail a notice of the hearing to the
applicant at least 10 days before such hearing and also send, by regular
mail, a copy of the notice of hearing to all owners of property located
within 250 feet of the property which is the subject of the application
when the property involved is located in an R District, or 500 feet when
the involved property is located in any other district, at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing. When necessary under § 239 of the
General Municipal Law, the Planning Board shall forward the site plan to
the Genesee County Planning Board for its review prior to taking any
final action.
(2) Submission of site plan and data. The applicant shall submit to the Town Clerk
10 copies of a site plan and supporting data in a form satisfactory to the
Planning Board, including but not limited to the following information
presented in graphic form and accompanied by a written text:
(a) Survey of property showing existing features, including contours, utility
easements, large trees, buildings, uses, structures, streets, rights-of-way,
zoning and ownership of surrounding property.
(b) Layout sketch showing proposed lots, blocks, building locations and land
use area.
(c) Traffic circulation, parking and loading spaces, and pedestrian walks.
(d) Landscaping plans, including site grading, landscape design, open space
and buffer zone.
(e) Preliminary architectural drawings for buildings to be constructed, floor
plans, exterior elevations and sections.
(f) Preliminary engineering plans, street improvements, storm drainage,
water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and fire protection.
(g) Engineering feasibility study of any anticipated problem which may arise
from the proposed development, as required by the Planning Board.
(h) Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase
for buildings, parking and landscaped areas.
(i) Description of proposed uses, anticipated hours of operation, expected
number of employees, and anticipated volume of traffic generated.
§ 235-63 ZONING § 235-63
235:127
(j) Description of proposed measures to control runoff and drainage from the
site and, when required by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and/or the SEQR process, a stormwater
management and erosion control plan.
(k) A description of the proposed generation, storage and/or disposal of
hazardous materials and/or hazardous wastes on site, including estimates
of amounts involved and provisions for transport, storage and
environmental protection.
(l) Any other permits or applications made to other governmental agencies
and any additional information requested by the Planning Board.
(3) Site plan review criteria. The Town Planning Board shall review the site plan
and supporting data before approval, approval with modifications, or
disapproval of such site plan, taking into consideration the following:
(a) Harmonious relationship between proposed uses and existing adjacent
uses.
(b) Maximum safety of vehicular circulation between the site and street,
including emergency vehicle access.
(c) Adequacy of interior circulation, parking and loading facilities, with
particular attention to pedestrian safety and emergency vehicle access.
(d) Adequacy of landscaping and setbacks to achieve compatibility with, and
protection of, adjacent residential uses.
(e) Adequacy of municipal facilities to serve the proposal, including streets,
water supply and wastewater treatment systems, stormwater control
systems, and fire protection.
(f) Protection of the aquifer and aquifer recharge areas that provide drinking
water for both private and municipal wells. In evaluating the protection
of the aquifer, aquifer recharge areas and the water supplies, the Planning
Board shall give consideration to the simplicity, reliability, and feasibility
of the control measures proposed and the degree of threat to water quality
that would result if the control measures failed.
(4) Area variances. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, where
a proposed site plan contains one or more features which do not comply with
the zoning regulations, applications may be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for an area variance pursuant to New York State Town Law § 274-a,
without the necessity of a decision or determination of an administrative
official charged with the enforcement of the zoning regulations.
(5) Modifications and conditions.
(a) The Planning Board may require changes or additions in relation to yards,
driveways, landscaping, buffer zones, etc., to ensure safety, to minimize
traffic difficulties and to safeguard adjacent properties. Should changes
or additional facilities be required by the Planning Board, final approval
§ 235-63 BATAVIA CODE § 235-63
235:128
of the site plan shall be conditional upon satisfactory compliance by the
applicant in making the changes or additions.
(b) The Planning Board shall have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to a
proposed site plan. Upon its approval of said site plan, any such
conditions must be met in connection with the issuance of permits by
applicable enforcement agents or officers of the town.
(6) Waiver of requirements. The Planning Board is empowered, when reasonable,
to waive any requirements for the approval, approval with modifications or
disapproval of site plans submitted for approval. Any such waiver, which shall
be subject to appropriate conditions set forth in this chapter, may be exercised
in the event any such requirements are found to be not requisite in the interest
of the public health, safety or general welfare or inappropriate to a particular
site plan.
(7) Reservation of parkland on site plans containing residential units.
(a) Before the Planning Board may approve a site plan containing residential
units, such site plan shall also show, when required by the Planning Board
or this chapter, a park or parks suitably located for playground or other
recreational purposes.
(b) Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes may not be
required until the authorized Board has made a finding that a proper case
exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes within the town. Such
findings shall include an evaluation of the present and anticipated future
needs for park and recreational facilities in the town based on projected
population growth to which the particular site plan will contribute.
(c) In the event the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to Subsection
C(7)(b) of this section that the proposed site plan presents a proper case
for requiring a park or parks suitably located for playgrounds or other
recreational purposes, but that a suitable park or parks of adequate size to
meet the requirement cannot be properly located on such site plan, the
Planning Board may require a sum of money in lieu thereof to be
established by the Town Board. In making such determination of
suitability, the Board shall assess the size and suitability of lands shown
on the site plan which could be possible locations for park or recreational
facilities, as well as practical factors, including whether there is a need
for additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood. Any moneys
required by the Planning Board in lieu of land for park, playground or
other recreational purposes, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
shall be deposited into a trust fund to be used by the town exclusively for
park, playground or other recreational purposes, including the acquisition
of property.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Subsection C(7), if the
land included in a site plan under review is a portion of a subdivision plat
which has been reviewed and approved pursuant to New York State
§ 235-63 ZONING § 235-63
235:129
Town Law § 276, the Planning Board shall credit the applicant for any
land set aside or money donated in lieu thereof under such subdivision
plat approval. In the event of resubdivision of such plat, nothing shall
preclude the additional reservation of parkland or money donated in lieu
thereof.
(8) Performance bond or letter of credit as a condition of site plan approval. The
Planning Board may require as a condition of site plan approval that the
applicant file a performance bond or letter of credit in such amount as the
Planning Board determines to be in the public interest, to ensure that the
proposed development will be built in compliance with accepted plans. Any
such bond must be in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney for an amount
approved by the Town Board.
(9) Performance standards. In all districts, uses are not permitted which violate
applicable county, state and/or federal codes and regulations pertaining to
environmental issues. The Planning Board, under its powers of site plan
review and approval, may, in its discretion, reject any uses if it determines that
insufficient evidence has been submitted to show compliance with these
environmental standards. However, final responsibility for compliance with all
environmental laws and regulations lies with the applicant.
(10) Decisions. The Planning Board shall decide any matter referred to it under this
Subsection C within 62 days after the first regular monthly meeting of the
Planning Board at least 10 days prior to which the site plan and all supporting
data required by this article are submitted to the Town Clerk. Such time may
be extended by mutual consent of the Planning Board and the developer. Prior
to rendering its decision the Board shall first complete the SEQR process. In
those instances where, due to the location of the affected property, a variance
request is subject to review under General Municipal Law § 239-m, a majority
plus one vote of the entire Planning Board is necessary to override a County
Planning Board recommendation of disapproval or approval with
modification. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the office of
the Town Clerk within five business days after such decision is rendered and a
copy mailed to the applicant by regular mail.
(11) Changes and revisions. Any applicant wishing to make changes in an approved
site plan shall submit a revised site plan to the Planning Board for review and
approval.
(12) Revocation of permit. After a permit has been issued following site plan
review based upon either approval or approval with modifications, a permit
may be revoked by the authorizing Board which granted the approval for said
permit in the event that the permit grantee deviates from or does not comply
with the site plan exactly as approved or with any modifications or conditions
established by the authorizing Board or in the event that, after full compliance
has been achieved, the permit grantee thereafter deviates from or ceases to
comply with the site plan exactly as approved or with any modifications or
conditions established by the authorizing Board. The procedure for revocation
of a permit shall be as follows: [Added 9-19-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
§ 235-63 BATAVIA CODE § 235-63
235:130
(a) After notification in writing by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of
alleged violations, the authorizing Board shall hold a public hearing to
consider whether or not the permit grantee is fully compliant with the
approved site plan or has violated any terms or conditions of said permit.
The public hearing shall be held only after the permit grantee has been
notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of said violations and has
failed to correct said violations within the time period established by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, to be not less than 15 calendar days.
(b) At least 10 calendar days before said public hearing, a legal notice of said
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town of Batavia. Written notice of said hearing shall also be mailed to
the permit grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular first-class mail directed to the last known address of the permit
grantee.
D. Special use permit. The Planning Board, at a regular or special meeting, shall
review and approve, approve with modification, or disapprove an application for a
special use permit. Uses requiring a special use permit are those which are
compatible with the general spirit of this chapter if certain standards and conditions
are met. Each such use is listed in this chapter as a use permitted within a zoning
district upon the issuance of a special use permit. All provisions of this chapter shall
be followed, and the Planning Board must find that the proposed implementation of
such use is not inconsistent with the public welfare. A special use permit may be
subject to conditions and safeguards imposed by the public welfare. Also, the
Building Inspector shall at least annually inspect the use of the property in question
to ensure compliance with conditions which have been imposed by the Planning
Board in issuing such special use permit and other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(1) Application. Applications for special use permits shall be made in writing on
the appropriate form obtained from the Building Inspector. Four copies of each
application, including site plan, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
who shall review the application for completeness prior to forwarding it to the
Town Clerk and the Planning Board. One copy shall be retained by the
Building Inspector. Such site plan shall show the location of all buildings,
parking, access and circulation, open space, landscaping and other information
necessary to determine that the proposed special use complies with the intent
of this chapter.
(2) Area variance. Where a proposed special use permit contains one or more
features which do not comply with this chapter, application may be made to
the Zoning Board of Appeals for an area variance pursuant to § 274-b of Town
Law without the necessity of a decision or determination of the Building
Inspector.
(3) Notice and public hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing as
part of the special use permit process. The public hearing shall be held at a
time fixed within 62 days from the date the application for a special use permit
is received by the Board, and public notice thereof shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town at least five days prior to the date
§ 235-63 ZONING § 235-63
235:131
of the hearing. At least 10 days before such hearing, the Planning Board shall
mail a notice of the hearing to the applicant and also send, by regular mail, a
copy of the notice of hearing to all Town of Batavia property owners whose
property(ies) is located within 250 feet of the property which is the subject of
the application when the property involved is located in an R District, or within
500 feet when the involved property is located in any other district. When
necessary under § 239 of the General Municipal Law, the Planning Board shall
forward the site plan to the Genesee County Planning Board for its review
prior to taking any final action.
(4) Conditions. The Planning Board shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental
to a proposed special use permit plan. Upon its approval of said special use
permit, any such conditions must be met in connection with the issuance of the
special use permit by the Building Inspector.
(5) Waiver of requirements. The Planning Board is empowered, when reasonable,
to waive any requirements, other than procedural processes required by law,
for the approval, approval with modifications or disapproval of special use
permits submitted for approval, except that any modifications to dimensional
requirements (setbacks, lot size, etc.) shall require a variance from the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Any such waiver, which shall be subject to appropriate
conditions set forth in this chapter, may be exercised in the event any such
requirements are found to be not requisite in the interest of the public health,
safety or general welfare or inappropriate to a particular special use permit.
[Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
(6) Decisions. The Planning Board shall decide any matter referred to it under this
Subsection D within 62 days after the public hearing. Such time may be
extended by mutual consent of the Planning Board and the applicant. Prior to
rendering its decision the Board shall first complete the SEQR process. In
those instances where, due to the location of the affected property, a special
use permit request is subject to review under General Municipal Law § 239-m,
a majority plus one vote of the entire Planning Board is necessary to override
a County Planning Board recommendation of disapproval or approval with
modification. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the office of
the Town Clerk within five business days after such decision is rendered and a
copy mailed to the applicant by regular mail.
(7) Abandonment of special use permit. A special use permit shall expire when
there occurs a cessation of such use or activity, for which said special use was
originally issued, for a period of one year. Upon evidence that a special use
permit has been abandoned, the Building Inspector shall issue a notice of
abandonment to the owner of record for the property by registered mail. If after
60 days the owner has not provided satisfactory proof that the special use did
not cease, the Planning Board shall revoke the special use permit.
(8) Standards applicable for all special use permits.
(a) The Planning Board may issue a special use permit only after it has found
that all the following standards and conditions have been satisfied, in
§ 235-63 BATAVIA CODE § 235-63
235:132
addition to any other applicable standards and conditions contained
elsewhere in this chapter:
[1] The location and size of such use and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted therewith, its site layout and its relation to
access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic
to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection
therewith will not be hazardous and shall be in harmony with the
orderly development of the district.
[2] The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences will
not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land
and buildings nor impair their value.
[3] The operation of any such use shall not be more objectionable to
nearby properties than would be the operation of any permitted use.
[4] The proposed use shall not cause undue noise, vibration, odor,
lighting glare, and unsightliness so as to detrimentally impact on
adjacent properties.
[5] When a commercial or industrial special use abuts a residential
property, the Planning Board may find it necessary to require
screening of sufficient height and density (i.e., fences, hedges, etc.)
to reduce or eliminate the conflicting environmental conditions
previously mentioned.
[6] Electrical disturbances shall not be caused so as to disrupt radio or
television communications in the immediate area.
[7] The proposed use shall meet the off-street parking and loading
requirements of similar uses.
[8] Appropriate on-lot drainage shall be provided so as to eliminate any
potential on-site water related problems. Also, the drainage systems
created shall not detrimentally impact on adjacent properties.
[9] Traffic access to and from the use site, as well as on-lot traffic
circulation, shall be designed so as to reduce traffic hazards. The
Planning Board shall review and approve all such proposals.
[10] Such use shall be attractively landscaped. This shall involve grading,
seeding, and regular mowing of the front yard area at a minimum.
(b) A special use permit shall not be issued for a use on a lot where there is
an existing violation of this chapter unrelated to the use which is the
subject of the requested special use permit, as determined by the Planning
Board.
(c) As a condition of all special use permits, right of entry for inspection with
reasonable notice shall be provided to determine compliance with the
conditions of said permit.
§ 235-63 ZONING § 235-63
235:133
§ 235-64. (Reserved)57
§ 235-65. Penalties for offenses.
(d) In addition to the general standards for special permits as set forth herein,
the Planning Board may, as a condition of approval for any such use,
establish any other additional standards, conditions, and requirements it
deems necessary or appropriate to promote the public health, safety and
welfare and to otherwise implement the intent of this chapter.
(e) The above standards are not intended to apply to uses whose regulation
has been preempted by the state or federal government, i.e., mining.
(9) (Reserved)
(10) (Reserved)
(11) (Reserved)
(12) Revocation of special use permit. After a special use permit has been issued
following site plan review based upon either approval or approval with
modifications, a special use permit may be revoked by the authorizing Board
which granted the approval for said special use permit in the event that the
special use permit grantee deviates from or does not comply with the site plan
exactly as approved or with any modifications or conditions established by the
authorizing Board or in the event that, after full compliance has been achieved,
the special use permit grantee thereafter deviates from or ceases to comply
with the site plan exactly as approved or with any modifications or conditions
established by the authorizing Board. The procedure for revocation of a special
use permit shall be as follows: [Added 9-19-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
(a) After notification in writing by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of
alleged violations, the authorizing Board shall hold a public hearing to
consider whether or not the special use permit grantee is fully compliant
with the approved site plan or has violated any terms or conditions of said
special use permit. The public hearing shall be held only after the special
use permit grantee has been notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
of said violations, and has failed to correct said violations within the time
period established by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, to be not less than
15 calendar days.
(b) At least 10 calendar days before said public hearing, a legal notice of said
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town of Batavia. Written notice of said hearing shall also be mailed to
the special use permit grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and by regular first-class mail directed to the last known address of the
special use permit grantee.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, alter, repair,
move, equip, use or occupy, or change the use of, any building, structure, or land or
57. Editor's Note: Former § 235-64, Artichitectural Review Board, was repealed 2-19-2003.
§ 235-63 BATAVIA CODE § 235-65
235:134
§ 235-66. Complaint of violation.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard
thereto. All such complaints must be in writing, signed, and shall be filed with the
Building Inspector, who shall properly record such complaint, investigate it and take
appropriate action in a timely manner.
§ 235-67. Environmental quality review.
part thereof in a manner not permitted by this chapter or without the issuance of a
valid zoning permit or certificate of compliance as required by this chapter.
B. It shall be further unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a written order of
the Building Inspector within the time fixed for compliance therewith.
C. Appearance ticket. The Building Inspector may issue an appearance ticket to any
person who fails to respond to a notice of violation and written order to correct the
violation.
D. It shall be unlawful for any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents, or for any person taking
part or assisting in the construction, alteration, repair or use of any building,
structure or land, to violate any of the applicable provisions of this chapter or any
lawful order, notice, directive, permit or certificates issued or made hereunder.
E. Any violation of this section and/or this chapter shall be deemed an offense
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment as set forth in § 268 of New York State
Town Law. Each and every week such violation continues shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation.
F. The Building Inspector may engage the Town Attorney or any other attorney
approved by the Town Board to initiate legal action to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
G. In addition to the foregoing remedies, the Town of Batavia and/or its appropriate
officials and authorities may maintain an action for injunction to restrain, correct or
abate any violation of this chapter and/or maintain an action at law for damages
sustained as a result of any violation of this chapter and/or seek any other remedy
permitted by law, including Town Law § 268. Damages may include, but not be
limited to, the legal fees and court costs expended or incurred by the town as a result
of any legal proceedings brought hereunder.
A. The State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR) requires that local
governments examine the environmental impact of all actions they permit, fund, or
construct. Article 8 and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Code of Rules and
Regulations (8 NYCRR 617) set forth the SEQR regulations in detail and should be
reviewed for compliance prior to undertaking any of the above-mentioned
activities.
B. As set forth in 8 NYCRR 617, determination of lead agency status is one of the
initial steps in the SEQR process. When the Town is designated lead agency for a
particular zoning action, the following Boards (agencies) may typically be the lead
§ 235-65 ZONING § 235-67
235:135
agency for the actions identified as follows:
(1) Zoning text amendment: Town Board
(2) Zoning district amendment: Town Board.
(3) Special use permits: Planning Board.
(4) Site plan review: Planning Board.
(5) Variances: Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. The SEQR process may extend the various procedural time limits set forth
throughout this chapter. For those actions taken under this chapter subject to SEQR,
all time frames and deadlines otherwise set forth in this chapter may be delayed
until a determination of significance has been made and, if required, a draft
environmental impact statement has been filed.
§ 235-67 BATAVIA CODE § 235-67
235:136
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 235-68. Initiating amendments.
§ 235-69. Referral of proposed amendments to Town Planning Board and County
Planning Board.
§ 235-70. Hearing on proposed amendment.
§ 235-71. Petition protesting amendment.
In case of a protest against such change signed by the owners of 20% or more either of
A. Initiating amendments. The Town Board may, from time to time, on its own
motion, on petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Board, amend,
supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
B. Petitions. Each petition requesting a change of zoning regulations or district
boundaries shall be typewritten, signed by the owner, and filed in triplicate with the
Town Clerk and shall be accompanied by the required fee.
A. Referral to Town Planning Board. All proposed amendments, other than those
requested by the Planning Board, shall be referred to the Planning Board for its
optional recommendation thereon. The Planning Board may submit its report prior
to the public hearing.
B. Referral to County Planning Board. Where required by § 239 of the General
Municipal Law or other applicable statute, a proposed amendment shall be referred
to the Genesee County Planning Board, which Board shall report its
recommendations to the Town Board within 30 days from the date of such referral.
Failure of the Genesee County Planning Board to report within said period shall be
deemed an approval of the proposed amendment by said Board. In the event that
the Genesee County Planning Board disapproves the amendment or recommends
modification thereof, the Town Board shall not act contrary to such disapproval or
recommendation except by a vote of a majority plus one of all the members of the
Town Board and after the adoption of a resolution fully setting forth the reasons for
such contrary action.
A. Before adopting any amendments to this chapter, the Town Board shall give notice
of a public hearing thereon to such persons and in such manner as required by § 264
of Town Law or other applicable law and shall hold a hearing thereon pursuant to
such notice.
B. When a proposed amendment involves a rezoning, the Town Board shall mail a
notice of the hearing to the applicant(s) at least 10 days before such hearing. At
least 10 days before the date of the hearing, the Town Board shall also send, by
regular mail, a copy of the notice of hearing to all Town of Batavia property owners
whose property(ies) is located in the area to be rezoned or within 500 feet of the
boundary of the rezone. Prior to taking final action on any amendment the Town
Board shall complete the SEQR process (see § 235-67).
§ 235-68 ZONING § 235-71
235:137
the land included in such proposed change or of the land immediately adjacent thereto
and extending 100 feet therefrom or of the land directly opposite thereto and extending
100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of at least 3/4 of the members of the Town
Board.
§ 235-72. Periodic review by Planning Board.
From time to time, at intervals of not more than three years, the Planning Board shall
re-examine the provisions of this chapter and the location of district boundary lines and
shall submit a report to the Town Board recommending such changes or amendments,
if any, which may be desirable in the interest of public safety, health, convenience,
necessity or welfare.
§ 235-71 BATAVIA CODE § 235-72
235:138
ARTICLE IX
Legal Status Provisions
§ 235-73. Effect on prior ordinances.
This repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for
any act done or committed in violation of the ordinance titled "Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Batavia," and all amendments thereto hereby repealed, prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 235-74. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that, if any provision or provisions of
this chapter or the application thereof to any building or other structure or tract of land
is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or ineffective in whole
or in part, or to be inapplicable to any person or situation, the effect of such decision
shall be limited to the provision or provisions which are expressly stated in the decision
to be invalid or ineffective or the zoning lot, building or other structure or tract of
land immediately involved in the controversy. All other provisions of this chapter shall
continue to be separately and fully effective, and the application of any such provision
to other persons or situations shall not be affected.
§ 235-75. Conflicts with other laws.
Whenever any provisions of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, or resolution of
any kind impose overlapping or contradictory regulations over the use of the same land
or over the use, location or size of certain buildings or other structures or contain other
restrictions covering the same subject matter, the provisions which are more restrictive
or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
§ 235-76. Existing zoning permits.
In all cases where a zoning permit has previously been lawfully issued for the proposed
construction of a new building or other structure, or for an enlargement or alteration of
an existing building or other structure which requires the construction or extension of
a foundation, and the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto would make
such new, extended or altered building or structure nonconforming, such construction
may nevertheless continue in accordance with said zoning permit, and a certificate of
compliance may be issued for such nonconforming building or structure.
§ 235-77. Existing private agreements.
This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or any other
private agreement.
§ 235-78. Applicability of Uniform Code.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to repeal, modify or constitute an
alternative to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (hereafter
referred to as the Uniform Code). Town residents and other individuals using these
zoning regulations should make sure they refer to the Uniform Code and contact the
§ 235-73 ZONING § 235-78
235:139
Town of Batavia Code Enforcement Officer in order to determine its applicability to
their specific project.
§ 235-78 BATAVIA CODE § 235-78
235:140
Disposition List
§ 235-78 ZONING § 235-78
235:141

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Enactment Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2001 2-14-2001 Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Appeals: alternate
members
Ch. 34, Art. I
2-14-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
4-18-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 2-2001 5-16-2001 Taxation: alternative veterans
exemption amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
L.L. No. 3-2001 7-18-2001 Junkyards Ch. 138
L.L. No. 4-2001 8-15-2001 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-2002 2-20-2002 Increase in salary of Highway
Superintendent
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2002 10-16-2002 Sewer use amendment Ch. 191
L.L. No. 3-2002 10-16-2002 Water amendment Ch. 229
L.L. No. 4-2002 10-16-2002 Land separation Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2017
2-19-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 1-2003 8-20-2003 Sewer use amendment Ch. 191
11-17-2004 Comprehensive Emergency
Management Plan
See Ch. 9
L.L. No. 1-2005 2-16-2005 Disposal of solid waste Ch. 198, Art. II
6-15-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 2-2005 7-20-2005 Sewer use amendment Ch. 191
8-17-2005 Highways; vehicles and traffic
amendment (crosswalks)
Ch. 127
10-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 1-2006 4-19-2006 Town Engineer Ch. 47, Art. III; Ch.
59
4-19-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-19-2006 Notification of information
security breaches
Ch. 29
5-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
§ 235-78 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Adoption
Enactment Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2006 7-19-2006 Grant to Genesee County
Industrial Development Agency
for Gateway II Corporate Park
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2006 10-18-2006 Parks amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2017
L.L. No. 4-2006 11-15-2006 Building construction and fire
prevention amendment
Ch. 89
L.L. No. 1-2007 6-20-2007 Grant to Genesee County
Industrial Development Agency
for Upstate Med & Tech Park
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2007 8-15-2007 Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Appeals: attendance,
training and removal
amendment
Ch. 34, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2007 9-19-2007 Disposal of solid waste
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
L.L. No. 4-2007 9-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 1-2008 1-16-2008 Highways; vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
1-16-2008 Fair housing policy Ch. 14
L.L. No. 2-2008 2-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 3-2008 2-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
3-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 4-2008 7-16-2010 Grant to Genesee County
Industrial Development Agency
for Genesee Valley Agricultural
Business Park
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2010 1-20-2010 Grant to Genesee County
Industrial Development Agency
for Upstate Med & Tech Park
and Genesee Valley
Agricultural Business Park
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2010 8-18-2010 2010 Retirement Incentive
Program
Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2010
L.L. No. 3-2010 9-15-2010 2010 Retirement Incentive
Program
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2010 12-15-2010 Dogs Ch. 76
3-16-2011 Anti-displacement plan See Ch. 3
3-16-2011 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 38
§ DL-1 BATAVIA CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Adoption
Enactment Date Subject Disposition
3-16-2011 Handicapped accessibility
policy
See Ch. 17
7-20-2011 Smoke-free and substance-free
policy
Ch. 54
L.L. No. 1-2011 11-16-2011 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
L.L. No. 2-2011 12-21-2011 Building construction and fire
prevention amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 89; 235
12-21-2011 Fund balance policy Ch. 15
3-21-2012 Hazard mitigation plan Ch. 18
L.L. No. 1-2012 4-18-2012 Sewer use amendment Ch. 191
L.L. No. 2-2012 9-26-2012 Tax levy limit override 2013 NCM
1-2-2013 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 38
1-2-2013 Investment policy amendment Ch. 20
L.L. No. 1-2014 11-19-2014 Tax levy limit override 2014 NCM
L.L. No. 1-2015 1-20-2015 Repeal of L.L. No. 1-2014 NCM
L.L. No. 2-2015 3-18-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2015 6-17-2015 Parks amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2017
L.L. No. 4-2015 10-21-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 5-2015 11-18-2015 Tax levy limit override 2016 NCM
L.L. No. 6-2015 11-18-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 1-2016 4-20-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 235
L.L. No. 2-2016 6-22-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2016 10-19-2016 Tax levy limit override 2017 NCM
L.L. No. 1-2017 4-19-2017 Municipal building energy
benchmarking
Ch. 155
L.L. No. 2-2017 6-21-2017 Parks Ch. 169
L.L. No. 3-2017 8-16-2017 Town facilities Ch. 110
L.L. No. 4-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 5-2017 Tax levy limit override 2018 NCM
L.L. No. 6-2017 11-15-2017 Land separation repealer;
subdivision of land
Ch. 144 (reference
only); Ch. 204
Res. No. 80 3-21-2018 Investment Policy Amendment Ch. 20
L.L. No. 1-2018 4-18-2018 Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 173
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Adoption
Enactment Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2018 4-18-2018 Highways; Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No. 3-2018 4-18-2018 Road Specifications
Amendment
Ch. 183
L.L. No. 4-2018 7-18-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
L.L. No. 5-2018 9-19-2018 Ethics, Code of Amendment Ch. 11
L.L. No. 6-2018 10-17-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override 2019 NCM
L.L. No. 1-2019 2-20-2019 Building Construction and Fire
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 89
L.L. No. 2-2019 4-17-2019 Sexual Harassment Policy Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2020
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
1-2020
3-18-2020 Investment Policy Ch. 20 24
L.L. No.
2-2020
8-19-2020 Discrimination and
Harassment Policy;
Sexual Harassment
Policy Repealer
Ch. 7; Ch. 51
(reference
only)
25
L.L. No.
1-2021
1-20-2021 Moratorium on Solar
Energy Systems
NCM 26
L.L. No.
2-2021
5-19-2021 Remote Work Policy Ch. 45 26
L.L. No.
3-2021
7-21-2021 Moratorium Extension on
Solar Energy Systems
NCM 26
L.L. No.
4-2021
10-20-2021 Tax Levy Limit Override
2021
NCM 26
L.L. No.
5-2021
11-17-2021 Zoning Map Amendment NCM 26
L.L. No.
6-2021
11-17-2021 Procurement Policy
Amendment
Ch. 38 26
§ DL-1 BATAVIA CODE § DL-1
DL:4

ZONING
235 Attachment 1
Town of Batavia
Zoning Schedule A
[Amended 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
Minimum Yards (feet)
Zoning
District Permitted Uses
Minimum Lot
Size1
(square feet)
Minimum
Frontage
(feet) Front1 Rear Side
Maximum
Height4
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage/Green
Space(%)
Site Plan
Requirement
Princ. Access Princ. Access
AG-R Single-family 20,000 100 50 30 2
35 30/20 NO
(Water District) 16,000 75
Two-family 30,000 150 50 30 2
35 30/20 NO
(Water District) 20,000 100
Multifamily 40,000+3
250 50 35 20 35 30/20 YES
Nonresidential 85,000 250 50 40 30 35 30/20 YES
R Single-family 20,000 100 50 30 2
30 30/20 NO
(Water District) 16,000 75
Two-family 30,000 150 50 30 2
30 30/20 NO
(Water District) 20,000 100
Multifamily 40,000+3
200 50 35 20 30 30/20 YES
Nonresidential 40,000 200 50 40 301
30 35/20 YES
HR 1-2-family 10,000 60 25 25 10 15 10 35 30/20 NO
Nonresidential YES
HC 1-2-family 10,000 90 25 25 10 15 10 35 30/20 NO
Nonresidential None None 30 20 10 20 10 35 50/20 YES
INT Interchange 40,000 200 50 50 304
35 35/15 YES
C Commercial 40,000 200 50 50 304
35 35/15 YES
I Industrial 40,000 200 50 50 304
40 35/15 YES
IP Industrial Park 40,000 200 50 50 304
40 35/15 YES
PBD Business/Ind. 40,0004
200 50 50 30 40 35/15 YES
PUD Planned Unit Development – Refer to § 235-31
FPO Floodplain Overlay Zone – Refer to § 235-32
WPO Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone – Refer to § 235-33
NOTES:
1 Excludes the highway right-of-way (ROW).
2 For one- and two-family dwellings in these districts, one side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet and the other a minimum of eight feet.
3 Two-family lot size plus 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit for each over two.
4 Lot layout to be consistent with coordinated development plan. Refer to § 235-31.1.
235 Attachment 1:1 05 - 15 - 2008

ZONING
235 Attachment 2
Town of Batavia
Zoning Schedule B
Table of Uses
[Added 2-20-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
Existing Zoning Districts Proposed Districts
AG-R
Ag-Resid
R
Residential
C
Commercial
I
Industrial
IP
Ind. Park
HC Hamlet
Commercial
HR Hamlet
Residential
PBD
Planned
Business
Agricultural Uses
Agricultural uses. P P P P P P
Agricultural uses, excluding
animal husbandry.
P P
Private stable. P
Public stable. SP
Commercial greenhouse. SP P P
Animal waste storage facilities
(see § 235-46).
SP
Pond (see § 235-48). SP SP SP P SP P
Residential Uses
One- and two-family dwellings. P P P
Mobile homes (see § 235-54). P
Multifamily dwellings,
townhouse and twin home
developments.
SP SP SP
Home Occupation I (see
§ 235-44).
P SP SP
Home Occupation II (§ 235-44). SP SP SP
Residential care facility. SP SP SP
Cluster residential development
(see § 235-41).
SP SP SP
Bed-and-breakfast. SP SP SP
Boardinghouse. SP SP SP
ECHO unit (see § 235-51). SP
235 Attachment 2:1 05 - 15 - 2008
BATAVIA CODE
Existing Zoning Districts Proposed Districts
AG-R
Ag-Resid
R
Residential
C
Commercial
I
Industrial
IP
Ind. Park
HC Hamlet
Commercial
HR Hamlet
Residential
PBD
Planned
Business
Residential uses, provided the
predominant land use within
500 feet of the proposal is also
residential.
SP SP
Existing residential uses. P
Public/Community Service Uses
Religious institutions. P P P
Public parks, public
playgrounds, and municipal
uses.
P P P
Schools. P P P
Club. SP
Community center. SP SP SP
Cemetery. SP
Day-care center. SP SP SP
Animal shelter. SP
Hospital. SP-AH SP-AH SP-AH
Government facilities. P P
Commercial/Industrial Uses And Structures
Adult uses (see § 235-49). P
Airport landing strip. SP
Animal hospital. SP
Auction house. SP SP
Banks (excluding drive-in
banks).
P P
Campground (see § 235-43). SP
Car wash. SP SP
Commercial communication
tower (see § 235-52).
SP
Commercial excavation
(see § 235-40).
SP SP
Commercial or professional
office or service.
P P
Contractor’s yard. SP SP SP
235 Attachment 2:2 05 - 15 - 2008
ZONING
Existing Zoning Districts Proposed Districts
AG-R
Ag-Resid
R
Residential
C
Commercial
I
Industrial
IP
Ind. Park
HC Hamlet
Commercial
HR Hamlet
Residential
PBD
Planned
Business
Drive-in business, including
drive-in restaurants and drive-in
banks (see § 235-37).
SP SP
Farm equipment sales, service,
repair (see § 235-37).
SP SP SP
Gasoline station (see § 235-37). SP SP-SH SP SP-SH
Gasoline station-market
(see § 235-37).
SP SP-SH SP SP-SH
Hotel/motel. SP-AH SP-AH SP-AH
Indoor recreation facility. SP-AH SP-AH SP SP SP-AH
Kennel. SP SP
Landscaping contractor’s yard
(see § 235-53).
SP
Motor vehicle repair shop
(see § 235-37).
SP-AH SP SP SP
Motor vehicle sales. SP SP
Office buildings. P P
Off-premises advertising sign
(see § 235-39).
SP SP SP
Outdoor recreation facility. SP
Recreational vehicle and mobile
home sales and service.
SP SP
Restaurant. SP-SH SP-SH
Restaurant (excluding drive-in
restaurants).
P P
Retail store. SP-SH SP-SH
Retail/service trade. P P P
Self-service storage facility. SP SP-AH SP SP SP SP-AH
Shopping center. SP SP
Skilled trade shop
(see § 235-47).
SP
Theaters. P P
Warehouse. SP P P SP P
Wholesale trade. P P P P P
235 Attachment 2:3 05 - 15 - 2008
BATAVIA CODE
Existing Zoning Districts Proposed Districts
AG-R
Ag-Resid
R
Residential
C
Commercial
I
Industrial
IP
Ind. Park
HC Hamlet
Commercial
HR Hamlet
Residential
PBD
Planned
Business
Industrial Uses And Structures
Disposal transfer station. SP
Heavy machinery and truck
sales and service (see § 235-37).
SP
Industrial park. SP
Junkyard (see § 235-42). SP
Light industrial. SP SP
Manufacturing (enclosed). P
Manufacturing (unenclosed). SP
Recyclables handling and
recovery facility.
SP SP P SP P
Research and development
facility.
P
Truck stop. SP
Trucking terminal. SP
Utilities/Telecommunication/Energy
Commercial communication
tower (see § 235-52).
SP SP SP SP
Public utility (see § 235-38). SP SP SP SP P SP SP P
Noncommercial wind energy. SP SP SP SP SP
P = Permitted Use.
SP = Special Use Permit.
SP-AH = Special Permit on Arterial Highways Only.
SP-SH = Special Permit on State Highways Only.
235 Attachment 2:4 05 - 15 - 2008

ZONING
235 Attachment 3
Specific Planned Unit Development Regulations
Upstate New York Medical and Technology Park Planned Unit Development
[Adopted 3-19-2008]
§ 1. The final plan submitted by the Genesee County Economic Development Center1
 on
January 10, 2008, is hereby approved with the modifications and conditions stated
hereinafter:
A. The owner and developer will be subject to site plan review by the Town of Batavia
Planning Board pursuant to § 235-63C of the Code of the Town of Batavia for the
following:
(1) Any deviation from the currently approved roads plan or infrastructure plan.
(2) Any proposal to construct or modify a building or structure within the planned
unit development area.
B. Any and all signs to be erected or installed shall be subject to the standards and
review of § 235-39 of the Code of the Town of Batavia.
C. Any subdivision of land shall be subject to the review and requirements of Chapter
204 of the Code of the Town of Batavia.
D. The minimum size of any building lot or parcel shall be 40,000 square feet with a
minimum frontage upon Assemblyman R. Stephen Hawley Drive of 200 feet.
E. No common open space criteria as currently required in the Town of Batavia Zoning
Ordinance shall apply. Open green space areas shall be provided in conjunction with
the proposed stormwater management areas.
F. The maximum impervious coverage per parcel shall be allowed to be up to 75% of
the size of the parcel, with a minimum of 25% of green space.
G. The following shall be permitted uses with only site plan review and no special use
permit requirement:
(1) Research and development facilities.
(2) Commercialization centers and related facilities.
(3) Manufacturing facilities.
(4) Office buildings.
(5) Data centers.
1
 Editor’s note: Said plan is on file in the town offices.
235 Attachment 3:1 06 - 15 - 2008
BATAVIA CODE
(6) Call centers.
(7) Laboratory facilities.
(8) Academic, training and business development facilities.
H. The following shall be permitted uses with both site plan review and the requirement
to obtain a special use permit pursuant to § 235-63D of the Code of the Town of
Batavia:
(1) Restaurant.
(2) Fitness center.
(3) Day-care center.
(4) Banking facility.
I. There shall be no more than one drive-through use or structure, and no more than one
restaurant, fitness center, day-care or banking facility within the Planned Unit
Development area.
J. Any use not specifically listed herein shall need prior approval of the Town Board
before obtaining site plan and/or special use permit approval from the Town of
Batavia Planning Board.
K. All front, side and rear setbacks for all buildings shall be at least 30 feet from any
roadway rights-of-way and all interior parcel boundary lines.
L. All parking lots shall be set back at least 10 feet from any roadway rights-of-way and
all interior parcel boundary lines.
M. All parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet.
N. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be subject to the requirements in §§
235-34, 235-35 and 235-36 of the Code of the Town of Batavia.
O. Sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet shall be installed between parking
facilities and all buildings.
P. All buildings and structures shall be no taller than three stories or 50 feet above
finished grade.
Q. There will be no requirement for the owner or developer to post security bonds for
performance and maintenance for the site or individual parcels therein.
235 Attachment 3:2 06 - 15 - 2008
ZONING
§ 2 A copy of this resolution with its decision therein shall immediately be filed in the office
of the Town Clerk, and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant by regular mail.
235 Attachment 3:3 06 - 15 - 2008