Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-4-1991 as L.L. No. 4-1991]
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters as
follows:
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Brightwaters shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of
Brightwaters," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in
any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the Code of
the Village of Brightwaters to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section number appearing
in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters, and it is
the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Brightwaters in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Brightwaters prior to the effective
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Brightwaters or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of
Brightwaters.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Brightwaters.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Brightwaters providing for
the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Brightwaters or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Brightwaters appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Brightwaters or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation related to carnivals, street fairs and circuses.
M. Any legislation related to Village facilities.
N. Any legislation regarding vehicles and traffic.
O. Investment policies and guidelines for the Village, including a
resolution dated 2-1-1988.
P. Any legislation adopted subsequent to March 4, 1991.
§ 1-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 1-5
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Brightwaters and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by
the Village Clerk of the Village of Brightwaters by impressing thereon the
Seal of the Village of Brightwaters, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability
of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Brightwaters" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of
Trustees to be a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Brightwaters required to
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or parts thereof, may be purchased from the Village
Clerk of the Village of Brightwaters upon the payment of a fee to be set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by
resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes
or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code
of the Village of Brightwaters or who alters or tampers with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village
of Brightwaters to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other
provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Brightwaters, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B, the following Code sections, Articles and chapters
were amended or added: §§ 8-1, 8-5, 8-10, 11-1, 11-2, 11-3A, 11-5B, 16-5, 19-2B, 19-3 and
19-4, Art. I of Ch. 38, §§ 50-4, 50-5, 50-6, 50-7, 50-8, 50-13, 75-1, 75-2, 75-3, 75-4, 75-5,
75-6, 75-7, 75-8, 75-9, 75-13, 75-16A, 75-18, 75-19, 75-20, 75-21, 75-24 and 75-25, Art. V
of Ch. 75, §§ 81-1, and 81-8, Ch. 84, §§ 94-2B(4)(a), 94-7F and G, 97-3B, 97-4, 97-8, 105-2,
105-4, 105-5B(4) and (5), 105-8, 105-9, 105-10, 105-11A, 105-12A, 106-3, 108-4, 108-6,
108-8A, 108-12, 108-14, 108-15, 108-16, 108-18, 108-26, 113-1, 124-9, 124-11, 124-13A,
124-17. Arts. II and III of Ch. 124 and Ch. 128. In addition, the following Code sections
and Articles were deleted: § 38-2B, the definition of "Department of Sanitation" located in
former § 19-2; §§ 39-8C, 39-14, 39-28, 39-29, 39-31A and C and Art. III of Ch. 39. In
addition, the following penalty sections and Articles were amended or added: §§ 50-12,
§ 1-8 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Village of Brightwaters, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
75-12, 75-17, 75-22, 75-26, 81-10, 90-4, 90-7, 90-9, 100-3, 105-14, Art. V of Ch. 108 and
§ 124-4. In addition, the following changes were made wherever the same appeared:
Building Inspector" was changed to read "Code Enforcement Officer"; "Building
Department" was changed to read "Code Enforcement Bureau"; and "State Building Code"
was changed to read "New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code." A
complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 8
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 19.
§ 8-1. Legislative intent.2
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection
for those individuals serving the Village of Brightwaters from losses which
may be brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken
while in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In
enacting this chapter, the Village Board of Trustees finds that the State of
New York has enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security
of its officers and employees and further finds that such security is also
required for local personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of
Trustees does not intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or
responsibility of the Village or its employees with regard to indemnification
or legal defense. It is the intent of this chapter to provide similar coverage
for local employees as is presently provided for state employees so as to
continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 8-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Village of Brightwaters, whether or
not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in
a municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 8-3. Provisions for defense.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 8-5 of this
chapter, the Village of Brightwaters shall provide for the defense of the
employee in any civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court
arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged
in the complaint to have occurred while the employee was acting within
the scope of his public employment or duties or which is brought to
enforce a provision of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983. This duty to provide for
a defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is
brought by or on behalf of the Village of Brightwaters.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 8-3
8:8
§ 8-4. Indemnification.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his
investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, the
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate or
whenever a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a conflict of
interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a
condition of payment of the fees and expenses, that the employee or
group of employees be represented by the same counsel. If the
employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by private
counsel under the provisions of this section, the Village Attorney shall
so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation
expenses shall be paid by the Village to such private counsel from time
to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding, subject to
certification that the employee is entitled to representation under the
terms and conditions of this Subsection B by the head of the
department, commission, division, office or agency in which such
employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant of the Village
Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple
employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or
the reasonableness of attorney's fees shall be resolved by the court
upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 8-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section,
on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a
defense.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage
resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the
employee.
B. Any employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
be subject to indemnification by the Village; and, if not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor shall certify such
§ 8-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 8-4
8:9
§ 8-5. Conditions.3
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant,
at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within 10 days after he is
served with such document and the full cooperation of the employee in
the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or
proceeding against the state based upon the same act or omission and in the
prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the
employee that the Village provide for his defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 8-6. Limitation of applicability.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees, as defined herein,
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 8-7. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 8-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending on the effective date hereof or hereafter instituted.
settlement and submit such settlement and certification to the Village
Attorney. The Attorney shall give his approval if, in his judgment, the
settlement is in the best interest of the Village. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify or save
harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and
approved by the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry of settlement, upon the Mayor;
and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 8-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 8-9
8:10
§ 8-9. Construal of provisions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Village or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 8-10. Payment of claims by Village.4
The Village shall be solely liable for and shall pay any amount which such
public officials become legally obligated to pay or which the Village shall
be required by law to pay for any claim or claims made against the public
officials for their public acts, which shall include damages, judgments,
settlements, costs and expenses of investigation and defense of legal
actions, claims or suits and appeals therefrom and costs of attachment,
appeal or similar bonds, including any insurance policy deductible and
including all sums in excess of any insurance policy limits, which are not
otherwise insured.
Chapter 11
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 19.
§ 11-1. Purpose. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters recognizes that there are rules of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed
if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence
is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promulgate rules of ethical conduct for the officers and
employees of the Village of Brightwaters. These rules shall serve as a
guide for official conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of
Brightwaters. The rules of ethical conduct in this chapter, as adopted and
amended, shall not conflict with but shall be in addition to any prohibition of
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other general or special law
relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers
and employees.
4. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 8-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 11-2
8:11
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer
or employee, unless the context otherwise requires.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Brightwaters, whether paid or unpaid, including member of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a "municipal officer or employee" solely by reason of being
a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer.[Amended 11-4-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 11-3. Standards of conduct. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991; 9-3-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
Every officer or employee of the Village of Brightwaters, Suffolk County,
New York, shall be subject to and abide by the following standards of
conduct:
A. Gifts. He or she shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept
or receive any gift having a value of $25 or more whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence in the
performance of his or her official duties or was intended as a reward for
any official action on his or her part. The use of Village services,
property or personnel is for the sole benefit of the Village, official
Village events and all its residents and may not be used for any personal
use.
B. Use of Village funds and property. No Village of Brightwaters officer or
employee shall use Village funds, property or a Village facility for
political purposes or for the personal advantage of themselves or a
member of their family.
C. Equal treatment of public by Village officers and employees. Every
Village officer and employee of the Village of Brightwaters shall treat
every member of the public with equal consideration and without
special advantage. No Village officer or employee shall discriminate on
the basis of race, color, creed/religion, national origin, age, disability,
sex or sexual orientation.
D. Confidential Information. He or she shall not disclose confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official
duties or use such information to further his or her personal interest.
E. Representation before one's own agency. He or she shall not receive or
enter into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for
services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal
agency of which he or she is an officer, member or employee or any
§ 11-2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 11-3
8:12
municipal agency over which he or she has jurisdiction or to which he
or she has the power to appoint any member, officer or employee.
F. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He or she shall
not receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of this municipality whereby his or her compensation
is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing, at any time, of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
G. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he or she knows
thereof, a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee
of the Village of Brightwaters, Suffolk County, New York, whether paid
or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives official opinion to
the Board of Trustees on any legislation before the Board of Trustees
shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of any
direct or indirect financial or other private interest he or she has in
such legislation.
H. Investments in conflict with official duties. He or she shall not invest or
hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his or her official duties, except that he or she can hold less than a fivepercent
stock interest in any corporation doing business with the
Village of Brightwaters.
I. No officer or employee shall have an interest in any contract with the
Village of Brightwaters when such officer or employee, individually or
as a member of a board, has the power or duty to i) negotiate, prepare,
authorize or approve the contract or authorize or approve payment
thereunder; ii) audit bills or claims under the contract; iii) appoint an
officer or employee who has any of the powers or duties set forth above.
J. Outside employment requiring disclosure of confidential information.
No officer or employee of the Village of Brightwaters shall accept
employment or engage in any business or professional activity which
will require him or her to disclose confidential information which he or
she has gained by reason of his or her official position or authority.
K. No officers or employees of the Village of Brightwaters shall disclose
confidential information or information not generally available to the
public, acquired by them in the course of their official duties, nor use
such information to further their personal interests, either while
officers or employees of the Village or after they have left Village
service.
L. No officer or employee of the Village of Brightwaters shall use or
attempt to use his or her official position to secure unwarranted
privileges or exemptions for himself or herself and others.
§ 11-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 11-3
8:13
§ 11-3.1. Disclosure of interest required.
Any Village officer or employee who has, will have or later acquires an
interest in any actual or proposed contract with the Village shall publicly
disclose the nature and extent of such interest in writing to the Village
Board as soon as he/she has knowledge of such actual or prospective
interest. Such written disclosure shall be made part of and set forth in
the official record of the proceedings of such body, and a copy shall be
forwarded to the Village Clerk to be kept in a separate file. Once disclosure
has been made by an officer or employee with respect to an interest in
M. Transactions as Village agent. No officers or employees of the Village of
Brightwaters shall engage in any transaction as representatives or
agents of the Village with any business entity in which they have a
direct or indirect financial interest that might reasonably tend to
conflict with the proper discharge of their official duties.
N. Village officers or employees shall not, by their conduct, give a
reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly
influence them or unduly enjoy their favor in the performance of their
official duties or that they are affected by kinship, rank, position or
influence of any party or person.
O. Officers and employees of the Village of Brightwaters shall abstain from
making personal investments in enterprises which they have reason to
believe may directly be involved in decisions to be made by them or
which will otherwise create conflicts between their duty in the public
interest and private interest.
P. Private employment. He or she shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for
or promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his or her official duties.
Q. Future employment. He or she shall not, after the termination of service
or employment with such municipality, appear before any board or
agency of the Village of Brightwaters in relation to any case, proceeding
or application in which he or she personally participated during the
period of this service or employment or which was under their his or
her consideration.
R. Press/public relations/media. No individual may speak on behalf of the
Village of Brightwaters. All officials and employees must make it clear
to the press that he/she is not purporting to talk on behalf of the Board
itself or the Village itself as a legal entity. The official or employee has to
make it clear that statements made to the press reflect his/her opinion
only. This would include communicating with any press/public relations/
social media and any form of broadcast/print/new/social media.
However, the Board of Trustees, by a majority vote, may authorize the
Mayor, or an individual Trustee, to speak to the press on behalf of the
Board itself or the Village.
§ 11-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 11-3.1
8:14
a contract with a particular person, firm, corporation or association, no
further disclosures need be made by such officer or employee with respect
to additional contracts with the same party during the remainder of the
fiscal year.
§ 11-4. Effect on filing of claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Brightwaters, Suffolk County, New
York, or any agency thereof, on behalf of himself/herself or any member of
his or her family arising out of any personal injury or property damage or
for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 11-5. Distribution of copies.
§ 11-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 16
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 16-1. Public hearing required; notice.
No local law shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Brightwaters until a public hearing has been held thereon in its final form
before such Board of Trustees not fewer than three nor more than 30 days
after public notice has been given of the time and place of the holding
of such public hearing. Such notice shall be given by the Village Clerk by
A. The Mayor of the Village of Brightwaters shall cause a copy of this Code
of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of
Brightwaters within 10 days after the effective date of this chapter.
Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be
furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office or
employment and shall complete and file with the Clerk of the Village of
Brightwaters the receipt of Code of Ethics set forth below at the end of
this section.5
B. Failure to distribute any copy of the Code of Ethics or failure of any
officer or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty
of compliance with such code nor the enforcement of provisions
thereof. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
5. Editor's Note: Said receipt is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 11-3.1 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 16-1
16:15
causing the same to be published once in the official newspaper of the
Village. Such notice shall contain the title of the proposed local law and a
brief explanation statement thereof.
§ 16-2. Posting of proposed law; availability of copies.
The Village Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law and shall, not later than the day such notice
is published, post one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, in
a conspicuous place in the Clerk's office and shall also make copies of
such proposed local law available at the Clerk's office for inspection by and
distribution to any interested person during business hours.
§ 16-3. Posting and publication after adoption.
The Village Clerk shall forthwith, upon the adoption of a local law by the
Board of Trustees, post copy thereof in a conspicuous place in the Clerk's
office and shall, within 10 days after such adoption, cause the local law, or
an abstract thereof describing the same in general terms, to be published in
the official newspaper of the Village.
§ 16-4. Proof of publication and posting.
Proof of publication of the notice of public hearing as required, and proof
of posting and publication as required by this chapter and set forth herein
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 16-5. Numbering of local laws.6
Each local law shall be numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1 for
each calendar year. When a local law is finally adopted and certified copies
thereof, as required by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, have been
filed in the offices of the Village Clerk and the Secretary of State, the Village
Clerk shall accordingly assign to such local law its appropriate number.
Chapter 19
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 8. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 16-1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 16-5
16:16
ARTICLE I
Code Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 9-9-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985 (Ch. 38 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 19-1. Office created.
There is hereby created in the Village of Brightwaters the office of Village
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 19-2. Appointments; terms of office.
§ 19-3. Authorization to issue appearance tickets. [Amended
11-14-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 3-1-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
All code enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue appearance
tickets for violations of Village ordinances and local laws and for violation of
the Village parking laws and for stopping, standing and parking violations
of Article 32 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 19-4. Powers and duties of Mayor. [Amended 11-14-1991 by L.L.
No. 4-1991]
The Mayor is authorized to make rules and regulations as may be required
for the efficient administration of the Code Enforcement Bureau and shall
also make provision for but not limited to training, compensation, uniforms
and equipment, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
A. The Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint a
Commissioner of the Village Code Enforcement Officers and set forth
his duties and responsibilities, and the Mayor may appoint as many
code enforcement officers as he shall determine to be necessary and
may designate one of such code enforcement officers to be the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer of the Village.7
B. The term of office of each code enforcement officer shall be at the
pleasure of the Mayor. [Amended 11-14-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
C. The Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint a
Plumbing Inspector, to serve under the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
of the Village, who shall be licensed to so act by the State of New York
and whose term shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor. [Added
9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
7. Editor's Note: Former § 38-2B, which provided for the organization of the Village Code
Enforcement Bureau, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 11-14-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 19-1 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 19-4
16:17

ARTICLE II
Attorney
[Adopted 11-16-1989]
§ 19-5. Powers and duties.
The Village Attorney for the Village of Brightwaters and such other counsel
as the Village may employ are hereby authorized, pursuant to §§ 2-234 and
20-2006 of the Village Law of the State of New York, to commence and
prosecute on behalf of the Village Board any action or proceedings at law or
in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction to:
§ 19-6. Acquisition of property on behalf of Village.
The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to take any steps reasonably
and prudently necessary to consummate a duly authorized acquisition or
conveyance of real or personal property on behalf of the Village.
§ 19-7. Ratification and authorization of previous actions.
Any actions or proceedings heretofore commenced by the Village and any
actions to which the Village has been made a party in which the Village
Attorney or his designated counsel has heretofore appeared are hereby
ratified and authorized.
A. Enforce or compel compliance with the ordinances and local laws of the
Village and any regulation thereunder in any instance where there
exists reasonable cause to believe a violation of said code or regulations
has occurred or is about to occur.
B. Enforce or compel compliance with any statute or regulation of the
State of New York or the United States where enforcement power
thereof is properly vested in the Village and where there exists
reasonable cause to believe a violation of said statutes or regulations
has occurred or is about to occur.
C. Enforce or compel compliance with any contractual or legal obligations
which exist between the Village and any other party.
D. Appear for and defend the Village in any action or proceeding brought
against the Village, its agents, officers and employees and other
persons designated by the Board of Trustees where said appearance is
permissible by law.
E. Carry out the stated policies of the Village Board of the Village or to act
in any proper forum in furtherance of the stated policies, goals and
objectives of the Village Board of the Village of Brightwaters and to take
such action as may be reasonably related to the furtherance of said
policies, goals and objectives.
§ 19-5 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 19-8
16:19
§ 19-8. Board approval required for commencement of action.
No action can commence without the approval of the Board of Trustees of
the Village.
§ 19-8 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 19-8
16:20
ARTICLE III
Term limits; Consecutive Terms of Office
[Adopted 1-4-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 19-9. Mayor.
No person shall be elected to the office of Mayor for more than four
consecutive two-year terms.
§ 19-10. Board of Trustees.
No person shall be elected to the office of Trustee for more than four
consecutive two-year terms.
§ 19-11. Limitation of effect to two-year terms.
In computing the terms, only full two-year terms are to be computed to set
the limitations.
§ 19-12. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable commencing in the Village election cycle
immediately following its adoption.
§ 19-9 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 19-12
16:21
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 33
ASSEMBLY, OUTDOOR AND PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals, street fairs and circuses — See Ch.
43.
§ 33-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Outdoor and Public Assembly Local Law
of the Village of Brightwaters."
§ 33-1.1. Purpose.
By adoption of this chapter, the Village Board seeks to regulate those
listed organized events which attract a large number of people, and might
adversely affect the well-being of Village residents. Organized activities
which are open to the public, either on private or public property, often
involve large assemblages of people, generally require some control over
traffic and parking and can cause a strain on governmental services. In
the case of events held on public property, the large number of people
which may be drawn to certain events has further potential to interfere
with the general public's normal use of roads and municipal facilities. This
chapter is intended to minimize the impact of these activities by appropriate
regulation.
§ 33-2. Permit required; application.
A. No person, organization, firm or company shall conduct any organized
race, swimming event, children's ride, adult ride, music performance or
fireworks display, whether on public or private property or Village
waters, without an outdoor assembly permit. Additionally, any event
involving the services of the Village of Brightwaters requires an outdoor
assembly permit from the Village Board of Trustees. Additionally, at a
Village-owned beach or park, the following activities shall only be
permitted under the terms and conditions of an outdoor assembly
permit duly issued by the Village Board:
(1) Activities involving the erection of a dance floor, tent greater than
100 feet, arch, fence or other structure; or
(2) Private concerts, shows or dances; or
(3) Staging area for walkathons, marathons, road races or bicycle
races.
§ 19-12 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 33-2
16:22
§ 33-3. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued only if the proposed activity is approved by the
Board of Trustees. In deciding whether or not to approve the issuance of
such permit, the Village Board shall consider:
B. Application.
(1) Written application must be made to the Village Board and filed
with the Village Clerk, together with the appropriate fee (to be
determined by the Board of Trustees) and a deposit (to be
determined by the Board of Trustees) to assure compliance with
the terms upon which each permit shall be deemed to have been
issued.
(2) Where the Village Board determines that there is no specific Village
benefit from the event, a deposit shall be made in an amount to be
determined prior to issuance of the permit based upon the
estimated direct costs attributable to additional code enforcement
and highway costs associated with the event. After the event, the
deposit shall be used to cover such costs, and any excess deposit
will be refunded.
(3) The applications must be filled at least 45 days in advance of the
earliest date for which the permit is applied for. Applications
seeking to be processed in less time than specified above shall pay
a rush fee in the amount of $100 in additional to the prescribed
application fee.
(4) The application must be signed by an adult who shall be
responsible for the statements therein and for the conditions for
which each permit is deemed issued. A permit issued shall be
revoked forthwith for any violation of the terms or conditions
herein set forth, which terms shall be as set forth in this chapter.
(5) The application shall clearly describe the premises to be used.
(6) The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance evidencing
coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate, or in another amount as specified by the Village Board,
and naming the Village of Brightwaters as additional insured
during the time of the event.
A. The size of the premises in relation to the number of persons expected
to attend the gathering.
B. The sufficiency or arrangements made to control traffic, parking, noise,
lighting and refuse.
C. Conflicts with other events which might overtax Village services.
D. Conflicts with other events which may cause vehicular or pedestrian
congestion in a particular area of the Village on the date in question.
§ 33-2 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 33-3
16:23
§ 33-4. Latrines.
Any applicant for a permit shall be required to provide and maintain
latrines, of a number and type approved by rules of the Suffolk County
Department of Health, for the use of persons engaged in conducting the
undertaking for which the permits shall apply and for the patrons of said
permitted undertaking, during the permit period.
§ 33-5. Applicants to clean up site; return of deposit.
Upon the expiration or revocation of the permit, the permit holder shall
leave the site clean and free of all debris. For a failure to clean up the
premises or site, the same shall be done at the expense of the applicant. The
deposit, or as much as remains after the payment of cleanup and highway
costs, shall be returned to the permit holder.
§ 33-6. Trespassing on adjoining property.
The applicant shall be required to prevent patrons, permittees and/or
invitees of the undertaking for which the permit is issued or persons
engaged in conducting the same from trespassing upon the adjoining
property or premises and shall set forth in the application that details how
the same shall be accomplished.
§ 33-7. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation
under the Penal Law and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
Chapter 38
BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 108. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 119.
E. The frequency of gatherings proposed or approved for the premises and
whether this frequency is so great that the gatherings constitute a
persistent usage of the property incompatible with its character or with
that of the surrounding area.
F. In the ease of public gatherings, conflicts with ordinary public use of
the land or facilities involved.
G. Whether the applicant or owner of the premises at which the subject
gathering is to be held has been convicted of failure to comply with the
terms of any outdoor assembly permit issued within the last three
years.
§ 33-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 33-7
38:24
ARTICLE I
Use in Business Districts
[Adopted 1-24-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972 as Ch. 6 of the 1972 Code;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code8]
§ 38-1. Sidewalk restriction.
No person or persons shall propel or ride any bicycle, tricycle, tandem,
velocipede, skateboard or other such vehicle of propulsion over or upon
any sidewalk in the business districts of the Incorporated Village of
Brightwaters.
§ 38-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch, 1, General Provisions, Art I.
§ 38-1 BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS § 38-2
38:25
Chapter 43
CARNIVALS, STREET FAIRS AND CIRCUSES
Chapter 50
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 84.
§ 38-2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 38-2
43:26
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 1-24-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972 as Ch. 3 of the 1972 Code]
§ 50-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMALS — Dogs, cats, horses, reptiles, rodents, birds, fowl, poultry or
livestock of any nature or kind, whether kept as pets or for use of any nature
or purpose.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or other responsible person by leash, cord, chain or other visible
physical restraint.[Amended 7-6-2004 by L.L. No. 19-2004]
DOG — Incudes both the male and the female animal.
KENNEL — The confinement or keeping of three or more adult (over six
months of age) animals as defined above, on a premises, in or out of an
enclosure of any kind.
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog.
RESIDENT — A person who maintains a residence within the Village of
Brightwaters.
SURRENDER — A voluntary forfeiture of ownership and possession.
§ 50-2. Animals running at large. [Amended 7-6-2004 by L.L. No.
20-2004]
No person shall cause, suffer or allow any animals be at large within the
Village, except as allowed by § 84-2 of this Code.
§ 50-3. Dog licenses; dogs running at large. [Amended 1-6-2003 by
L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 50-4. Authority to seize and impound dogs; redemption;
destruction. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
A. No person shall own or harbor a dog within the Village unless it is
licensed in accordance with the requirements of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
B. No dog, whether licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large in any
area of the territorial limits of the Village.
A. The Dog Control Officer designated by the Village or any peace officer
is authorized and directed to seize and confine at the Town of Islip dog
pound for a period not exceeding seven days all dogs found at large,
§ 50-1 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 50-4
50:27
§ 50-5. Nuisances by dogs; Pooper-Scooper Law. [Amended
11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 11-4-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of a dog shall knowingly
or carelessly or negligently permit such dog or other animal to defecate
upon any public street or its right-of-way, any other public property or
private property in the Village of Brightwaters, and same shall constitute an
offense under this article unless the feces are immediately removed by said
person.
§ 50-6. Surrender of dogs; fee. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
§ 50-7. Liability of Village and employees. [Amended 11-4-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991]
No liability shall be imposed upon the Dog Control Officer designated by
the Village nor the Village of Brightwaters nor any employee of the Village
of Brightwaters for destruction of any animal or animals pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 50-8. Powers of Dog Control Officers, Village Code Enforcement
Officers and peace officers. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991;
11-4-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002]
The Dog Control Officer, Deputy Dog Enforcement Officers, Village Code
Enforcement Officers and peace officers duly authorized to act as such
within the Village of Brightwaters are hereby authorized to issue
unmuzzled or not under the immediate possession and control of the
owner or person in charge thereof.
B. Any dog seized may be redeemed by the owner upon payment to the
Dog Control Officer of a fee in the amount established by the enforcing
agency. All dogs not redeemed within such period of seven days shall be
destroyed by the Dog Control Officer designated by the Village, who
shall be entitled to the fees as provided in § 118 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York.
A. The Dog Control Officer designated by the Village, in addition to the
powers granted to him by law, may, upon the application of a resident of
the Village of Brightwaters and surrender of the animal at the dog
pound, accept any dog owned by such resident for immediate
destruction or any dog for immediate adoption, in which case the dog
shall be kept for a minimum of seven days and, if not adopted,
destroyed, at the discretion of the Dog Control Officer designated by
the Village.
B. A resident of the Village of Brightwaters who shall surrender a dog to
the Dog Control Officer designated by the Village for adoption or
destruction shall pay a fee as established by the enforcing agency.
§ 50-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 50-8
50:28
summonses and to present informations for the appearance of violators of
this article before courts of competent jurisdiction.
§ 50-9. Kennels prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall at any time maintain a kennel for the
purpose or boarding, breeding, raising, training or otherwise dealing in
animals. The boarding, training or sale of animals within the limits of the
Village of Brightwaters is hereby prohibited.
§ 50-10. Disturbances by animals.
No person owning or possessing any animal shall allow it to disturb the
comfort, peace or repose of any persons in the vicinity by long-continued or
frequent noise. If a complaint is made to the Village Clerk that such noise
has occurred, the owner, keeper or possessor of the offending animal shall
be notified of the provisions of this Article and that its violation is charged.
No penalty hereunder shall be inflicted unless such notification has been
made and a violation thereafter has recurred.
§ 50-11. Harboring of animals restricted.
No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the Village limits any
livestock, pigs, hogs, cattle, poultry, horses or other animals, but the
keeping of ordinary household pets is not hereby prohibited.
§ 50-11.1. Hunting prohibited. [Added 3-3-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
Hunting of wildlife within the corporate limits of the Village is strictly
prohibited.
§ 50-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law, any person committing an offense against any provision of this Article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 50-8 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 50-12
50:29

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
[Adopted 4-5-1976]
§ 50-13. Designation of enforcement officer. [Amended 11-4-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters does request and
authorize the Islip Dog Control Officer to enforce the Village Code within
the confines of the Village.
§ 50-13 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 50-13
50:31
Chapter 56
FACILITIES, VILLAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 84. Waters and waterways — See Ch. 124.
Chapter 58
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement officers — See Ch. 19, Art.
I.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 61.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 90.
Zoning — See Ch. 128.
§ 58-1. Intent; adoption of state standards.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with
nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable
degree, of life and property from the hazard of fire and explosion arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises and, in so doing, to comply with the
provisions of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of New York and
all appropriate codes, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
To that end, the Village hereby adopts the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code in its entirety, except where the same is
superseded by the provisions of the Village of Brightwaters' ordinances,
local laws or rules and regulations enacted pursuant thereto.
§ 58-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Local
Law of the Village of Brightwaters."
§ 58-3. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this code shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the
terms of this code shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do
not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property in the opinion of the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 50-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 58-4
56:32
§ 58-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
APPROVED — Accepted by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer as a result
of his investigation and experience or by reason of test, listing or approval
by Underwriters' Laboratories, Incorporated, the National Bureau of
Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories or other nationally
recognized testing agencies.
CHIEF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Chief Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village of Brightwaters.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
a code enforcement officer, as the sense permits.
DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION — The Division of Fire Prevention of the
Village of Brightwaters.
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY — The occupancy or use of a building or
structure, or any portion thereof, by persons harbored or detained to
receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment or by persons
involuntarily detained.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association, its standards and its
codes.
OWNER — Includes the owner in fee of real property or of a lesser estate
therein, his duly authorized agent or attorney, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, an assignee of rents, a purchaser, a devisee, a fiduciary and
any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in
question.
SUPERVISING TRUSTEE — The Village Trustee having authority over the
Division of Fire Prevention.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of Trustees of the Incorporated
Village of Brightwaters.
§ 58-5. Designation of Division of Fire Prevention; powers and
duties of Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
A. There is hereby designated in the Village of Brightwaters a Division of
Fire Prevention and a public official in charge of such Division to be
known as the "Chief Code Enforcement Officer," who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Village Board at a compensation
to be fixed by it.
B. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer and those acting under him are
expressly subject to the authority and direction of the Supervising
Trustee. All decisions made by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer are
subject to the consent and approval of such Trustee; and wherever this
code grants authority to the Chief Code Enforcement Officer to make
§ 58-4 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 58-5
56:33
§ 58-6. Right of entry; inspections; exemption.
§ 58-7. Inspections.
decisions concerning the application or enforcement of this code, the
same may only be made with the consent and approval of such Trustee.
C. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation or except as herein otherwise provided, the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Village
ordinances and local laws and other laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations applicable thereto, as well as such other duties as may be
assigned by the Supervising Trustee from time to time.
D. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer, with the approval of the
Supervising Trustee, may appoint one or more code enforcement
officers, as the need may appear, to act under the supervision and
direction of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer and to exercise any
portion of the powers and duties of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
as he may direct. The compensation of such code enforcement officers
shall be fixed by the Village Board.
A. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or any code enforcement officer
may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the
purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the
provisions of this code, he may deem necessary to be made, subject to
the appropriate provisions of law relating to searches and inspections.
B. Public buildings not under the jurisdiction of the Village as to
construction shall not be subject to inspection or to the terms of this
chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer to inspect or
cause to be inspected by code enforcement officers all buildings and
premises, except the interiors of one-family dwellings, as often as may
be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or endanger life from fire
or any violations of the provisions or intent of this code and of any other
ordinance affecting fire hazards. The code enforcement officer making
such inspections shall report any violations or conditions alleged to
constitute violations to the Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or a code enforcement officer,
upon the request of the owner or occupant or upon the complaint of any
person or whenever he shall deem it necessary, shall inspect any
buildings and premises within his jurisdiction, subject to the
appropriate provisions of law relating to searches and inspections.
§ 58-5 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 58-8
56:34
§ 58-8. Dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials.
Whenever any code enforcement officer shall find in any building or upon
any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials as follows,
he shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or
remedied in such manner as may be specified by the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer. Such dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials
include the following:
§ 58-9. Service of process for violations.
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or
otherwise hazardous materials.
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
C. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly combustible materials.
D. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or
inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible materials from
hoods, grease extractors and ducts.
E. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated access openings in
exterior walls for Fire Department use, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or egress of occupants in case of fire.
F. Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of
adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fireextinguishing
equipment or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or
from any other cause, creates a hazardous condition.
A. The service of process for violations of this chapter shall be made upon
the owner of record, as disclosed by the Village Assessor's records, the
occupant or any other person responsible for the conditions, either by
delivering a copy of the same to such person or by delivering the same
to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or, in case no
such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of such premises.
Whenever it may be necessary to serve such process upon the owner of
a premises, such process may be served either by delivering to and
leaving with said person a copy of said process or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the process, by
sending such copy by certified or registered mail to the owner's last
known post office address.
B. If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by
another under lease or otherwise, the process issued in connection with
§ 58-8 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 58-9
56:35
§ 58-10. Investigation of fires.
§ 58-11. Records and reports.
the enforcement of this chapter shall apply to the occupant thereof,
except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to
or changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately
become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises.
In such cases, the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the
occupant, unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and the
occupant.
A. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or his appointed representative
shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstance of every fire
occurring in the Village which is of suspicious nature or which involves
loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been destroyed
or substantially damaged. Such investigation shall be begun
immediately upon the occurrence of such fire, and, if it appears that
such fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
shall immediately notify the Suffolk County Police Department of the
facts. Said Police Department shall immediately take charge of the
physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law
to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate
with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution
of the case.
B. Every fire that occurs within the Village shall be reported, in writing, to
the Chief Code Enforcement Officer within two days after the
occurrence of the same by the code enforcement officer in whose
jurisdiction such fire has occurred. The report shall be in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer and shall
contain a statement of facts relating to the cause, origin and
circumstances of such fire, factors contributing to the spread of the fire,
injury to persons, the extent of the damage, the insurance upon such
property and such other information as may be required.
C. The Village Attorney, the Village Prosecutor and the Suffolk County
Police Department, upon request of the Chief Code Enforcement
Officer, shall assist the Division in the investigation of any fire which, in
its opinion, is of suspicious origin.
A. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official
records of all transactions and activities conducted by him and the code
enforcement officers serving under him, including all applications
received, plans approved, permits and certificates issued, fees charged
and collected, inspection reports, all rules and regulations promulgated
by the municipality and notices and orders issued. All such reports shall
be public information open to public inspection during normal business
hours.
§ 58-9 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 58-11
56:36
§ 58-12. Permits; fees; general requirements.
B. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Board a written report of all business conducted.
A. A permit issued by the Village pursuant hereto shall constitute
permission to maintain, store or handle materials or to conduct
processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property or to
install equipment used in connection with such activities. Such permit
does not take the place of any license required by law. It shall not be
transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of the premises shall
require a new permit. Permits shall be required for the manufacture,
storage or sale of the following materials or the conducting of the
following operations. Fees for such permits shall be fixed from time to
time by the Village Board.9
(1) Materials or operations for which permits are required are as
follows:
(a) Combustible fibers.
(b) Combustible materials.
(c) Dry-cleaning establishments.
(d) Flammable or combustible liquids (tank).
(e) Flammable finishing.
(f) Fumigation.
(g) Hazardous chemicals.
(h) Service stations or repair garages.
(i) Welding and cutting, per unit (per tank).
(2) None of the above shall be permitted without the appropriate
permit issued by the Village.
B. Before a permit may be issued, the Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
his assistants shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles,
buildings or storage places to be used. In cases where laws or
regulations enforceable by departments other than the Division of Fire
Prevention are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all
departments concerned.
C. All applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made to
the Chief Code Enforcement Officer in such form and detail as he shall
prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans
as required by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
9. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 58-11 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 58-12
56:37
§ 58-13. Revocation of permit.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued
if any violation of this chapter is found upon inspection or in case there has
been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
§ 58-14. Prohibited acts.
§ 58-15. Transportation of explosives.
Transportation of explosives and blasting agents on streets and highways
subject to the control of the Village is hereby prohibited without a permit
issued by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 58-16. Fireworks.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to store,
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks,
provided that the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power
to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for
supervised public displays of fireworks by the Village, fair associations,
amusement parks and other organizations. Every such display shall be
handled by a competent operator approved by the Chief Code Enforcement
Officer and the Suffolk County Police Department. Such display shall be of
such a character and be so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of
said persons after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person.
§ 58-17. Modification of provisions.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to modify any of
the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code upon application, in writing, by
D. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein
and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or any code enforcement officer.
E. One permit only shall be required by establishments dealing in or using
two or more flammable, combustible or explosive materials to be kept in
the establishment at any one time, but each of the materials shall be
listed on the permit.
A. Storage of flammable liquids in aboveground tanks is hereby
prohibited, except as permitted by § 128-6H of the Code. [Amended
8-4-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
B. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is hereby prohibited.
C. Storage of explosives and blasting agents is hereby prohibited.
D. Fueling/refueling in the marina is hereby prohibited.
§ 58-12 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 58-17
56:38
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided
that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted
or allowed, and the decision of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer thereon
shall be entered upon the records of his office, and a signed copy shall be
furnished to the applicant.
§ 58-18. Appeals from decision of Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
Whenever the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning
of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer to the
Board of Trustees of the Village within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed.
§ 58-19. New materials, processes or occupancies requiring
permits.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall determine and specify, after
giving interested persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those
now enumerated in this chapter. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall
post such list on the bulletin board in the Village Office and distribute copies
thereof to interested persons upon their request.
§ 58-20. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any
order of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer or any code enforcement
officer shall be unlawful and shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
B. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
occupant, lessee or other person responsible for such violation and
anyone who takes part or assists in the commission of such violation
shall, for each and every violation and for each and every day that such
violation continues, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or 15
days in jail, or both. Penalties for such violations shall be collected and
violations shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law or
ordinance effective in the Village of Brightwaters.
C. Any action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Brightwaters may
be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provisions
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
Village ordinances or local laws or any rule or regulation relating
thereto. Such remedy shall be in addition to any other penalties
prescribed by law.
§ 58-17 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 58-21
56:39
§ 58-21. Compliance with state standards intended; conflict with
state provisions.
It is the intention of this chapter to effectuate full compliance in the
administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as enacted pursuant to Article 18 of the New
York State Executive Law and the codes, rules and regulations thereunder
enacted. In any event where any Village ordinance or local law is deemed
or found to prescribe standards less than the minimum provided for in such
state enactment, it shall be deemed, for that purpose only, that the same
is amended so that the provisions thereof shall be the minimum standards
provided by said New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
Chapter 61
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 58.
Zoning — See Ch. 128.
§ 58-21 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 58-21
56:40
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 61-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters finds
that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may
be a problem to the residents of the Village of Brightwaters and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 61-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 61-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
§ 61-1 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-3
56:41
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 61-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-3
56:42
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 61-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred
to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equalled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
§ 61-4 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-4
56:43
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zones
V1-V30 VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X
or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD OR FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 61-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-4
56:44
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1) above.
(2)
§ 61-4 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-4
56:45
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 61-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-4
56:46
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD OR ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD —
Has the same meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope
to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 61-14B.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 61-4 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-4
56:47
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The "actual start of construction"
means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, installation of piling or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and/or walkways;
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations; the erection
of temporary forms; or the installation of accessory buildings such
as garages and sheds not occupied as dwelling units nor part of the
main building. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.[Amended 6-1-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The terms does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 61-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-4
56:48
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 61-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdictions of the Village of Brightwaters, Suffolk County, New York.
§ 61-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 61-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 61-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 61-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall be
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Brightwaters,
Community No. 361342, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
[Amended 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
(1) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Suffolk County, New York (all jurisdictions)," dated September 25,
2009.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36103C0859H,
36103C0860H and 36103C0878H, the effective date of which is
September 25, 2009, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Incorporated Village of Brightwaters, Village Office, 40 Seneca Drive,
Brightwaters, New York 11718.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention. [Amended
6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009]
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 61-5 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-9
56:49
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of
Brightwaters from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 61-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Village of Brightwaters, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 61-9 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-10
56:50
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 61-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 61-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 61-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where
applicable. Additional information may be required on the permit
application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 61-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include but not be limited to plans, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials and drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50. In addition the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Brightwaters for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zones V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
§ 61-11 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-13
56:51
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 61-16C, Utilities.
E. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 61-19, Nonresidential structures (except coastal highhazard
areas).
F. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 61-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
I. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in a
proposed structure with design strengths in excess of 20 pounds per
square foot.
J. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, for all new and substantial improvements to structures,
floodplain development permit applications shall be accompanied by
design plans and specifications, prepared in sufficient detail to enable
§ 61-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-13
56:52
§ 61-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited the
following:
independent review of the foundation support and connection
components. Said plans and specifications shall be developed or
reviewed by a licensed professional engineer or architect and shall be
accompanied by a statement, bearing the signature of the architect or
engineer, certifying that the design and methods of construction to be
used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 61-13, Application for permit, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction standards, and, in
particular, subsection § 61-15B, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
§ 61-13 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-14
56:53
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 61-13H, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the
certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site.
A certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new or
substantially improved structure, the permit holder shall submit to
the local administrator a certificate of elevation, in relation to mean
sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns). For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. An elevation certificate
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a
site 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and
ready for highway use).
§ 61-14 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-14
56:54
(3) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 61-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 61-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 61-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
§ 61-14 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-14
56:55
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsections D(1) and (2) of this section and
whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1) of
this section and whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(4) Certifications required pursuant to § 61-18N, Breakaway wall
design standards, and § 61-13J.
(5) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance procedures.
(6) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 61-14 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-14
56:56
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 61-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 61-6.
A. Coastal high-hazard areas. The following requirements apply within
Zones V1-V30, VE and V:
(1) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the reach of
high tide.
(2) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(3) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
C. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Brightwaters agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
§ 61-15 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-15
56:57
§ 61-16. Standards for all structures.
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Brightwaters for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Brightwaters for all costs related to the final map
revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 61-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Brightwaters agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Brightwaters for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Brightwaters for all costs related to
the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas below lowest floor.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
§ 61-15 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-16
56:58
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either
free from obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system. The
enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used only for parking
vehicles, building access or storage. Use of this space for human
habitation is expressly prohibited. The construction of stairs,
stairwells and elevator shafts are subject to the design
requirements for breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating
and air-conditioning equipment, plumbing connections, and other
service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation level or be designed to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
to or above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the
appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of
New York State for the location of such items in wet locations.
[Amended 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
§ 61-16 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-16
56:59
§ 61-17. Residential structures (except coastal high-hazard areas).
§ 61-18. Residential structures (coastal high-hazard areas).
[Amended 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
The following standards, in addition to the standards in §§ 61-15A, Coastal
high-hazard areas; 61-15B, Subdivision proposals; and 61-16, Standards
for all structures, apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard shown as Zones V1-V30,
VE or V on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 61-6.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to then or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards, in addition to the standards in
§§ 61-15B, Subdivision proposals; 61-15C, Encroachments; and 61-16,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of
special flood hazard as indicated.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood level.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 61-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest elevated
floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached to the piles
or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members designed to
§ 61-16 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-18
56:60
either withstand storm action or break away without imparting
damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above the level of the
base flood so as not to impede the flow of water.
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during the base
flood on all building components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that
would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves, current
drag forces and impact forces from waterborne storm debris.
Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if bulkheads, walls or
other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause wave
runup beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due
to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include
windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof,
internal forces when openings allow wind to enter the house and
upward force on the underside of the house when it is exposed. In
the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially from
any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the building
code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water pressures acting
simultaneously on all building components. Foundations must be
designed to transfer safely to the underlying soil all loads due to
wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including uplift
due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural
support of a new building or substantial improvement of an existing
structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less
than eight to one for individual piles (this shall not apply to pile
clusters located below the design grade) The maximum center-tocenter
spacing of wood piles shall not be more than 12 feet on
center under load bearing sills, beams or girders.
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to
resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with typical
§ 61-18 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-18
56:61
structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include consideration
of decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion of soil strata
surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum
if the BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if
the BFE is greater than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in
column action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil
elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally
braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of
eight inches for round timber piles and eight-by-eight inches for
square timber piles. All wood piles must be treated in accordance
with requirements of EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and damage from
fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twentyeight-
day ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000
pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced with a minimum of
four longitudinal steel bars having a combined area of not less than
1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete area. Reinforcing for
precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4
inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for
No. 6 through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field
shall have a concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted or augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both
directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced concrete
grade beam. These at-grade supports should be securely attached
to the piles to provide support even if scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch-by-eightinch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in
location to below the lowest supporting structural member and
above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the vertical plane
along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline. Galvanized steel
rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the
beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall be
two-by-four lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or four-byfour
or larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting shall
§ 61-18 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-18
56:62
consist of two five-eighths-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for
two-by-eight members, or one five-eights-inch lag bolt (each end)
for square members. Knee braces shall not extend more than three
feet below the elevation of the base flood.
E. Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete
piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads,
and be connected with a moment-resisting connection to a pile cap or
pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure. Toe
nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All metal
connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be steel, hotdipped
galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in protected interior
locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam-to-pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall
span the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential
floodwater and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or
pilings by bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members shall
be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (if precast) shall be
securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams or girders are
attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two five-eighths-inch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/16 inch by
four inches by 18 inches each bolted with 2 1/2 inch lag bolts per beam
member shall be used. Nothing of pile tops shall be the minimum
sufficient to provide ledge support for beam members without unduly
weakening pile connections. Piling shall not be notched so that the
cross-section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-by-four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist
anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders.
These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a minimum.
Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided. Such cross
bridging may be one-by-three-inch members, placed eight feet oncenter
maximum, or solid bridging of the same depth as the joist at
the same spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide
good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure.
The plywood should not be less than three-fourths-inch total
thickness and should be exterior grade and fastened to beams or
joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such
fastening shall be supplemented by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be
§ 61-18 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-18
56:63
used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to studs in
exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie. Continuous 15/
32-inch or thicker plywood sheathing-overlapping the top wall plate and
continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder-may be used to provide the
continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically continuous,
then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all horizontal
joints. In lieu of the plywood, galvanized steel rods of one-half-inch
diameter or galvanized steel straps not less than one inch wide by 1/
16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top wall plate to the sill,
beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum diameter of three inches shall
be used at each end of the one-half-inch round rods. These anchors shall
be installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more than
four feet on center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(1) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner that
the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters. Ceiling joists
and rafters shall be securely fastened at their intersections. A
metal or wood connector shall be used at alternate ceiling joist/
rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(2) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end.
Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet toward the
house interior from each gable end.
K. Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and water
uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two
feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs
and porches will be permitted if designed or reviewed by a registered
professional engineer or architect and certified in accordance with
§ 61-13J of this chapter.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing, shall
not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of exterior
sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices for sheathing
and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of other suitable
corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends and roof overhangs exceeding six inches
shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial
adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used
in the sheathing of such corner, gable end or roof overhang.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys and other
points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
§ 61-18 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-18
56:64
§ 61-19. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high-hazard
areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in §§ 61-15B, Subdivision proposals; 61-15C,
Encroachments; and 61-16, Standards for all structures.
M. Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows and doors
shall be designed, detailed and constructed to withstand loads due to
the design wind speed of 75 miles per hour. Connections for these
elements must be designed to transfer safely the design loads to the
supporting structure. Panel widths of multiple panel sliding glass doors
shall not exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, with
the criterion that the safety of the overall structure at the point of
wall failure be confirmed using established procedures. Grade
beams shall be installed in both directions for all piles considered
to carry the breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for
front row piles that support breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square
foot shall not be permitted unless a registered professional
engineer or architect has developed or reviewed the structural
design and specifications for the building foundation and
breakaway wall components and certifies that the breakaway walls
will fail under water loads less than those that would occur during
the base flood and the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base
flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. All structural components located below the base flood level
§ 61-18 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-19
56:65
§ 61-20. Nonresidential structures (coastal high-hazard areas).
In Zones V1-V30, VE and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available,
new construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall have
the bottom of the lowest member of the lowest floor elevated to or above
the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of structures is not an allowable
alternative to elevating the lowest floor to the base flood elevation in Zones
V1-V30, VE and V.
§ 61-21. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in §§ 61-15, General
standards, and 61-16, Standards for all structures, apply in areas of special
flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are
located in areas of special flood hazard.
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide flood waters around and away from proposed structured on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
§ 61-19 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-21
56:66
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V and VE shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, D and E.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30 or VE that is on a site either outside of an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision as herein defined; in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision as herein defined; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision as
herein defined; or in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision as herein defined on which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall, within Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; or, within Zones V1-V30
and VE, be elevated on a pile foundation such that the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting
of dry stacked blocks is prohibited. Methods of anchoring may include
but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors.
C. A manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved in Zone
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30 or VE in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision that is not to be placed on a site on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage shall be:
(1) Elevated in a manner such as required in Subsection B; or
(2) Elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation
on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zones A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
§ 61-21 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-21
56:67
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that
are no less than 36 inches in height above the lowest adjacent grade
and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on
piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
E. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 61-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks
is prohibited.
§ 61-21 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-21
56:68
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 61-22. Appeals board.
§ 61-23. Conditions for variances.
A. The Board of Appeals, as established by the Mayor, shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
B. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by
the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal
such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.10
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that Subsections D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
10.Editor’s Note: Former Subsections D, E and F, which pertained to considerations by the
Board of Appeals, attachment of conditions to the granting of variances, and maintenance
of records by the local administrator, respectively, were repealed 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017.
§ 61-22 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-23
56:69
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 61-23 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 61-23
56:70
Chapter 75
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sales of personal property — See Ch. 97.
§ 61-23 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 61-23
56:71

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 75-1. License required for certain activities. [Amended 11-4-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Whenever, in any local law or ordinance, it is provided that a license shall be
obtained before engaging upon any act or in any specified business, trade
or occupation; providing services for payment or hire for the convenience,
comfort or entertainment of others; or for any other designated purpose, it
shall be a violation hereof for any person to engage upon or undertake any
activity or enterprise thus specified until a license has been issued to him in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of any other applicable
local law or ordinance.
§ 75-2. Application required; information to be provided. [Amended
11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Except as otherwise specifically provided, every applicant for a license
shall file with the Village Clerk a statement signed and sworn to by the
applicant, in person if an individual, by all partners if a partnership and by
the president or duly authorized officer if a corporation, showing:
A. The name of the applicant.
B. His business address.
C. His home address if he is a natural person.
D. If his age is 21 years or less, and if less, his precise age.
E. The precise purpose for which the license is sought.
F. The place within the Village where the licensee will engage in the
licensed activity or enterprise.
G. Whether or not the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, whether
any officer or director thereof has been convicted of a crime or violation
of any local law or ordinance of the Village and, if so, the nature of such
offense and the penalty assessed therefor.
H. Satisfactory credentials from his principal, if the applicant is to act as
an agent.
I. References or letters of recommendation by at least three reputable
businessmen or property owners of the Village such as will establish the
good character and business responsibility of the applicant.
J. Any other data necessary to meet the requirements of any local law or
ordinance by provisions of which the license sought is required.
§ 75-1 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-3
56:73
§ 75-3. Bonds. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Whenever, by the terms of any local law or ordinance, a bond is required
to protect the Village or any other person against loss because of the fault
or default of a licensee, no license shall be issued until a bond in the full
amount specified and in a form approved by the Village Counsel has been
filed with the Village Clerk and the fact of its filing, the amount of its
coverage and the date of its expiration have been noted on the license.
§ 75-4. Expiration of annual licenses. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L.
No. 4-1991]
All licenses issued on an annual basis shall expire on the 31st day of
December of each year, unless otherwise noted. The precise date of
expiration shall be clearly marked upon each temporary license.
§ 75-5. Issuance; refusal to issue. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
All licenses shall be issued by the Mayor or a person designated by the
Mayor to such persons as he shall deem fit and proper upon an evaluation
of their qualifications and upon compliance of the applicant with the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable local law or ordinance.
However, licenses shall be refused to commercial or business activities
which constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
§ 75-6. Review of refusal to issue license. [Amended 11-4-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991]
Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Mayor or a person
designated by the Mayor may apply for its issuance to the Board of Trustees
at a meeting thereof, and the same may be granted or refused by the Board.
§ 75-7. Signing of license; records. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Every license issued shall be signed by the Mayor or a person designated by
the Mayor and countersigned by the Village Clerk, who shall keep a record
thereof and of the amount of fee to be paid therefor.
§ 75-8. Payment of fee required. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
No license shall be effective until the fee therefor, as established by the
Board of Trustees, shall have been paid.11
11.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 75-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 75-9
56:74
§ 75-9. Revocation. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any other
local law or ordinance may be revoked by the Mayor or a person designated
by the Mayor, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 75-10. Renewal.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any license duly issued may be
renewed upon application by the licensee, accompanied by the appropriate
fee12 and a continuance or renewal of bonds as provided in § 75-3 hereof.
§ 75-11. Availability of license for inspection.
Every person to whom a license or permit has been issued shall at all
times have the same with him at the site or place when the business or act
licensed is being performed and available for inspection by a police officer
or any other authorized person.
§ 75-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. Fraud or false statement in the application for the license.
B. Fraud or false statement in connection with carrying out the business,
activity or enterprise for which the license was issued.
C. Any violation of a term of this chapter or of any other local law or
ordinance under whose provision the license was issued.
D. Conviction of the licensee of any crime.
E. Carrying out the licensed business, enterprise or activity in an unlawful
manner or in such a way as to breach the peace or constitute a menace
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
F. Any transfer or assignment of the license to any person, except upon
written consent of the Mayor or a person designated by the Mayor upon
due application and the presentation of information concerning the
proposed transferee's qualifications similar to those furnished by the
original applicant.
12.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 75-9 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-12
56:75

ARTICLE II
Hawkers and Peddlers
§ 75-13. License required. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
No person shall engage in the business of hawker or peddler in the Village
without first obtaining a license therefor. This requirement shall include a
badge or certificate bearing the name of the individual, the name of the
organization represented and effective date and the expiration date plainly
visible thereon.
§ 75-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER OR PEDDLER — Any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive
vehicle or other conveyance from street to street, from house to house or
from place to place carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise
and offering the same for sale.
§ 75-15. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit hawking or peddling by an
honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine who is crippled as a result
of injuries while in the naval or military service of the United States or the
holder of a license granted pursuant to § 32 of the General Business Law.
§ 75-16. Fees.13
A. An annual fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to
time shall be paid before a license is issued hereunder, except that if
application is made and a license is granted for a daily license, a fee as
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time or, for a
monthly license, a fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from
time to time shall be paid. All annual licenses shall expire on December
31, unless otherwise noted, and shall thereafter be renewable as
provided in § 75-10. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
B. For each separate vehicle or conveyance used by any licensee
hereunder, a separate fee shall be paid. The license issued for each
vehicle shall contain the New York State motor vehicle license number
of such vehicle and shall be visibly displayed upon such vehicle. Any use
of such license on any other vehicle shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of any and all of the offending licensee's licenses hereunder.
13.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 75-13 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-17
56:77
§ 75-17. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 75-17 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 75-17
56:78
ARTICLE III
Solicitors and Canvassers
§ 75-18. License required. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
No person shall engage in business as a solicitor or canvasser in the Village
without first obtaining a license therefor. This requirement shall include a
badge or certificate bearing the name of the individual, the name of the
organization represented and the effective date and the expiration date
plainly visible thereon.
§ 75-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — Any natural person traveling either by foot or by
conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to
street, taking a survey, or requesting the views and opinions of Village
residents, or asking for donations on behalf of any group or cause, or selling
any publications related to any group or cause and which publications are
delivered at time of sale.[Added 3-3-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
SOLICITOR — Any natural person traveling either by foot or by conveyance
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street soliciting
and taking orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, including
books and periodicals for future delivery, or for services to be performed
later, whether he collects advance payments on such sale or for such
services or not.[Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 3-3-2003 by
L.L. No. 4-2003]
§ 75-20. Bonds. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 3-3-2003
by L.L. No. 4-2003]
Every applicant for a solicitor's license not a resident of the Village or
who, being a resident of the Village, represents any person whose principal
place of business is located outside of the State of New York shall file with
the Village Clerk a surety bond, running to the Village, in the amount of
$2,500, with surety given by a recognized insurance carrier, conditioned
that the applicant shall comply fully with the provisions of the local laws or
ordinances of the Village and the laws of the State of New York regulating
the business of solicitor and guaranteeing to any resident of the Village
that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied
according to the representations of the solicitor and that any property
purchased will be delivered in compliance with the representations made by
the solicitor. Such bond shall provide that action thereon may be brought by
any person to whom a judgment has been awarded because of loss caused
by such licensee's fault or default.
§ 75-18 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-20.1
56:79
§ 75-20.1. License restrictions. [Added 3-3-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003;
amended 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
No license shall be issued to any canvasser or solicitor unless he has
provided the Suffolk County Police Department and the Village Clerk with
the name, home address and date of birth of each individual solicitor or
canvasser and the make, color, year and registration plate number for each
vehicle to be used by any solicitor or canvasser acting under such license.
No solicitation or canvassing shall be allowed on any Saturday, Sunday or
federal holiday, and soliciting or canvassing shall not be allowed before
9:00 a.m. or after dusk on other days of the week. No person may be
solicited or canvassed upon any premises in the Village displaying any sign
disallowing solicitation, canvassing or both, or upon any premises listed
with the Village Clerk for that purpose. The Village Clerk shall maintain a
list of all premises, the owners or occupants of which have requested that
no solicitation, canvassing or both be allowed at such premises, and shall
provide a copy of such list to every licensee under this article at time of
license issuance.
§ 75-21. Fees. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The license fee to be charged to each individual person for carrying on the
business of solicitor or canvasser shall be as set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees from time to time.
§ 75-22. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 75-20.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 75-22
56:80
ARTICLE IV
Operators of Restaurants and Similar Establishments
§ 75-23. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of running a restaurant, eating
place, lunch counter, soft-drink counter or similar place in the Village for
the sale or the consumption upon the premises of nonalcoholic beverages of
any class or description without obtaining an annual license therefor, upon
presentation of certification of approval by the Suffolk County Department
of Health.
§ 75-24. Inspections. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
In addition to the filing of information as required of applicants by § 75-2,
the Mayor or a person designated by the Mayor, shall cause an investigation
to be made by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer as to the physical
characteristics and appurtenances of the premises for which operations
hereunder a license is sought. If such inspection discloses that such
premises are inadequate, unsafe, improperly equipped or of such nature as
to be inimical to the health, safety or welfare of the patrons thereof or of
the public at large, the license shall not be granted or, if granted, shall be
revoked. Such inspections after the granting of a license shall be regularly
repeated at intervals of no longer than a year.
§ 75-25. Fees. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The fee payable for any license hereunder for a full year or any fraction
thereof shall be as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to
time, either for an original license or any renewal thereof.14
§ 75-26. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
14.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 75-23 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-26
56:81

ARTICLE V
Amusement Devices
[Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 75-27. License required.
No pinball, bagatelle or other mechanically or electronically controlled
or manually operated amusement device shall be kept, maintained, used,
exhibited or operated in or upon any premises within the Village of
Brightwaters unless the owner of such device and the person upon whose
premises or in whose possession and control such machine or device shall
be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated shall first procure a license
therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 75-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes but is not limited to the type of machine
commonly known as a "bagatelle," "baseball," "football" or "pinball" game.
This article, however, shall exclude any device, the possession or use of
which is prohibited by law.
OWNER — Includes the individual or individuals, partnership, company,
corporation or association who or which places or operates such machine
or device or by or under whose direction such machine or device is placed
within the corporate limits of the Village of Brightwaters, whether or not
legal title to such machine or device is in such individual, partnership,
company, corporation or association.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
corporation, association or society, and any officer, agent, servant or
employee of the foregoing, who shall license, lease, rent, sell, install or
otherwise dispose of or display, keep, maintain, use or exhibit, in the Village
of Brightwaters, amusement devices, as hereinabove defined, or who shall
be in responsible charge of the premises hereinafter mentioned.
PREMISES — Includes any parcel of land, building, structure, vehicle or any
other property or part thereof.
§ 75-29. Application requirements and information.
A. In addition to all other information and requirements as otherwise
specified in Article I, all persons required to obtain a license pursuant
to this article shall furnish the following additional information on their
application for a license:
(1) The name and address of the manufacturer of the device and the
manufacturer's number, if any.
§ 75-27 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-29
56:83
§ 75-30. Fees.15
(2) The number of the premises where the device is sought to be kept,
maintained, used, exhibited or operated and the nature and use of
such premises.
(3) The number of such devices already licensed upon the same
premises.
(4) A complete statement indicating whether or not any previous
application has been made for a license hereunder and whether any
license hereunder has been received, refused, suspended or
revoked and, with the circumstances thereof.
(5) Such further information as the Village Clerk or the Board of
Trustees may require.
B. A license shall be procured by the person upon whose premises the
machine or device is to be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or
operated.
A. The license fee for each person owning one or more machines or
devices within the corporate limits of the Village of Brightwaters shall
be as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time.
B. The license fee for each person upon whose premises or in whose
possession and control such machine or device is to be kept,
maintained, used, exhibited or operated shall be as set by resolution of
the Board of Trustees from time to time for each such machine or
device.
C. Such license shall be procured for each such machine or device and
shall not be transferable, except that the owner of such machine or
device may substitute, in the same premises for which such machine or
device has been licensed, another machine or device upon payment to
the Village Clerk of a fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees
from time to time. Upon payment of such fee, there shall be endorsed
upon the license issued the information as to such substituted machine
or device as required in § 75-29 hereof. Such endorsement shall be
signed by the Village Clerk.
D. The person upon whose premises or in whose possession and control
such machine or device is kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated
may move such machine to a different location upon obtaining from the
Village Clerk an endorsement upon his license showing the new
location to which such machine is to be moved and upon the payment of
a fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time to
the Village Clerk.
15.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 75-29 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 75-31
56:84
§ 75-31. Enforcement.
The supervision, regulation and control of such machines shall be vested in
the Mayor of the Village of Brightwaters or a person so designated.
§ 75-32. Uses prohibited by law.
No such licensed machine or device shall be operated or devoted or
permitted to be operated, devoted or used for any purpose prohibited by
law.
§ 75-33. Limitation on number of devices.
No more than three such machines or devices shall be kept, maintained,
used, exhibited or operated in any one place or premises.
§ 75-34. Issuance of licenses restricted.
No license shall be issued to any person who shall have been previously
convicted of any crime.
§ 75-35. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the
Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
B. Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any such machine or
device in violation of the foregoing sections shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 75-31 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 75-35
56:85
Chapter 81
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 50.
§ 81-1. Unnecessary noise restricted. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L.
No. 4-1991]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs or injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. The
restrictions contained herein are specific enactments to curb and prevent
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
§ 81-1.1. Certain construction and lawn maintenance work
restricted. [Added 8-4-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003; 10-4-2004 by L.L.
No. 26-2004; amended 10-4-2004 by L.L. No. 27-2004; 10-4-2004 by
L.L. No. 28-2004; 10-4-2004 by L.L. No. 29-2004; 12-4-2017 by L.L.
No. 7-2017]
In an effort to preserve and maintain the quiet enjoyment of homeowners
within the Village, this section hereinbelow recited shall regulate the days
and times when loud, noise-producing construction and lawn maintenance
can be performed.
A. There shall be an absolute prohibition of any excavation, paving,
demolition, painting, grading, erection, alteration and repair to the
exterior of any residential premises or business establishment by a
commercial contractor on any federal legal holiday.
B. There shall be an absolute prohibition of any lawn, tree or shrub
maintenance on any residential premises or business establishment by
a commercial landscaper on any federal legal holiday.
C. For residential homeowners.
(1) Any and all types of construction, which shall include, but may not
be limited to, excavation, paving, demolition, grading, erection,
alteration or repair, shall be permitted on weekdays, Monday
through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and on Saturdays from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and prohibited on any Sunday.
(2) Non-noise-producing interior construction, alteration or home
repair and any non-noise-producing exterior construction may be
performed on a Sunday.
§ 75-35 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 81-1.1
56:86
§ 81-2. Loudspeakers, radio apparatus and talking machines.
§ 81-3. Horns and signaling devices.
No person shall sound or cause to be sounded any horn or signaling device
on any motorcar, motorcycle, motorboat or other vehicle on any street,
waterway or public place of the Village except as a danger signal, alarm or
traffic warning, nor shall any person create or cause to be created by the
use of such device any unreasonably loud, harsh or prolonged sound.
(3) Lawn, tree or shrub maintenance by an individual homeowner shall
be permitted weekdays, Monday through Friday, only from 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and on Saturdays and Sundays permitted only
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(4) Lawn, tree or shrub maintenance by commercial landscapers shall
be prohibited on any Sunday.
D. For commercial business establishments.
(1) Any and all types of exterior construction, which shall include, but
may not be limited to, excavation, paving, demolition, painting,
grading, erection, alteration or repair, shall be permitted on
weekdays, Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and
on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and prohibited on any
Sunday.
(2) Non-noise-producing interior construction, alteration or repair
shall be permitted on a Sunday.
(3) Lawn, tree or shrub maintenance, either by the individual business
owner or commercial landscaper or agent thereof, shall be
prohibited on any Sunday.
A. No person shall maintain or operate or permit to be maintained or
operated any loudspeaker attachment connected with a radio apparatus
or talking machine or other source of sound in such a manner that the
loudspeaker will project sound outside of any building so that the sound
is audible for a distance of more than 30 feet from the point of its origin.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the operation
of radio apparatus or talking machines in a reasonable manner within
any building or structure even though the sound therefrom may be
heard outside such building or structure up to 30 feet therefrom,
provided that such radio apparatus or talking machine is not connected
with a loudspeaker or amplifier or sound conveyor fastened to or
connected with an outside wall or which projects from a window or
other opening.
§ 81-1.1 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 81-4
56:87
§ 81-4. Sound trucks and other mechanical sound-amplifying
devices.
No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck or other mechanical
sound-amplifying device at any place within the Village except by express
permission of the Board of Trustees.
§ 81-5. Sound broadcasting from aircraft.
§ 81-6. Motor vehicles and engines.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorcar, motorboat
or other mechanism propelled by gasoline, fuel oil or other combustible
substance unless the same is properly equipped with a muffler so designed
and in such condition as to prevent unnecessary noise in its operation.
§ 81-7. Factories, warehouses and transfer stations.
No person shall operate or permit the carrying on of any activities in
connection with the operation of any factory, warehouse or transfer station
in which the primary activity is not totally enclosed within the four walls of
a building, whenever such an establishment is located within 200 feet of a
residence zone, between the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. or at any time
on Sunday.
§ 81-8. Audible alarms. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Within 120 days of the enactment of this chapter, alarm users must equip
audible alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible
alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such a
timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Village and must be disconnected
by the alarm user within 120 days of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 81-9. Applicability of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit or apply to any air raid or
warning signal, siren or any noise when emanating from a device lawfully
and properly operated by a governmental authority or when operated in
pursuance of any provision of state or federal law.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for any
purpose over the Village with sound-amplifying equipment in operation
that is audible to persons on the ground. This prohibition includes
amplification of human voices and musical instruments and forbids the
broadcasting of the advertisements of any product, function or cause
and the dissemination of messages, recitals or reading or other
materials of any kind, unless the same shall have been duly authorized
by an official agency of government.
B. The prohibition herein shall not apply to broadcastings of warning
signals from devices installed on authorized aircraft.
§ 81-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 81-10
56:88
§ 81-10. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 84
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Village facilities — See Ch. 56.
Waters and waterways — See Ch. 124.
Definition of "all-terrain vehicle" — See Ch.
128, § 128-3.
§ 84-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall injure, deface, disturb or befoul any part of a Village park
so designated by the Board of Trustees or any buildings, signs, equipment
or other property found therein or remove, cut down, cut, injure or destroy
any tree, flower, shrub, monument, statue, fence, bridge, structure or other
property within any park or park approach or within any other public area
of the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 84-2. Dogs and other animals prohibited. [Amended 7-6-2004 by
L.L. No. 18-2004; 9-6-2011 by L.L. No. 13-2011]
No person shall permit or allow any dog or other domestic animal owned
or harbored by such person to be within the limits of any park at any time,
except that any dog not at large may use Gilbert Park at any time during
its open hours, and a dog at large may use Gilbert Park between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day commencing on Memorial Day and
terminating on Labor Day each year, and a dog at large may use Gilbert
Park between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any day commencing
on the day after Labor Day each year and terminating on the day before
Memorial Day the next year.
§ 84-2.1. All-terrain vehicles prohibited. [Added 5-3-2004 by L.L.
No. 15-2004]
No all-terrain vehicle may be used or operated on any Village property.
§ 84-2.2. Alcoholic beverages prohibited; exceptions. [Added
7-25-2012 by L.L. No. 9-2012]
§ 81-10 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 84-2.2
56:89
§ 84-3. Playing baseball and other games restricted.
One may play baseball or indulge in any game or sport only when it shall not
be dangerous to or annoy the users of any park or nearby residents within
the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 84-4. Parking permits.
Parking permits may be required and shall be displayed on automobiles
parked in designated areas of Village of Brightwaters' parks.
§ 84-5. Tennis courts.
No person shall use the tennis courts at Wohseepee Park except for the
purpose of playing tennis and upon approval of an application by and
payment of a fee to the Village Clerk.17
§ 84-6. Hours of operation; permits; fees.
Parks are open to residents and their guests each day at such times as are
established by the Board of Trustees. Walker Park and Robert S. Gilbert
Park are open to Village residents upon issuance of a permit, key or other
locking device and upon payment of a fee where established by the Board
of Trustees. Nonresidents are permitted to use Walker Park upon payment
of a fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.18
§ 84-7. Use of facilities by groups; fees.
Facilities at parks are available to groups upon approval of an application
and payment of fees established by the Board of Trustees.19
§ 84-8. Unregistered vehicles prohibited.
No unregistered vehicles shall be permitted to be parked or operated on
any Village property.
A. No person may possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any form
in Gilbert Park, Walker Park or Wohseepee Park at any time.16
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, limited permission for alcohol consumption at Walker
Beach, added 7-18-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016, was removed as this local law became null and
void 7-28-2016. Local Law No. 5-2016, adopted 9-19-2016, permitted consumption of
alcoholic beverages at Walker Beach on 9-30-2016. This local law became null and void
10-1-2016.
17.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
18.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
19.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 84-2.2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 84-9
56:90
§ 84-9. Boats and other apparatus.
No person shall cause or permit any boat or other floating device or
apparatus to be placed upon or used or moored on any of the lakes within
the Village.
§ 84-10. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250
or 15 days in jail, or both.
Chapter 90
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 105. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 106.
§ 84-9 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 84-10
56:91

ARTICLE I
Trimming of Trees, Shrubs and Hedges
[Adopted 1-24-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972 (Ch. 34 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 90-1. Overhanging limbs.
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant to keep the trees and
shrubs on his premises so trimmed as not to interfere with passersby on the
sidewalk or roadway. All overhanging limbs shall be at least eight feet above
the center of the sidewalk and 13 feet above the roadway.
§ 90-2. Hedges at intersections.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of property located at street
intersections to keep all hedges, bushes, flowers or other growing plants so
trimmed as not to obscure the vision of motorists approaching the corner
of any intersecting street. A maximum height of four feet to the top of
such hedge, bush or growing plant from the level of the roadbed of the
contiguous street is permissible hereunder.
§ 90-3. Notice of violation; assessment of costs for work done by
Village.
Any owner who has been notified by the Village Clerk that the trees or
shrubs on his premises are in violation of either § 90-1 or 90-2 hereof and
shall fail to correct the condition within five days of the sending of such
notice to his last known address by mail shall be in violation of this article
and, in addition to the penalties otherwise enforceable, the Village may
thereafter so trim offending trees and hedges as to correct the prohibited
conditions and assess the cost thereof against the owners of the adjacent
property. Such costs, if not paid, shall be assessable against the property as
a tax thereon.
§ 90-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 90-1 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 90-4
56:93

ARTICLE II
Removal of Trees Along Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-24-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972 (Art. VIII of Ch. 34 of the
1972 Code)]
§ 90-5. Permit required; fines. [Amended 5-2-2005 by L.L. No.
6-2005; 3-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 90-6. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require a permit for the
trimming of trees and hedges to meet the provisions of Article I.
§ 90-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L No. 4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. No person shall mutilate, cut down, remove, injure or destroy any trees
or shrubbery growing in street rights-of-way, public sidewalks or public
places.
B. Any person guilty of a violation of this provision, upon conviction, shall
be guilty of a violation of the Village Code punishable by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 for the first offense; a fine not exceeding $1,500 for
the second offense, and a fine not exceeding $2,000 for the third
offense. These fines are exclusive of the penalties set forth in § 90-7 of
this chapter and not in addition thereto. [Amended 11-19-2018 by
L.L. No. 5-2018]
§ 90-5 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 90-7
56:95

ARTICLE III
Accumulation of Waste Materials
[Adopted 4-6-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987 (§ 19-5 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 90-8. Removal at owner's expense.
Any accumulations of waste materials resulting from failure of any person
to comply with any provisions of Chapter 105, Solid Waste, or from the
failure of such person to take advantage of the regular collection service
maintained by the Village and any waste materials in excess of ordinary
household wastes shall be removed by such person at his expense.
§ 90-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 90-8 FACILITIES, VILLAGE § 90-9
56:97
Chapter 94
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 94-1. Legislative intent.
The Village Board hereby amends the existing rules heretofore adopted by
this Board in accordance with Chapter 578 of the Laws of 1974 so as to
conform to the provisions of said law, as amended by Chapter 933 of the
Laws of 1977,20 and promulgates this set of rules.
§ 94-2. Records access officer; duties.
A. The Village Clerk is hereby designated as the records access officer of
the Village of Brightwaters for the purpose of coordinating Village
response to public requests to access to records. The records access
officer is hereby directed to make available to persons requesting
records those public records which, by law, are required to be made
available for public inspection and copying.
B. The records access officer shall be responsible for:
(1) Maintaining an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assisting a requester or identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the requested records, taking one of the following
actions:
(a) Making records available for inspection; or
(b) Denying access to the records, in whole or in part, and
explaining, in writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Making a copy available upon payment or offer to pay a fee as
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time per
page for photocopies not exceeding nine by 14 inches.21
(b) Permitting the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certifying that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certifying that:
(a) The Village is not the custodian of such records; or
20.Editor's Note: See Art. 6 of the Public Officers Law.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village offices during
regular office hours.
§ 90-9 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 94-2
94:98
§ 94-3. Location of records.
All public records shall be available for public inspection and copying at
the office of the Village Clerk at 40 Seneca Drive, Brightwaters, New York
11718.
§ 94-4. Hours for requests for records.
All requests for public access to records and for the production of records
shall be permitted during all regular business hours when the Village
Clerk's office is regularly open for business.
§ 94-5. Procedure for requests for records.
§ 94-6. Subject matter list.
(b) The records of which the Village is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
A. Requests for public access to records shall be in writing upon an
application form supplied by the records access officer.
B. The records access officer shall respond to any requests reasonably
describing the record or records sought within five business days of the
receipt of the request.
C. Requests for records shall reasonably describe the record or records
sought. Whenever possible, any person requesting records should
supply information regarding dates or file information that may help to
describe the records sought.
D. In the event that the records access officer does not provide or deny
access to the records sought within five business days of receipt of a
request, the records access officer shall furnish a written
acknowledgment of the receipt of the request and a statement of the
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied. If access
to records is neither granted nor denied within 10 business days after
the date of acknowledgment of receipt of a request, it may be construed
as a denial of access that may be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list, by subject matter, of all records in its possession, whether or not
records are available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
§ 94-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 94-7
94:99
§ 94-7. Denial of access; appeals.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters shall hear appeals
regarding denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information
Law.22
B. Denial of access shall be in writing, stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters, 40 Seneca Drive,
Brightwaters, New York.
C. If a records access officer fails to respond to a request within five
business days of receipt of a request as required in § 94-5D, such failure
shall be deemed a denial of access by the records access officer.
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a
denial.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Brightwaters shall commence upon receipt of written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records.
(2) The records that were denied.
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
F. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters shall transmit to
the Committee on Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt
of an appeal. Such copies shall be addressed to23:
Committee on Open Government
Department of State
162 Washington Avenue
Albany, New York 12231
G. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters shall inform the
appellant and the Committee on Open Government of its determination,
in writing, within seven business days of receipt of an appeal. The
determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open
Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection F of this
section.24
H. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection G of this section, shall be subject to court review as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
22.Editor's Note: See Art. 6 of the Public Officers Law.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 94-7 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 94-8
94:100
§ 94-8. Fees.25
Except when a different fee is otherwise prescribed by law, there shall be
no fee charged for the following:
§ 94-9. Posting of records information.
The records access officer shall publicize the following information by
posting the same in a conspicuous location throughout the Village which is
regularly used to advertise matters of public interest:
Chapter 97
SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 75.
§ 97-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of these regulations to prohibit the infringement of any
businesses in any established residential areas and in so doing to regulate
the term and frequency of personal property sales (such as garage sales,
porch sales, basement sales, yard sales and other similar types of sales) so
as not to disturb or disrupt the residential environment of the area. It is not
the intent of this chapter to seek control of sales by individuals selling a few
of their household or personal items.
A. Inspection of records.
B. Search for records.
C. Any certification pursuant to this chapter.
A. The location where records shall be made available for inspection and
copying.
B. The name, title, business address and business telephone number of the
designated records access officer.
C. The right to appeal by any person denied access to a record and the
name and business address of the person or body to whom an appeal is
to be directed.
25.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 94-8 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 97-2
94:101
§ 97-2. Permit required. [Amended 2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
Any person desirous of holding a personal property sale (such as but not
limited to a garage sale, basement sale, porch sale or yard sale) or resale of
used household, clothing or any personal property items which are owned
by the residents of the premises shall obtain a permit therefor from the
Village Clerk at least 48 hours prior to the sale.
§ 97-3. Time and limitation of permits.
§ 97-4. Permit fee. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991;
2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
The permit fee for each sale shall be as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.26 Any sale commenced without a permit having
been obtained first shall subject the person conducting same to a date-ofsale
permit fee in an amount of twice the permit fee in place at that time.
§ 97-5. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Village Clerk upon forms
furnished by the Village Clerk's office.
§ 97-6. Conditions for validity of permit; posting of permit; removal
of signs.
A. Any such permit issued shall be for a term not exceeding two
consecutive calendar days.
B. Permits shall be limited to one per calendar year per residential
dwelling. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
A. The permit shall be valid only upon a proper showing and finding by the
Village officer that proper safety and environmental precautions have
been taken for the public.
B. The permit shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as
to be seen by the public and code enforcement officers.
C. One sale sign may be posted on the property. The sign shall be removed
from the property the day following the sale. Additionally, if the person
conducting the sale provides the Village Clerk with two sale signs, no
larger than 8.5 inches by 11 inches, no less than 48 hours before the
start of the sale, the Village will post one at Village Hall and the other
on the Village's Community Bulletin Board outside of the Brightwaters
Post Office on Orinoco Drive. No sale sign shall be affixed to any tree,
fence, pole or structure, other than on the sale premises, anywhere in
the Village. [Amended 2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
26.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 97-2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 97-7
94:102
§ 97-7. Enforcement.
A police officer or any other official designated by any Village local law and/
or ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or regulating local law
and/or ordinance or to enforce the same shall have the right of entry to any
premises showing evidence of a personal property sale for the purpose of
enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a sale or
arrest and/or issue summons for violating this chapter to any person who
violates the provisions of this chapter.
§ 97-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250
and/or 15 days in jail for each day of occurrence.
Chapter 100
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 58.
Zoning — See Ch. 128.
§ 100-1. Approval required for construction of cesspools.
No person owning, managing, controlling, occupying or using any land or
building within the Village shall hereafter construct any cesspool or sanitary
system for disposal of sewage which shall not have been first approved by
the Suffolk County Board of Health.
§ 100-2. Disposal of sewage restricted.
No person owning, managing, controlling, occupying or using any land
or building within the Village shall hereafter construct or maintain any
cesspool or sanitary system for disposal of sewage which shall empty into
any lake, lagoon or harbor adjacent to or within the Village, nor shall any
cesspool or sanitary system be hereafter constructed or maintained which
shall flow or overflow into the surface of the ground or allow the escape of
noxious odors.
§ 100-3. Penalties for offenses.27
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
27.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 97-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 100-3
100:103
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 105
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 90.
§ 105-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Garbage, Rubbish and
Waste Materials Local Law of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters, New
York."
§ 105-2. Property maintenance requirement. [Amended 11-4-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The owner, lessee, tenant or any other person who has the management or
control of or who occupies any lot or plot of land or residence in the Village
shall keep such land at all times free and clear of accumulations of ashes,
rubbish, refuse, grass cuttings, tree cuttings, leaves, garbage, offal or other
substances except such as are deposited in containers or are otherwise
secured as provided for in this chapter for the collection and disposal by the
Department of Public Works of the Village.
§ 105-3. Definitions.
For the purses of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.28
GARBAGE — Food, animal, vegetable, fruit or similar organic wastes.
LITTER — All waste material, including but not limited to rubbish, vehicle
parts, machinery and unregistered vehicles, which tends to create a danger
to public health, safety and welfare or creates unsightliness.[Added
34-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991]
PREMISES — Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or
parts thereof upon or in which trash/rubbish is stored.
TRASH/RUBBISH — All other solids, other than ashes, garbage and wrap
(hereinafter defined), including but not limited to garbage, grass clippings,
28.Editor's Note: The definition of "Department of Sanitation," which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 100-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 105-3
100:104
leaves, tree trimmings, wood, metals, crockery, porcelain and other similar
materials.
WASTE — Where appropriate herein, the terms "garbage," "ashes," "trash/
rubbish" and "wrap" may be collectively referred to herein as "waste."
WRAP — Paper, bottles, whether made of glass or plastic, tin cans and
cartons and boxes (broken down and tied together).
§ 105-4. Department of Public Works; duties of Superintendent.
[Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works, which shall be
under the supervision and control of the Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the responsibility for the
collection and disposal of all waste by the Department of Public Works. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall carry out all rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board of Trustees concerning such matters as the days
for collection of waste, the location of containers therefor and all other
matters relating to the storage, collection and disposal thereof.
§ 105-5. Receptacles; manner of storage for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, controlling or
occupying any land or residence within the Village to provide sufficient
metal or plastic receptacles to hold all accumulations of waste
materials ordinarily accumulated on the premises. No person owning,
managing, controlling or occupying any land or residence within the
Village shall store any such receptacle in open view in the front yard of
such land or residence. [Amended 6-3-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
B. Waste materials will be stored for collection as follows:
(1) Garbage. Food waste shall be drained and wrapped in paper or
plastic bags and placed in a plastic or metal watertight container
with a cover and containing handles.
(2) Ashes. Ashes must be dry and free of embers. Do not include glass,
metals or any other material with the ashes. The ashes shall be
placed in metal containers with adequate covers and handles.
(3) Trash/rubbish. Thee and hedge clippings must be tied in bundles
not larger than three feet in length and 18 inches in diameter with
an adequate-strength cord. Wood or metal rubbish that cannot be
placed in a container shall be reduced in volume and tied to
facilitate handling. Thee stumps are not acceptable.
(4) Wrap. Paper and magazines shall be tied in bundles, placed in
brown paper bags or deposited in containers for recyclables
provided by the Village. Corrugated boxes and containers shall be
crushed flat and tied securely in bundles. Plastic, glass and metal
recyclables shall be cleaned, caps removed, paper labels removed
§ 105-3 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 105-5
100:105
§ 105-6. Removal of litter required; notice; assessment of costs of
removal by Village. [Added 3-4-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991]
from metal recyclables and placed in a garbage can, not in plastic
bags. Recyclables are to be separately bundled from all other waste
material, and no waste, as defined in § 105-3, that is not recyclable
shall be bundled with wrap. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
(5) Weight. The total weight for each item of collection shall not exceed
50 pounds. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
A. Authority to remove. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in
control of such land shall fail to remove litter in the Village, including
unregistered vehicle(s), vehicle parts and machinery, the Village shall
have the authority as provided for herein to enter onto such land and
clean the same and charge the cost or expense of such action against
the owner and establish a lien in the manner herein provided.
B. Village Board action. Any owner of real property in the Village shall be
required to remove the litter which exists upon his land when directed
to do so by resolution of the Village Board, pursuant to the authority
provided under Village Law.
C. Notice to be served. Whenever the Village Board shall adopt a
resolution requiring the owners of land to remove litter which exists
thereon, the Village Board shall specify the time within which such
work shall be completed. Such notice shall set forth, with reasonable
certainty, the location at which the condition exists and the manner in
which the removal work shall be performed. The owners shall be given
at least 10 days from the date of the mailing of the notice during which
the work shall be performed, and, in any event, such notice shall grant a
reasonable time, giving due consideration to the amount of
accumulation of rubbish or debris and the location thereof. Notice of
the adoption of a resolution requiring the removal work shall be served
upon the owners of the property at which the condition exists by
certified mail, addressed to the last known address of said owner.
D. Failure to comply. Whenever a notice or notices referred to in this
section of this chapter have been served and the owner shall neglect or
fail to comply with such notice within the time provided therein, the
Village Board shall authorize the work to be done and shall provide for
the cost thereof to be paid from general Village funds, as directed by
resolution.
E. Manner of assessment of costs upon real property. In cases where it
shall be necessary for the Village Board to have the work performed
due to the failure of the owner to comply with the Village Board's
resolution, the Village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work
performed or the services rendered at its direction, by assessment or
levy upon the lots or parcels of land where such work was performed or
§ 105-5 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 105-6
100:106
§ 105-7. Removal or disturbance of materials placed for collection.
No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Village or a
property owner or occupant shall disturb or remove any waste that has been
placed outside of a residence or apartment house or lot for removal.
§ 105-8. Placement for collection. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991; 5-19-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 105-9. Refuse not acceptable for collection. [Amended 11-4-1991
by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The following refuse shall not be considered acceptable for collection by the
Department of Public Works and shall not be placed out for collection:
such services rendered. All costs actually incurred by the Village upon
each lot or parcel and the charge therefor shall be assessed and
collected in the same manner and in the same time as other ad valorem
Village charges.
A. All trash/rubbish and wrap for collection by the Village Department of
Public Works must be placed in such place as is designated by the
Board of Trustees, i.e., roadside, after 6:00 p.m. the day before or
before 5:30 a.m. on the scheduled day of collection.
B. All garbage shall be placed at one designated pickup area per
household.
C. Whenever any of the item(s) defined by § 105-3 of this Code have been
placed at roadside for Village collection and said item(s) were not
collected by the Village on the scheduled date therefor for any reason, it
shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, controlling or
occupying the land or residence in the Village from which said item(s)
were generated to remove the same from the roadside by no later than
12:00 midnight of that scheduled collection date.
A. Materials resulting from the repair, construction, alteration or
excavation of buildings or structures, streets or sidewalks, such as
earth, plaster, mortar, concrete, bricks, lath and roofing materials,
wood debris or other types of construction debris. Arrangements are to
be made with private contractors for the removal of trees and large
quantities of refuse. Professional gardeners and landscapers are
required to remove their own debris.
B. Dangerous materials or substances, such as combustible materials or
substances, poisons, acids, caustics, infected or infectious materials,
explosives or those materials which may be of danger to the ecology or
residents of the Village.
C. Materials which have not been prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 105-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 105-9
100:107
§ 105-10. Schedule for collection. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
All disposable material shall be collected according to a schedule approved
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 105-11. Residential sanitation charge.
§ 105-12. Collection by authorized agent only.
D. Large bulk items such as refrigerators, bedsprings, box springs, stoves,
washing machines, hot-water boilers, etc., will not be removed with the
rubbish. It will be necessary to call the Department of Public Works to
arrange for removal of these items. A fee will be charged for such items.
Items are not to be placed at the property line until arrangements have
been made with the Department of Public Works.
E. Waste which is not placed in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board of Trustees for that purpose.
A. The charge for the collection and disposal of waste by the Department
of Public Works of the Village shall be according to a schedule set by the
Board of Trustees. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
B. The residential sanitation charge shall be billed annually by the Village,
in advance, as a part of the annual Village real property tax bill to the
record owner of the premises and shall be due and payable to the
Village at the same time that the Village real property tax bill is paid,
such payment to be made at the office of the Village Clerk and/or the
Receiver of Taxes.
C. Penalty for delinquent charges. In the event that the residential
sanitation charge is not paid within the time provided for payment of
the Village real property tax bill, then a penalty charge shall be added
to the amount owed, and said penalty charge shall be at the same rate
as that established by the appropriate statutes of the State of New York
relating to penalties on delinquent Village property taxes.
D. Lien for unpaid charges. All residential sanitation charges, including
penalties and interest thereon, if any, shall be a lien upon the real
property benefited by the refuse collection and disposal service
provided for under this chapter from the date that the residential
sanitation charge is due and payable, and such lien shall be prior and
superior to every other lien or claim except the lien of the existing taxes
or local assessments. The Board of Trustees may certify to the Village
Clerk and/or the Village Receiver of Taxes the amount of any such lien
which has not been paid at the time and in the manner prescribed by
such Board, with a description of the real property affected thereby, and
the Board of Trustees may include such amount in the annual tax levy
and shall levy the same upon the real property in default.
§ 105-9 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 105-12
100:108
§ 105-13. Disposal of refuse restricted.
No refuse shall be disposed of within the Incorporated Village of
Brightwaters except in such manner and at such place or places as may be
permitted by the Board of Trustees.
§ 105-13.1. Littering prohibited. [Added 7-6-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998]
No person shall placed, or cause to be placed, any litter or waste on any
public road or public property in the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 105-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. No person, other than an authorized employee or agent of the Village
Department of Public Works, shall disturb or remove any waste that has
been placed outside of a residence or apartment house within the
Village for removal. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
B. Commercial enterprises within the Village shall be responsible to
dispose of all waste accumulated by or arising out of their commercial
enterprise. No person, other than one licensed by the Town of Islip for
private collection and approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village,
shall disturb or remove any waste or other articles from a commercial
establishment, and the same shall only be removed in a vehicle lawfully
licensed and authorized to remove such waste.
C. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a property owner or
occupant from disposing of his own waste, subject to prior approval of
the Board of Trustees.
D. All garbage, refuse and waste, as defined in § 105-3, from commercial
establishments located within the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters
shall be collected or removed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday. It is prohibited to collect or remove any
garbage, refuse and waste from any commercial establishment on
Saturday or Sunday. [Added 6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 105-12 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 105-14
100:109
Chapter 106
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 90.
§ 106-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 106-2. General provisions.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the
property, property values and welfare of the residents of the Village of
Brightwaters and their guests, and of the visitors to the Village, and to
protect the property and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the
environment of the Village of Brightwaters.
B. Intent. It is the finding of the Board of Trustees that the planting and/or
the growing of bamboo within the Village of Brightwaters has been and
will continue to be destructive to the natural environment, including
indigenous flora, and destructive to structures and walks on properties
within the Village adjoining and neighboring those properties where
bamboo has been planted and/or permitted to grow; that because of
these effects the planting and the growing of bamboo threatens the
value and physical integrity of both public and private property in the
Village; and that therefore, in order to protect and preserve said
environment and values, the Village declares it necessary to regulate or
prohibit the planting and/or growing of bamboo within the Village.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BAMBOO — Any tropical or semitropical grass of the genera Bambusa,
Dendrocalamus or of any other related genera.
BAMBOO PROPERTY OWNER — A property owner in the Village who
has planted or grown or caused the planting or growing of bamboo on
his property and/or permitted or permits the growing of bamboo on
his property that had initially encroached onto his property from an
adjoining or neighboring property.
B. Applicability. For purposes of this section, if bamboo is found growing
upon a property that shall constitute presumptive evidence that the
growing of bamboo on the property shall have occurred with the
consent of the owner of such property, except that such property owner
shall not be presumed to be a bamboo property owner if the property
owner did not plant or grow or cause said bamboo to be planted or
grown on his property and he shall provide the Building Inspector with
proof, satisfactory to the Building Inspector, that, within a reasonable
§ 105-14 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 106-2
100:110
period of time after he first learned of the encroachment of bamboo
onto his property from an adjoining or neighboring property, he advised
the owner of such adjoining or neighboring property of his objection to
the encroachment of bamboo onto his property and/or initiated steps
for the removal of the bamboo from his property.
C. Prohibition. Effective upon the date this provision shall become law, the
planting or growing of bamboo shall be prohibited within the Village of
Brightwaters. Any person who thereafter plants or grows, or causes to
be planted or to grow, bamboo within the Village shall be deemed to be
in violation of this section and shall be subject to such penalties as are
set forth hereunder.
D. Regulation. Any bamboo which has been planted or otherwise
permitted to grow on any property within the Village of Brightwaters
prior to the effective date of this chapter may remain on such property
subject to compliance with this section. Each bamboo property owner
shall be responsible to ensure that the bamboo planted or growing on
his property prior to the effective date of this chapter does not encroach
or grow upon any adjoining or neighboring property or properties,
including all public property and rights-of-way held by the Village, and
shall be required to take such measures as are reasonably expected to
prevent such bamboo from invading or growing onto adjoining or
neighboring properties. Such measures shall include installation of
sheathing comprised of metal or other material impenetrable by
bamboo at a sufficient depth within the property line or lines where the
bamboo is planted or is growing to prevent the growth or encroachment
upon adjoining or neighboring property by said bamboo. The Board of
Trustees may from time to time prescribe such rules and regulations as
may be necessary to give effect to this.
E. Removal.
(1) In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo property owner's
property invades or grows on an adjoining or neighboring property
that is owned or held on behalf of the Village of Brightwaters, the
Village shall notify the bamboo property owner that the bamboo
said owner had planted or caused to plant or had permitted to grow
on his property has invaded Village property and that the bamboo
property owner is responsible for the removal of such bamboo from
the Village property. This notice shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular mail to the latest address
of the bamboo property owner on file with the Village Clerk, and a
copy of the notice shall also be left in a conspicuous location on the
bamboo property owner's property in the Village of Brightwaters.
(2) In the event that the bamboo property owner does not remove or
contract for the removal of said bamboo from the Village property,
or does not make an arrangement with the Village for removal of
such bamboo within 30 days from the date the Village first
deposited the notice as provided in Subsection E(1) above with the
§ 106-2 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 106-2
100:111
§ 106-3. Violations and penalties.
United States Postal Service, then the Village, at its discretion,
may remove or arrange for the removal of such bamboo from the
Village property. The bamboo property owner shall be liable and
responsible to the Village for the Village's costs in removing the
bamboo from the Village property. Such costs may be assessed
against the property of the bamboo property owner as a tax payable
by such bamboo property owner in the event that the costs remain
unpaid more than 30 days after demand for payment has been
made by the Village on the bamboo property owner.
(3) In the event that the Village is compelled to undertake the removal
or to contract for the undertaking of removal of bamboo, as
provided for in Subsection E(2) above, neither the Village nor its
employees shall have any liability for damages or other claims to
the bamboo property owner by reason of the removal of such
bamboo. In the event such removal entails or causes damages to
the flora or other property of a person other than the property of
the bamboo property owner, the bamboo property owner in
violation of this section shall be responsible for such damages.
F. Replanting prohibited. Any bamboo either planted or caused to be
planted or existing on a property prior to the effective date of this
section may not be replanted or replaced in kind once such bamboo is
or has become, for any reason, dead, destroyed, uprooted or otherwise
removed.
G. Notification. Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, the
Village shall give notice by reasonable means to all property owners in
the Village advising them of the enactment of this section and
requesting that each property owner who would be deemed a bamboo
property owner hereunder as of the effective date of this section notify
the Village in writing no later than 60 days after the date of the
aforementioned notice from the Village that bamboo is present on the
property of such property owner and such other information as may be
requested in the notice from the Village.
A. Violations. Any property owner who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation thereof. Each and every day that a
violation of this chapter shall exist shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
B. Penalties.
(1) A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $750 for each violation.
(2) The Village may also pursue civil or injunctive relief, or pursue
criminal penalties, irrespective of any determination to prosecute
for a violation of this chapter.
§ 106-2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 106-4
100:112
§ 106-4. Severability.
In the event that any portion or portions of this chapter shall be determined
to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the chapter
and its provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 107
RENTAL REGISTRATION
§ 107-1. Preamble.
This chapter of the Code shall be applicable only to single-family residential
dwellings.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
PREMISES — Single-family residence or dwelling.
RECORD OWNER — The person or persons set forth in the latest deed or
other instrument of conveyance, as filed in the office of the Suffolk County
Clerk, setting forth the true and accurate owner or owners of real property.
§ 107-3. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brightwaters hereby finds that
it is in the public interest to prevent unsafe conditions arising from the
rental of residential property that is in violation of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or the Brightwaters Village
Code, and any other codes or regulations that are applicable within the
Village of Brightwaters, and property used for rental that is inadequate
in size, overcrowded and dangerous; or which poses hazards to life, limb
and property of residents of the Village of Brightwaters or that tends to
promote and encourage deterioration of the housing stock of the Village
of Brightwaters; creates blight, excessive vehicle traffic and parking
problems; and overburdens municipal services. The Board of Trustees
further finds that additional Code provisions are required to halt the
proliferation of such conditions and that the public health, safety, welfare
and good order governance of the Village of Brightwaters will be enhanced
by enactment of the regulations set forth in this chapter.
§ 107-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all rentals of property for residential use in the
Village of Brightwaters. Any property shall be presumed to be rented if said
premises is not occupied by the legal owner thereof.
§ 106-4 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 107-5
100:113
§ 107-5. Effect on other provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to supplement applicable
state and local laws, codes and regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to abolish, impair, supersede or replace existing remedies or
existing requirements of any other provision of state or local law or code or
regulation. The issuance of any permit or the filing of any form under this
chapter does not make legal any action or state of facts that is otherwise
illegal, unlawful or nonpermitted, or is otherwise in contravention of any
other applicable law, code, rule or regulation.
§ 107-6. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to use, establish, maintain, lease or let any premises,
entirely or partially for residential occupancy, where any rent or other
consideration is paid, charge is made or services are rendered in exchange
for such use or occupancy, without first having obtained a permit therefor,
as required by this chapter.
§ 107-7. Application for permit.
§ 107-8. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued hereunder upon a determination by the
Superintendent of Buildings that the dwelling unit conforms to all
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and the Code of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters.
Where the provisions or requirements of such codes are in conflict, one with
A. An application for a rental permit that has been signed and sworn to by
the owner shall be filed for all rentals of property for habitation or
residential purposes prior to the rental or occupancy thereof, which
application shall contain the legal residence and contact information of
each owner and verification of an inspection by the Village of
Brightwaters or a written certification from a licensed architect or
licensed engineer that states that the rental unit fully complies with all
of the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and Brightwaters Village Code, and any other applicable
codes and regulations, which certification shall not have been
completed more than 30 days prior to the date of the application for a
rental permit, and a floor plan of the rental unit.
B. Owner or designated agent. An application hereunder shall be executed
by the record owner of the premises or by an agent designated, in
writing, by said record owner for the purposes of this chapter. Said
record owner or agent, as the case may be, shall be the person upon
whom service shall be made of any written violation or notice of
violation under this Code. Where a record owner maintains residence
outside of the County of Suffolk, State of New York, such record owner,
as a condition of any permit hereunder, shall designate a person as the
agent for such premises.
§ 107-5 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 107-8
100:114
the other, then the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive,
or which establishes the higher standard, shall prevail.
§ 107-9. Denial of permit.
Where the Building Inspector determines not to issue a permit hereunder,
the Building Inspector shall provide written notice to the applicant as to the
basis therefor, which notice shall set forth, in detail, those matters which
are required to be addressed by the applicant in order for such permit to
issue. In the event of any denial of a permit hereunder, the applicant shall
have a right of appeal to the Board of Trustees, which shall consider any
such appeal promptly and provide its decision, in writing, to the applicant.
§ 107-10. Compliance required.
§ 107-11. Inspections.
The Village Building Inspector is authorized to make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings and to safeguard the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. The Building Inspector or
his designated representative is authorized to enter, upon the consent of the
owner, tenant or occupant of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit or premises, at any reasonable time during daylight hours, or
at such other time as may be necessary in an emergency without consent of
the owner, for the purpose of performing his duties under this chapter.
§ 107-12. Search warrant applications.
The Village Building Inspector or his designated representative is
authorized to make application to any court with jurisdiction over the
premises for the issuance of a search warrant in order to conduct an
inspection of any premises covered by this chapter where the owner refuses
or fails to allow an inspection of its rental premises and where there is
reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred.
The application for a search warrant shall in all respects comply with the
applicable laws of the State of New York.
A. No permit or renewal thereof shall be issued under any application
unless the property shall be in compliance with all the provisions of the
Code of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters, the laws and sanitary
and housing regulations of the County of Suffolk or any special district,
and the laws of the State of New York.
B. Prior to the issuance of any such permit or renewal thereof, the
property owner shall provide a certification from a licensed architect, a
licensed professional engineer or the Village Building Inspector that the
property which is the subject of the application is in compliance with all
the provisions of the Code of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters,
the laws and sanitary and housing regulations of the County of Suffolk
or any special district, and the laws of the State of New York.
§ 107-8 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 107-13
100:115
§ 107-13. Search without warrant restricted.
Nothing in this chapter, except for provisions concerning emergency
inspections, shall be deemed to authorize the Village Building Inspector
or his authorized representative to conduct an inspection of any premises
subject to this chapter without the consent of the owner and/or occupant of
the premises and without a warrant duly issued by an appropriate court.
§ 107-14. Validity of permit; renewals.
§ 107-15. Transfer of permit prohibited.
A permit issued hereunder shall not be transferred or be transferable to
a successor record owner. The then-current record owner shall provide
written notice to the Building Inspector upon transfer of title to the
premises within 48 hours of any such event. The successor record owner
shall, not later than 10 days after the date of transfer of title to the
premises, apply for such permit or permits hereunder as may then be
required for such premises.
§ 107-16. Schedule of fees.
The Board of Trustees shall adopt, and from time to time may amend,
a schedule of fees payable by applicants for permits hereunder or for
renewals thereof. Such schedule of fees may, in the discretion of the Board
of Trustees, take into account if the dwelling unit is occupied by the record
owner or by a member or members of the immediate family of the record
owner. Such schedule of fees may, in the discretion of the Board of Trustees,
take into account if the record owner is over the age of 65 at the time
application is made hereunder.
A. A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of three years
from the date of issuance, except upon transfer of record ownership of
the premises under § 107-15 herein.
B. An application for the renewal of a rental permit shall be signed by the
owner and shall be completed and filed with the Building Inspector not
later than 30 days prior to the expiration of any valid rental permit. The
application for a renewal of the rental permit shall contain an official
copy of the prior valid rental permit and either a signed and sworn
affidavit by the owner affirming that the rental property, to the best of
his/her knowledge, fully complies with all of the provisions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and
Brightwaters Village Code, that the structure has not been physically
altered in any way, except in full conformance with a valid building
permit, and the owner is not aware of the property being in violation of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
Brightwaters Village Code; or an inspection by the Building Inspector of
the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 107-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 107-17
100:116
§ 107-17. Record of applications and permits to be maintained.
A record of all applications made and permits issued hereunder shall be
maintained in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 107-18. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter and an offense within the
meaning of the Penal Law for any person to list, solicit, advertise or offer,
exhibit or show, to any person, a dwelling unit within the Village, for the
purpose of bringing about or causing the rental thereof, where no currently
effective permit has been issued by the Building Inspector in respect to such
dwelling unit, as provided in this chapter.
§ 107-19. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 108
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 38.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 90.
Solid waste — See Ch. 105.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 119.
A. Any person who violates, or assists in the violation of, any provision of
this chapter other than § 107-6 above (Permit required) shall be guilty
of a violation punishable by a fine not less than $1,000 nor more than
$1,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for a conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of two years, punishable by a
fine of not less than $1,500 nor more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction of a third or
other subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period
of three years, punishable by a fine of not less than $3,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
B. Any person who violates or assists in the violation of § 107-6 above
(Permit required) shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine in an
amount not less than $3,000. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 107-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 107-19
108:117

Part 1
[Adopted 1-24-1972 By L.L. NExoc. a1v-a1t9i7o2nsAs Ch. 16 Of The 1972 Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 108-1. Compliance required.
No person shall open up, tunnel under, alter the grade of, dig or excavate
in the roadbed, pavement or gutters of any street of the Village for any
purpose whatever except upon compliance with the provisions herein.
§ 108-2. Application for permit required; contents.
Except as provided in § 108-10 hereof, not less than 24 hours prior to the
proposed time for such digging or excavating, application shall be made to
the Village Clerk for a permit therefor. Such application shall state:
§ 108-3. Cash deposit or bond; forfeiture or release.29
§ 108-4. Insurance requirements.30
Each application for a permit shall further be accompanied by a certificate
of insurance, in a from determined by the Village Counsel, approved by
the Board of Trustees and issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business in this state, running to the Village, guaranteeing that
the applicant has provided public liability coverage of not less than
$100,000./$300,000 and property damage insurance of $50,000/$100,000,
to save the Village harmless from all claims, actions and proceedings
brought by any person for injury to person or property resulting from or
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The precise place where the applicant desires to dig or excavate, with
the distance from the nearest street intersection or from the property
abutting the street at the point proposed for excavation.
A. Each application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit or bond or
undertaking to cover the cost of restoring the street and its pavement to
a condition which meets the approval of the Village Engineer. In the
alternative and in the discretion of the Village Clerk, a guaranty or
adequate assurance that such repavement will be made will be
supplied.
B. Failure to restore the street and its pavement to a satisfactory condition
shall result in forfeiture of the cash deposit or bond. Satisfactory
completion of the work or restoration shall result in the release of the
cash deposit or bond.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 108-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-4
108:119
occasioned by any fault or default of the person to whom the permit is
issued or by anyone acting thereunder on his behalf.
§ 108-5. Backfilling and restoration.
§ 108-6. Fees.31
The fee for each permit hereunder will be as established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees from time to time.32
§ 108-7. Issuance of permit; conditions of permit.
§ 108-8. Start of permitted work; expiration and extensions of
permit.
A. As a condition precedent to receiving a permit, the applicant shall
agree that, immediately upon completion of his work and, when
required, its inspection and approval, he will backfill the excavation.
Thereafter, when the Village restores the street at the place excavated
to complete repair, the cost thereof will be paid by the permittee, the
amount due being taken from the sum placed on deposit as provided in
§ 108-3 hereof. Until such complete repair has been made, all liability
for the condition of the street remains upon the permittee.
B. In the alternative, upon permission, in writing, by authorization of the
Board of Trustees, the permittee may himself restore the pavement to
complete repair under supervision of the Village Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works and in conformity with grades and
specifications to be provided for such work.
A. When there has been full compliance with the provisions herein stated
and no other valid objections have appeared, the Village Clerk will issue
a permit to the applicant therefor.
B. Permits are not transferable, and the work shall not be performed in
any place other than the locations specifically designated in the permit.
A. Every grant of work for which a permit is issued must be begun within
48 hours of the time and date specified in the permit.33
B. Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the
work within the specified time, he shall, prior to the expiration of the
permit, present, in writing, to the Chief Code Enforcement Officer a
request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for
the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer, such an extension is necessary and not contrary to
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
32.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 108-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 108-8
108:120
§ 108-9. Availability of permit for inspection.
Each person to whom a permit is issued hereunder must at all times have
it available at the place of the excavation and, upon demand, show it to the
representative of the Village.
§ 108-10. Emergencies.
§ 108-11. Safeguards.
Whenever the surface of a street is disturbed or an opening is made therein
or when, as a result of work done thereon, there exists a depression below
the surrounding grade or an elevation higher than the grade because of
excess backfill or for other reasons, the person to whom the permit was
issued or who has caused the hazard shall provide adequate safeguards
to the public by erecting a barrier or fence, of distinctive type or color,
marking the outside limits of the affected area and bearing warning signs
distinguishable by day and adequate numbers of lighted lanterns or flares
to give warning of danger after dark.
§ 108-12. Penalties for offenses.34
the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional time for
the completion of the work.
A. Application. In an emergency, such as the breaking of a main or other
condition calling for immediate opening of a street to prevent loss or
injury to property, application may be made to the Village Clerk for an
emergency permit, in person or by telephone, and authority shall be
granted to proceed with the necessary work forthwith.
B. Notifying police. If such emergency develops during hours when the
Village Office is closed, as during the night or on holidays, notification
thereof shall be made to the Police Department, in person or by
telephone, before proceeding with the street opening.
C. Duties thereafter. It shall be the duty of every person who undertakes to
open a street under the provisions of this section to place warning
signs, lights and barriers to protect the public and, upon the first day of
resumption of regular business at the Village Office, to comply with the
provisions of §§ 108-2, 108-3, 108-4, 108-5 and 108-6 hereof or to be
held in violation of this Part 1.
A. For the infraction of any provision hereof, any permit may be canceled,
and permission to do similar work may be withheld from the offender
for a period of three months from the time of such violation.
B. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Part 1
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 108-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-12
108:121
Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 108-12 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 108-12
108:122
Part 2
[Adopted 1-24-1972 By LG.Le.n Neroa. l1 P-1ro9v7i2siAons sArts. I Through VI Of Ch.
34 Of The 1972 Code]
ARTICLE II
Depositing Materials on Streets and Sidewalks
§ 108-13. Permit required; applicant's statement.
§ 108-14. Insurance requirements.35
Each application hereunder shall be accompanied by a bond or certificate
of insurance in a form approved by the Village Counsel and issued by
an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, running to
the Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has provided public liability
coverage of not less than $100,000/$300,000 and property damage
insurance in the amount of not less than $50,000/$100,000, to save the
Village harmless from all claims, actions and proceedings brought by any
person for injury to person or property resulting from or occasioned by any
fault or default by the person to whom the permit is issued or anyone acting
thereunder on his behalf.
§ 108-15. Permit fees. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
The fee for each permit shall be as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees
from time to time, and in addition thereto, there shall be a charge as set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time per day for every
day or fraction thereof that said material shall remain upon the designated
street or sidewalk.36
A. No person shall deposit any material designed for use in building
construction or for other purposes upon any street or sidewalk in the
Village or in any other manner obstruct or impede free travel upon such
street or sidewalk unless a permit has been issued therefor.
B. Prerequisites for permit. As a prerequisite to securing a permit, each
applicant must file with the Village Clerk a statement containing:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The nature of the materials and amount thereof he wishes to place
in the streets.
(3) The precise place of such deposit.
(4) The length of time the encumbrance will continue.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
36.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 108-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-16
108:123
§ 108-16. Location of deposit of materials. [Amended 11-4-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991]
No materials may be placed upon any street or in any gutter, curb or
sidewalk, despite such permit, except in the place and manner designated
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 108-17. Warning signs and devices.
Every person who places or deposits any materials upon a street, gutter,
curb or sidewalk shall mark the location thereof by a barrier or fence
bearing warning signs and distinguished by lighted red lanterns or flares
after dark adequately to apprise the public of the presence of the hazard.
§ 108-18. Placement of materials in certain locations prohibited.
[Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
No person shall construct, erect, store, plant, obstruct or place any material
on that portion of Village property between the road surface and the
owner's residential property line.
§ 108-16 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 108-18
108:124
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk and Curb Repairs
§ 108-19. Duty to maintain in safe condition.
It shall be the duty of every property owner or occupant to keep the
sidewalk and curb adjoining his premises in a safe, passable condition. For
failure, upon notice by the Village Clerk of not less than 24 hours, to make
such repairs as are specified as to places and manner, the Board of Trustees
may cause the same to be done and assess the expense thereof upon the
adjoining land.
§ 108-20. Duty to keep free of obstructions and clear snow and ice.
The owner or occupant of any premises shall keep the contiguous sidewalks
free from dirt, filth, weeds and other obstructions or encumbrances and
shall cause such sidewalks to be cleared of snow and ice within 24 hours
after such snowfall shall have ceased or ice has formed.
§ 108-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-20
108:125

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 108-21. Sweeping of materials onto streets prohibited.
No person shall throw, deposit, sweep or cause the accumulation of ashes,
refuse, debris, dirt, grass clippings, leaves, waste, garbage, snow and/or ice
upon any street, sidewalk or public place.
§ 108-21.1. Dumping of pollutants into street storm drains or storm
sewers prohibited. [Added 1-6-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
No person shall dump, place, or otherwise cause or allow the intrusion
of, but not limited to, any animal waste, oil, antifreeze, paint, organic or
inorganic solvent, gasoline or other similar pollutant into any storm drain
or storm sewer on any street, right-of-way or other public property in the
Village.
§ 108-22. Compliance with warning devices required.
No person shall walk upon, enter or drive any animal or vehicle upon any
roadway or sidewalk which is guarded by any barrier, sign or signal lawfully
so placed for the purpose of preventing or warning persons from entering
into or upon the same.
§ 108-23. Removal of or interference with warning devices
prohibited.
No person shall remove, displace or in any manner interfere with any
barrier, guardrail, sign, lantern or other object or form of warning which
shall have been placed along or across any street or sidewalk or about any
public place as a warning or safeguard or to prevent interference with or
damage to work completed or being done in such place.
§ 108-24. Awning and canopy restrictions.
No person shall erect or hang or permit to be erected or hung or maintained
upon any building owned or occupied by him an awning or canopy, any
part of which shall project in, over or upon any of the streets, sidewalks or
public places, unless such awning or canopy be at least seven feet above the
sidewalk upon such street or public place.
§ 108-25. Display of merchandise on sidewalks prohibited.
No person who is the owner, lessee or occupant of any premises adjoining
any street, avenue or highway shall place or keep or permit to be placed or
kept on any sidewalk in front of, adjoining or adjacent to such premises any
goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 108-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-26
108:127
§ 108-26. Keeping of wheeled carts on sidewalks prohibited; seizure
by police. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
No merchant or purveyor of foods or other goods shall permit wheeled
carts or conveyors provided by him for the convenience of patrons to
remain on the sidewalks while not in use. Every such vehicle left on a
sidewalk or street shall be considered an obstacle to traffic and a hazard
to pedestrians and may, without notice, be seized by the police and taken
to police headquarters, subject thereafter to restitution to its owner upon
payment of reasonable charges of transportation and storage as are set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time for every vehicle thus
seized, removed and held.37
37.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 108-26 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 108-26
108:128
ARTICLE V
Penalties
[Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 108-27. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Part 2 shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 108-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 108-27
108:129
Chapter 113
TAXATION
§ 108-27 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 108-27
113:130
ARTICLE I
Utilities
[Adopted 1-24-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972 as Ch. 36 of the 1972 Code]
§ 113-1. Tax imposed. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
Pursuant to the authority granted by Article 5, § 5-530, of the Village Law
of the State of New York, from on and after March 1, 1969, there is hereby
imposed:
§ 113-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes:
A. A tax equal to 1% of the gross income of every utility doing business in
the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters which is subject to the
supervision of the New York State Department of Public Service and
which has an annual gross income in excess of $500, except motor
carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-B of the
Public Service Law.38
B. A tax equal to 1% of the gross operating income of every other utility
doing business in the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters which has an
annual gross operating income in excess of $500.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated
within the Village.
A.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telegraph service,
only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village.
B.
In the case of any utility other than described in the definition of "gross
operating income" hereof:
Receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or
otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to
which it is provided that profits from the same shall be included
in "gross income"), made or service rendered for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser in the Village, including cash,
credits and property of any kind or nature, whether or not such
sale is made or such service is rendered for profit, without any
deductions therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold,
the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever.
(1)
(2) Profits from the sale of securities.
C.
38.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by Chapter 267 of the
Laws of 1970. See now Transportation Law § 240 et seq.
§ 113-1 TAXATION § 113-2
113:131
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or
telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the
cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount
paid or any other expense whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by
any other means, except the state, municipality, public districts and
corporations and associations organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of
which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
UTILITY — Includes:
Profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
or use of or interest in such property.
(3)
Profits from the sale of personal property, other than property of
a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of a
taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is
made.
(4)
Receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from
sources within the Village (other than such as are received from
a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the
taxpaying utility), without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt
thereof.
(5)
Profits from any transaction, except sales for resale and rentals,
with the Village whatsoever.
(6)
Every person subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Public Service, except:
Persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping
and parlor railroad cars.
(1)
Persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing railroads
other than street-surface, rapidtransit, subway and elevated
railroads.
(2)
Omnibus corporations subject to supervision under Article 3-A of
the Public Service Law.39
(3)
A.
§ 113-2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 113-2
113:132
§ 113-3. Applicability of provisions.
This Article and the tax imposed thereby shall:
§ 113-4. Disposition of revenues.
All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax imposed by this Article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 113-5. Collection and enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Village Treasurer shall be the chief enforcement officer of this Article
and shall make and be responsible for all collections hereunder. He shall
also have the power and authority to make any rules or regulations or
directives not inconsistent with this Article which, in his discretion, are
reasonably necessary to facilitate the administration of this Article and the
collection of the taxes imposed hereby. Copies of all such rules, regulations
and directives as may from time to time be promulgated shall be sent by
registered mail to all utilities subject to this Article which register as such
with the Village Treasurer. All such rules, regulations and directives shall
be deemed a portion of this Article.
§ 113-6. Filing of returns; contents.
Every person who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration,
telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or wires,
whether or not such person is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service.
B.
Every person who furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such
person or are only incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the
public streets.
C.
A. Apply only within the territorial limits of the Village of Brightwaters.
B. Not apply and the tax shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the
Village of Brightwaters notwithstanding that some act is necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
C. Be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other
provisions of law.
D. Apply to all subject income received on and after March 1, 1969.
39.Editor's Note: Article 3-A of the Public Service Law was repealed by Chapter 267 of the
Laws of 1970. See now Transportation Law § 150 et seq.
§ 113-2 TAXATION § 113-6
113:133
§ 113-7. Time of payment.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed hereby for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of
the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 113-8. Penalties and interest.
Any utility failing to file a return or a corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this Article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax because due; but the Village Treasurer,
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such
penalty.
§ 113-9. Tax as operating cost.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 113-10. Failure to file or incorrect returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, he may require at any time a further
or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days
after the same is required by notice from him or if no return is made for
any period, the Village Treasurer shall determine the amount due from
such information as he is able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate
the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice
A. Time of filing. Every utility subject to a tax hereunder shall file, on or
before March 1, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding each
return date, including any period for which the tax imposed hereby or
amendment hereof is effective. Any utility, whether subject to tax under
this Article or not, may be required by the Village Treasurer to file an
annual return.
B. Contents. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to
be furnished by him for such purpose and shall show thereon the gross
income or gross operating income for the period covered by the return
and such other information, data or matter as the Village Treasurer may
require to be included therein. Every return shall have annexed thereto
a certification by the head of the utility making the same or of the owner
or of a copartner thereof or of a principal corporate officer to the effect
that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 113-6 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 113-10
113:134
of such determination to the utility liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax unless the utility against which
it is assessed shall, within one year after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to him for a hearing or unless the Village Treasurer,
of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After such hearing he shall give
notice of this decision to the utility liable for such tax.
§ 113-11. Review of final determination.
Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall
be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality, or any other reason
whatsoever, by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules if the proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the giving
of notice of such final determination; provided, however, that any such
proceeding under said Article 78 shall not be instituted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon
as may be provided for by local law, ordinance or resolution, shall be first
deposited and an undertaking filed, in such amount and with such sureties
as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if such
proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all
costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 113-12. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the utility for which it is intended in a
postpaid envelope addressed to such utility at the address given by it in
the last return filed by it under this Article or, if no return has been filed,
then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the utility to
which addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this section by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 113-13. Refunds.
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously
or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be
so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no refund
shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the
Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
in the manner provided in the Civil Practice Law and Rules that such
determination was erroneous or illegal. An application for a refund, made
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
§ 113-10 TAXATION § 113-13
113:135
of any tax or penalty complained of, and the Village Treasurer may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination,
the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to commence a proceeding to review such determination
in accordance with the provisions of the following section hereof.
§ 113-14. Review of proceedings for refund.
Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally
or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund thereof duly
made to the Village Treasurer and he shall have made a determination
denying such refund, such determination shall be reviewable by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules; provided,
however, that such proceeding is instituted within 90 days after the giving
of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was not
previously made and that an undertaking is filed with the Village Treasurer,
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 113-15. Limitation of additional tax.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with the intent to
evade the tax, no assessment or additional tax shall be made with respect
to taxes imposed under this Article after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return, provided, however, that where no
return has been filed as required hereby, the tax may be assessed at any
time.
§ 113-16. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In addition to any other powers herein given the Village Treasurer and in
order to further ensure payment of the tax imposed hereby, he shall have
the power to:
§ 113-17. Enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
Article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
A. Prescribe the form of all reports and returns required to be made
hereunder.
B. Take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter
hereby entrusted to him.
C. Subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books, papers, records and documents.
§ 113-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 113-17
113:136
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186 of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 113-17 TAXATION § 113-17
113:137

ARTICLE II
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 8-3-1981 by resolution]
§ 113-18. Determination of assessment.
A. The Village of Brightwaters utilizes the assessed valuations established
by the Town of Islip for all properties in the Village for the purpose of
setting the tax rolls.
B. The Town of Islip has been ordered by the court to change the manner
of assessing real property.40
C. The State Legislature has approved, under Real Property Tax Law
§ 458, Subdivision 5(a), that, if the ratio between the exemption granted
under § 458 and the total assessed value of the real property for which
such exemption has been granted increases or decreases due only to a
change in the manner of assessing real property by a court-ordered fullvalue
assessment, the amount of the exemption heretofore or hereafter
granted shall be increased or decreased in such subsequent year in the
same proportion as the total assessment has been increased or
decreased on all properly filed veterans exemption applications.
D. As filed and approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Brightwaters, all veterans exemptions shall be equated in the same
manner.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 48D, Taxation: Partial Exemption for Veterans, of the 1970 Code of
the Town of Islip (L.L. No. 1-1985).
§ 113-18 TAXATION § 113-18
113:139

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 9-4-1990 by resolution]
§ 113-19. Exemption granted.
Real property of persons 65 years of age or over shall be exempt from
Village taxes to the extent of the percentage of the assessed valuation as set
forth herein, subject to the conditions and provisions of § 467 of the Real
Property Tax Law.
§ 113-20. Annual application required; filing.
The owner or all of the owners must file an application annually at the
Assessor's office by January 1.
§ 113-21. Determination of exemption; schedule.
The income of the owner or the combined income of the owners for the
calendar year prior to the date that the application is filed shall determine
the percentage of assessed valuation which is exempt from taxation, in
accordance with the following schedule:
Annual Income of Owner(s)
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempted
Not more than $15,000 50
$15,000 but less than $15,600 45
$15,600 but less than $16,200 40
$16,200 but less than $16,800 35
$16,800 but less than $17,400 30
$17,400 but less than $18,000 25
$18,000 but less than $18,600 20
§ 113-22. Property requirements.
A. The title to the property must be vested in the owner or, if more than
one owner, then in all the owners for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date that the application is filed.
B. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes and be
occupied in whole or in part by the owners and constitute the legal
residence of the owners.
§ 113-19 TAXATION § 113-22
113:141

ARTICLE IV
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-1-1994 as L.L. No. 5-199441]
§ 113-23. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended
by a chapter of the laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A,42 the Village of Brightwaters hereby acts by local law, not subject to
referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue
to be enforced pursuant Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law,
as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 113-24. Filing with Board of Equalization and Assessment.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this Article
shall be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and
Assessment.
41.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect on the same day as a
chapter of the laws of 1994 takes effect (Chapter 532) as proposed in legislative bill
number S. 8560-A, except that if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this
local law, this local law shall take effect immediately.
42.Editor's Note: See Chapter 532 of the Laws of 1994.
§ 113-23 TAXATION § 113-24
113:143
Chapter 119
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 38. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 106.
§ 113-24 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 113-24
113:144
ARTICLE I
Traffic Control Devices
§ 119-1. Authority to install traffic control devices.
Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Superintendent of
Highways of the Village of Brightwaters shall install and maintain traffic
control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
ordinance, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as per recommendation by the Engineering Section of the Traffic
and Safety Bureau, Police Department, County of Suffolk, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that
law.
§ 119-1 TAXATION § 119-1
113:145

ARTICLE II
One-Way Roadways
§ 119-2. One-way roadways designated.
A. The following roadways are designated for one-way traffic as specified:
Roadway One-Way Direction
(1) West Orinoco Court Westbound between North Windsor Avenue
and Potter Boulevard
(2) East Orinoco Court Eastbound between North Windsor Avenue
and Richland Boulevard
(3) Penataquit Drive Westbound between North Windsor Avenue
and Pine Drive
(4) Woodland Court Northbound between Johnson Drive and
Woodland Drive
(5) Woodland Court Southbound between Johnson Drive and
West Lake Court
(6) West Lake Court Northbound between Montauk Highway
and Woodland Drive
§ 119-2 TAXATION § 119-2
113:147

ARTICLE III
Prohibition of U-Turns and Right Turns on Red Signal
§ 119-3. Prohibited turns. [Amended 8-5-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
A. The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is
hereby prohibited at all intersections within the Village.
B. Prohibited turns right on red.
Location
Controlling
Traffic Hours
Union Boulevard
and Windsor Avenue
Westbound on
Union Boulevard
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
§ 119-3 TAXATION § 119-3
113:149

ARTICLE IV
Stop Intersections
§ 119-4. Stop intersections designated.
A. The following intersections are designated as stop intersections, and all
traffic entering the intersection shall stop before entering same, as
indicated:
(1) Seneca Drive and Ackerson Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Seneca Drive.
(2) Seneca Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Seneca Drive.
(3) Mohawk Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Mohawk Drive.
(4) Mohawk Drive and Pine Acres Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Mohawk Drive.
(5) Mohawk Drive and Richland Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Mohawk Drive.
(6) Mohawk Drive and Manatuck Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Mohawk Drive.
(7) Penataquit Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
westbound on Penataquit Drive.
(8) Penataquit Drive and Lombardy Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Penataquit Drive.
(9) Iroquois Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Iroquois Drive.
(10) Pine Drive and Seneca Drive. Stop for northbound traffic on Pine
Drive43. [Added 5-1-1989]
(11)Wohseepee Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Wohseepee Drive.
(12)Wohseepee Drive and Richland Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Wohseepee Drive.
(13)Wohseepee Drive and Lombardy Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Wohseepee Drive.
(14) Hiawatha Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Hiawatha Drive.
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(10), regarding Wohseepee Drive and Pine Drive, was
deleted 5-1-1989.
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:151
(15) Hiawatha Drive and Manatuck Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Hiawatha Drive.
(16) Hiawatha Drive and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Hiawatha Drive.
(17) Orinoco Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Orinoco Drive.
(18) Lombardy Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for eastbound traffic
on Mohawk Drive44. [Added 5-1-1989]
(19) Lawrence Drive and Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Lawrence Drive. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(20) Johnson Drive and Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Johnson Drive. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(21) Lake View Avenue South and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for
traffic eastbound on Lake View Avenue South.
(22) Phelps Drive and North Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic eastbound
on Phelps Drive.
(23) Pine Drive and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Pine Drive.
(24) Pine Drive and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Pine Drive.
(25) Pine Drive and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Pine Drive.
(26) Pine Drive and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Pine Drive.
(27) Ackerson Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Ackerson Boulevard.
(28) Ackerson Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Ackerson Boulevard.
(29) Ackerson Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Ackerson Boulevard.
(30) Ackerson Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic southbound
on Ackerson Boulevard.
(31) Peters Boulevard and Sunrise Highway. Stop for traffic northbound
on Peters Boulevard.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18), regarding Union Boulevard and North Windsor
Avenue, was deleted 5-1-1989.
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:152
(32) Peters Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Peters Boulevard.
(33) Peters Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Peters Boulevard.
(34) Peters Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Peters Boulevard.
(35) Peters Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic southbound on
Peters Boulevard.
(36) Potter Boulevard and Seneca Drive. Stop for traffic northbound on
Potter Boulevard.
(37) Potter Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Potter Boulevard.
(38) Potter Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Potter Boulevard.
(39) Potter Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Potter Boulevard.
(40) Potter Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Potter Boulevard.
(41) Potter Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic southbound on
Potter Boulevard.
(42) North Windsor Avenue and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on North Windsor Avenue.
(43) North Windsor Avenue and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic
northbound on North Windsor Avenue.
(44) South Windsor Avenue and Lagoon Court. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on South Windsor Avenue.
(45) Pine Acres Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard.
(46) Pine Acres Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard.
(47) Pine Acres Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard.
(48) Pine Acres Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard.
(49) Richland Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Richland Boulevard. [Amended 5-1-1989]
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:153
(50) Richland Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Richland Boulevard.
(51) Richland Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Richland Boulevard.
(52) Richland Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic southbound
on Richland Boulevard.
(53) Manatuck Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Manatuck Boulevard. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(54) Manatuck Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Manatuck Boulevard.
(55) Manatuck Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Manatuck Boulevard.
(56) Manatuck Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic
southbound on Manatuck Boulevard.
(57) Brooklyn Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic northbound
on Brooklyn Boulevard.
(58) Brooklyn Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Brooklyn Boulevard.
(59) Brooklyn Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Brooklyn Boulevard.
(60) Lombardy Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic
northbound on Lombardy Boulevard.
(61) Lombardy Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Lombardy Boulevard.
(62) Lombardy Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lombardy Boulevard.
(63)Woodland Drive and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic northbound
on Woodland Drive.
(64)West Lake Court and Woodland Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
on West Lake Court.
(65) Lagoon Drive and Johnson Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Lagoon Drive.
(66) Lake View Avenue West and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lake View Avenue West. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(67) Lake View Avenue East and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lake View Avenue East.
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:154
(68) Lake View Avenue East and Lawrence Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Lake View Avenue East.
(69) Lake View Avenue East and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic
northbound on Lake View Avenue East.
(70) East Lake Court and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic northbound
on East Lake Court.
(71) Plymouth Avenue and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic northbound
on Plymouth Avenue.
(72) Plymouth Avenue and Lawrence Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Plymouth Avenue.
(73) Plymouth Court and Phelps Drive. Stop for traffic northbound on
Plymouth Court.
(74) Plymouth Court and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic southbound
on Plymouth Court.
(75)Windsor Court and Union Boulevard. Stop for traffic northbound on
Windsor Court.
(76) Bayway Avenue and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic northbound
on Bayway Avenue.
(77) Bayway Avenue and Corinthian Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Bayway Avenue.
(78) Bayway Avenue and Linwood Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Bayway Avenue.
(79) Bayway Avenue and Neptune Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Bayway Avenue.
(80) Bayway Avenue and West Shore Road. Stop for traffic southbound
on Bayway Avenue.
(81) South Bay Avenue and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic
northbound on South Bay Avenue.
(82) South Bay Avenue and Corinthian Court. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on South Bay Avenue.
(83) South Bay Avenue and Linwood Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on South Bay Avenue.
(84) South Bay Avenue and Neptune Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on South Bay Avenue.
(85) South Bay Avenue and West Shore Road. Stop for traffic
southbound on South Bay Avenue.
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:155
(86) Brooklyn Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Brooklyn Boulevard. [Added
8-19-197545]
(87) East Concourse and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic northbound
on East Concourse.
(88) East Concourse and Lagoon Court. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on East Concourse.
(89) Brooklyn Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic southbound
on Brooklyn Boulevard.
(90) Peters Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Peters Boulevard. [Added 6-20-1972]
(91) Ackerson Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Ackerson Boulevard. [Added
6-20-1972]
(92) Peters Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Peters Boulevard. [Added 6-20-1972]
(93) Richland Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Richland Boulevard. [Added
6-20-1972]
(94) Orinoco Drive and Lombardy Boulevard. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lombardy Boulevard. [Added 12-3-1973;
amended 5-1-1989]
(95)Woodland Drive and Lawrence Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Woodland Drive. [Added 10-7-1974;
amended 5-1-1989]
(96) Potter Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound. [Added 10-7-1974]
(97) Ackerson Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound. [Added 10-7-1974]
(98) Pine Drive and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic southbound on Pine
Drive46. [Added 5-1-1989]
(99)Windsor Avenue and Johnson Drive. [Added 4-7-1975; repealed
4-3-1978]
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(86) regarding West Concourse and Montauk Highway
was deleted 8-4-1975.
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(98), regarding Community Road and Windsor Avenue,
as added 4-7-1975, was deleted 5-1-1989.
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:156
(100) Brooklyn Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Brooklyn Boulevard. [Added
8-19-1975]
(101)West Concourse and Corinthian Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on West Concourse. [Added 8-19-1975]
(102)West Concourse and Linwood Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on West Concourse. [Added 8-19-1975]
(103)West Concourse and Neptune Court. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on West Concourse. [Added 8-19-1975;
amended 5-1-1989]
(104)West Concourse and West Shore Road. Stop for traffic eastbound
on West Shore Road. [Added 8-19-1975]
(105) Seneca Drive and Peters Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound and
westbound on Seneca Drive. [Added 9-3-1980]
(106) Lakeview Avenue East and Johnson Drive. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Johnson Drive. [Added 9-3-1980]
(107) Orchard Drive and Lakeview Avenue West. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Orchard Drive. [Added 10-5-1981]
(108)Woodland Drive and Lakeview Avenue West. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Woodland Drive. [Added 10-5-1981]
(109) Iroquois Drive and Richland Boulevard. Stop for traffic westbound
and eastbound on Iroquois Drive. [Added 4-5-1982]
(110) Richland Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
westbound and eastbound on Penataquit Drive. [Added 12-7-1987
by L.L. No. 4-1987]
(111) Pine Drive and North Sunrise Highway Service Road. Stop for
traffic southbound on Pine Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(112) Ackerson Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Ackerson Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(113) Ackerson Boulevard and North Sunrise Highway Service Road.
Stop for traffic southbound on Ackerson Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(114) Ackerson Boulevard and South Sunrise Highway Service Road.
Stop for traffic northbound on Ackerson Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(115) Peters Boulevard and Howells Road. Stop for traffic southbound
on Peters Boulevard. [Added 5-1-1989]
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:157
(116)West Orinoco Court and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound on West Orinoco Court. [Added 5-1-1989]
(117) Pine Acres Boulevard and Seneca Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound on Pine Acres Boulevard. [Added 5-1-1989]
(118) Pine Acres Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(119) Seneca Drive and Howells Road. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Seneca Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(120) Richland Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Richland Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(121) Manatuck Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Manatuck Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(122) Brooklyn Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Brooklyn Boulevard. [Added
5-1-1989]
(123) North Windsor Avenue and South Sunrise Service Road. Stop for
traffic northbound on North Windsor Avenue. [Added 5-1-1989]
(124) Pine Drive and Howells Road. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Pine Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(125)Windsor Place and East Concourse. Stop for traffic westbound on
Windsor Avenue. [Added 5-1-1989]
(126) Oaks Court and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic northbound on
Oaks Court. [Added 5-1-1989]
(127) Oaks Court and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic northbound on
Oaks Court. [Added 5-1-1989]
(128) Plymouth Avenue and Johnson Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Plymouth Avenue. [Added 5-1-1989]
(129) Plymouth Avenue and Lakeview Avenue North. Stop for traffic
southbound on Plymouth Avenue. [Added 5-1-1989]
(130) Lakeview Avenue North and Lakeview Avenue South. Stop for
traffic southbound on Lakeview Avenue North. [Added 5-1-1989]
(131) Lakeview Avenue North and Lakeview Avenue East. Stop for
traffic westbound on Lakeview Avenue North and westbound on
Lakeview Avenue East. [Added 5-1-1989]
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:158
(132) Lakeview Avenue South and Lakeview Avenue East. Stop for
traffic westbound on Lakeview Avenue South. [Added 5-1-1989]
(133) Phelps Drive and Lakeview Avenue East. Stop for traffic
westbound on Phelps Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(134) Lagoon Drive and Lakeview Avenue North. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lagoon Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(135) Lakeview Avenue West and Lawrence Drive. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Lawrence Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(136) Lakeview Avenue West and Lagoon Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound on Lagoon Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(137)Woodland Drive and Woodland Drive. Stop for traffic southbound
on Woodland Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(138) Orchard Drive and Woodland Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound and
westbound on Orchard Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(139) Johnson Drive and Woodland Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound and
westbound on Johnson Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(140)West Concourse and Montauk Highway. Stop for traffic
northbound on West Concourse. [Added 5-1-1989]
(141)Windsor Place and South Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Windsor Place. [Added 5-1-1989]
(142) Marine Court and South Windsor Avenue. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Marine Court. [Added 5-1-1989]
(143) Marine Court and East Concourse. Stop for traffic westbound on
Marine Court. [Added 5-1-1989]
(144) Johnson Drive and Lakeview Avenue West. Stop for traffic
eastbound on Johnson Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(145) Lagoon Drive and Lawrence Drive. Stop for traffic northbound on
Lagoon Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(146) Peters Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic westbound
on Penataquit Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(147) Ackerson Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic
westbound on Penataquit Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(148) Potter Boulevard and Penataquit Drive. Stop for traffic westbound
on Penataquit Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(149) Peters Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Mohawk Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:159
(150) Peters Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Iroquois Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(151) Peters Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(152) Peters Boulevard and Hiawatha Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Hiawatha Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(153) Brooklyn Boulevard and Iroquois Drive. Stop for traffic eastbound
and westbound on Iroquois Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(154) Lombardy Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic
southbound on Lombardy Boulevard. [Added 8-7-1989]
(155)Wohseepee Drive and Lombardy Boulevard. Stop for traffic
westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 8-7-1989]
(156) Iroquois Drive and Lombardy Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound at Iroquois Drive. [Added 8-7-1989]
(157) North Windsor Avenue and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on North Windsor Avenue. [Added
8-7-1989]
(158) North Windsor Avenue and Wohseepee Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on North Windsor Avenue. [Added
8-7-1989]
(159) Bay Way Avenue and Neptune Court. Stop for traffic westbound
on Neptune Court. [Added 7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
(160) South Windsor Avenue and Windsor Place. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on South Windsor Avenue. [Added
11-7-1994 by L.L. No. 10-1994]
(161) Peters Boulevard and Seneca Drive. Stop traffic northbound on
Peters Boulevard. [Added 8-3-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(162) Ackerson Boulevard and Seneca Drive. Stop traffic northbound on
Ackerson Boulevard. [Added 8-3-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(163) Lakeview Avenue East and Lawrence Drive. Stop traffic
eastbound and westbound on Lawrence Drive. [Added 8-3-1998
by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(164) Orinoco Drive and Richland Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Orinoco Drive. [Added 8-3-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
(165) Orinoco Drive and East Court. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Orinoco Drive. [Added 8-3-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:160
(166) Lakeview Avenue East and Johnson Drive. Stop traffic northbound
and southbound on Lakeview Avenue East. [Added 8-3-1998 by
L.L. No. 2-1998]
(167) Lakeview Avenue East and Lagoon Drive. "Stop sign ahead" sign.
[Added 8-3-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(168)Windsor Avenue and Johnson Drive. Stop traffic northbound and
southbound on Windsor Avenue. [Added 2-1-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
(169)Windsor Avenue and Lakeview Avenue South. Stop traffic
northbound and southbound on Windsor Avenue. [Added
2-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
(170) Hiawatha Drive and Potter Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Hiawatha Drive. [Added 5-7-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
(171) Lombardy Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop traffic northbound
and southbound on Lombardy Boulevard. [Added 7-2-2001 by
L.L. No. 3-2001]
(172)Wohseepee Drive and Ackerson Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound
and westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 1-7-2002 by L.L.
No. 1-2002]
(173) Richland Boulevard and Wohseepee Drive. Stop traffic
northbound and southbound on Richland Boulevard. [Added
6-6-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
(174)Wohseepee Drive and Potter Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound
and westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 6-6-2005 by L.L.
No. 7-2005]
(175) Mohawk Drive and Potter Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Mohawk Drive. [Added 11-2-2009 by L.L. No.
7-2009]
(176)Windsor Avenue and Iroquois Drive. Stop traffic northbound and
southbound on Windsor Avenue. [Added 2-1-2010 by L.L. No.
3-2010]
(177) Pine Drive and Penataquit Drive. Stop traffic westbound on
Penataquit Drive. [Added 7-5-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
(178) South Bay Avenue and Corinthian Court. Stop traffic eastbound
and westbound on Corinthian Court. [Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
6-2012]
(179) South Bay Avenue and Linwood Court. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Linwood Court. [Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
7-2012]
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:161
(180) South Bay Avenue and Neptune Court. Stop traffic eastbound and
westbound on Neptune Court. [Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
8-2012]
(181) Manatuck Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop traffic northbound
and southbound on Manatuck Boulevard. [Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 10-2012]
(182) Lakeview Avenue East and Phelps Drive. Stop traffic northbound
and southbound on Lakeview Avenue East. [Added 11-5-2012 by
L.L. No. 12-2012]
(183) Lakeview Avenue West and Woodland Drive. Stop traffic
northbound and southbound on Lakeview Avenue West. [Added
11-5-2012 by L.L. No. 13-2012]
(184)Wohseepee Drive and Brooklyn Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound
and westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 8-12-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
(185) Penataquit Drive and Brooklyn Boulevard. Stop traffic eastbound
and westbound on Penataquit Drive. [Added 10-6-2014 by L.L.
No. 6-2014]
(186) Orinoco Drive and Richland Boulevard. Stop for traffic eastbound
on Richland Boulevard. Stop for traffic westbound on Richland
Boulevard. [Added 3-7-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(187) Hiawatha Drive and Brooklyn Boulevard. [Added 10-17-2016 by
L.L. No. 6-2016]
(188) Linwood Court and Bay Way Avenue. [Added 11-7-2016 by L.L.
No. 7-2016]
(189) Corinthian Court and West Concourse. Stop for traffic eastbound
on Corinthian Court. [Added 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
(190) Linwood Court and West Concourse. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Linwood Court. [Added 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
(191) Neptune Court and West Concourse. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Neptune Court. [Added 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
(192) Richland Boulevard and Orinoco Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound on Richland Boulevard. [Added 9-4-2018 by L.L. No.
3-2018]
(193) Pine Acres Boulevard and Mohawk Drive. Stop for traffic
northbound and southbound on Pine Acres Boulevard. [Added
5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
(194)Wohseepee Drive and Manatuck Boulevard. Stop for traffic
eastbound and westbound on Wohseepee Drive. [Added 5-6-2019
by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 119-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-4
113:162
(195) Concourse East and Windsor Place. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Concourse East. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
3-2019]
(196) Lagoon Drive and Concourse East. Stop for traffic eastbound on
Lagoon Drive. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
(197) Concourse East and Marine Drive. Stop for traffic northbound and
southbound on Concourse East. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
3-2019]
(198)Woodland Drive and Johnson Drive. Stop for traffic northbound
and southbound on Woodland Drive. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
3-2019]
§ 119-4 TAXATION § 119-4
113:163

ARTICLE V
Regulated Parking
§ 119-5. Nighttime parking restricted.
No vehicle, except in case of emergency or as otherwise provided, shall be
parked or left standing on any public highway within the corporate limits of
the Village of Brightwaters between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
any day.
§ 119-6. One-hour parking.
No vehicle, except in case of emergency, shall be continuously parked or left
standing on any public highway within the corporate limits of the Village of
Brightwaters for a period of longer than one hour, when so posted.
§ 119-6.1. Thirty-minute parking. [Added 2-7-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
No vehicle, except in the case of an emergency, shall be parked or left
standing for more than 30 consecutive minutes on Windsor Avenue, on
both its east and west sides, between the Long Island Railroad tracks and
Orinoco Drive.
§ 119-7. No parking in certain locations.
A. The parking or standing of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the
following locations:
(1) South Country Road (Montauk Highway), on the north and south
sides, within the Village of Bright waters.
(2) East Concourse, on the east and west sides, from Montauk
Highway to Great South Bay.
(3) West Concourse, on the east side, from Montauk Highway to Great
South Bay, and on the west side from a distance of 150 feet south of
Montauk Highway south to the Great South Bay.
(4) Plymouth Court, on the west side, from Phelps Drive to South
Country Road (Montauk Highway).
(5) North Windsor Avenue, on the east and west sides, from South
Country Road (Montauk Highway) to the north a distance of 354
feet.
(6) Lakeview Avenue West, on the west side, from Lawrence Drive to
Montauk Highway. [Added 9-13-1976]
(7) Lagoon Drive, on the east and west sides, from Lawrence Drive to
Lakeview Avenue South. [Added 9-13-1976]
§ 119-5 TAXATION § 119-7
113:165
§ 119-8. Parking restricted during certain hours.
(8) Lakeview Avenue East, on the east side, from Lakeview Avenue
North to Montauk Highway. [Added 9-13-1976]
(9) Lakeview Avenue North, on the north side. [Added 9-13-1976]
(10) Lakeview Avenue South, on the south side. [Added 9-13-1976]
(11) Bayshore Road, on the north and south sides, from Pine Drive to
Ackerson Boulevard. [Added 5-7-1979]
(12) East Shore Road, on the north side, from South Windsor Avenue
west to East Concourse. [Added 12-6-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
(13) South Bay Avenue, on the west side, for 100 feet south from
Montauk Highway. [Added 5-1-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
B. Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection C hereof, the parking or
standing of vehicles is hereby at all times prohibited on that side of the
following roadways and streets of the Village nearest the lakes adjacent
thereto: [Added 8-4-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
(1) Lagoon Drive, on the westerly side thereof, from its intersection
with Lawrence Drive South to and including its intersection with
Lakeview Avenue East.
(2) Lakeview Avenue East, on the westerly side thereof, from the
intersection of Lagoon Drive and Lakeview Avenue East to its
intersection with Montauk Highway (also known as South Country
Road).
(3) Lakeview Avenue West, on the easterly side thereof, from the
intersection of Lawrence Drive South to its intersection with
Montauk Highway (also known as South Country Road).
(4) Lakeview Avenue North, on the southerly side thereof, from its
intersection with Lakeview Avenue East to its intersection with
Lakeview Avenue South.
(5) Lakeview Avenue South, on the northerly side thereof, from its
intersection with Lakeview Avenue North to its intersection with
Lakeview Avenue East.
C. Holders of currently valid Village of Brightwaters resident parking
permits issued pursuant to Chapter 84 (§ 84-4), of this Code are
exempted from this amendment to Chapter 119, Vehicles and Traffic, of
the Village Code, provided that the provisions of Chapter 84, (§ 84-6,
Hours of operation; permits; fees, are complied with, and for the
purposes of this amendment, the lake areas of the Village are deemed
"parks" and within the purview of said § 84-6. [Added 8-4-1986 by
L.L. No. 1-1986]
§ 119-7 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-8
113:166
§ 119-9. Parking for boat owners with permits.
A. No vehicle, except in case of emergency, shall be parked or left standing
on the following streets or adjacent park areas between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
(1) Lakeview Avenue West, on the east side, from Lawrence Drive to
Montauk Highway. [Amended 9-13-1976]
(2) Lakeview Avenue East, from Montauk Highway to Lakeview
Avenue South. [Amended 9-13-1976]
(3) Lakeview Avenue South, on the north side. [Amended 9-13-1976]
(4) Lakeview Avenue North, on the south side. [Amended 9-13-1976]
(5) Lakeview Avenue East, between Montauk Highway and Lakeview
Avenue North.
(6) Phelps Drive.
B. No vehicle, except in case of emergency, shall be parked or left standing
on the following streets or in the designated park: [Added 6-7-2004 by
L.L. No. 17-2004]
(1) Penataquit Drive on the north side, Potter Boulevard on the east
side, Mohawk Drive on the south side and North Windsor Avenue
on the west side, but only where each street abuts Wohseepee Park,
or anywhere within Wohseepee Park, between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; nor between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. without a valid parking permit issued by the Village Clerk.
C. No vehicle, except in the case of an emergency, shall be parked or left
standing for more than two consecutive hours on the following streets:
[Added 2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
(1) North Windsor Avenue, on both its east and west sides, between
Orinoco Drive and Hiawatha Drive, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(2) Orinoco Drive, on both its north and south sides, between Potter
Boulevard and Pine Acres Boulevard, between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. [Added 2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011]
A. Vehicles displaying current "Boat Owner Parking Permit" emblems may
park on the designated side of each of the following streets between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day while utilizing
boats berthed in the Village Boat Harbor:
(1) Corinthian Court.
(2) Lagoon Court.
(3) Linwood Court.
§ 119-8 TAXATION § 119-9
113:167
§ 119-10. No parking or standing between signs. [Added 9-13-1976]
§ 119-11. Penalties for offenses. [Added 7-7-1980; amended
8-4-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
(4) Marine Court.
(5) Neptune Court.
(6) Windsor Place.
(7) East Shore Road, from South Windsor Avenue to Concourse East,
but only on the south side thereof. [Added 12-6-1993 by L.L. No.
6-1993]
B. Vehicles displaying current "Boat Owner Parking Permit" emblems may
park overnight in the following municipal parking areas:
(1) At the head of the Boat Harbor where designated by signs.
(2) In the parking area of Walker Park on the north side of West Shore
Road where designated by signs.
A. There shall be no parking or standing between signs in the following
locations:
(1) Lakeview Avenue West, approximately 400 feet to 500 feet north of
Montauk Highway.
(2) Orinoco Drive, on the south side between the two curb cuts onto
premises known as "279 Orinoco Drive." [Added 7-1-2002 by L.L.
No. 8-2002; amended 12-2-2002 by L.L. No. 11-2002]
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York, every person, firm or corporation
convicted of a violation of a provision of this Article V, Regulated
Parking, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
B. Failure to answer summons. Upon the failure of a person or owner of a
vehicle to appear or answer a summons on or before the return period
or any subsequent adjourned date, late penalties shall be imposed as
follows: [Added 2-12-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(1) If the aforementioned fine shall not be paid within 15 days from the
date the summons was issued, a late penalty equal to the original
fine shall be added to the fine; and
(2) If the fine is still not paid within 60 days from the date the summons
was issued, an additional late penalty in an amount equal to the
original fine shall be added to all fines and penalties previously
assessed; and
§ 119-9 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-11
113:168
§ 119-11.1. Parking regulations and prohibitions to include rightsof-
way. [Added 6-3-2002 by L.L. No. 6-2002]
Every provision of this Code which regulates or prohibits parking on any
public road, roadway, street or highway shall also include in the regulation
or prohibition any public right-of-way abutting said public road, roadway,
street or highway.
§ 119-11.2. Storage of vehicles on vacant property. [Added 3-1-2004
by L.L. No. 2-2004]
No vehicle shall be parked or stored outside on any privately owned vacant
property in a residence district.
§ 119-11.3. Parking on residential property. [Added 3-1-2004 by L.L.
No. 3-2004]
No vehicle shall be parked on residential property except when parked on a
surfaced driveway, and in no event shall be parked on a lawn or area other
than a surfaced driveway.
§ 119-11.4. Parking on service roads. [Added 3-1-2004 by L.L. No.
4-2004]
No vehicle shall park, stop or stand on any unnamed service road in any
residential district in the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 119-11.5. Parking during snowstorms. [Added 3-1-2004 by L.L.
No. 5-2004]
No vehicle shall be parked on any street in the Village of Brightwaters
during any snowstorm in which snowplowing takes place, nor after any such
snowstorm until snowplowing has ended.
(3) If the fine is still not paid within 90 days from the date the summons
was issued, an additional penalty of $30 shall be added to all other
fines and penalties previously assessed.
§ 119-11 TAXATION § 119-11.5
113:169

ARTICLE VA
Yield Intersections
§ 119-12. Yield intersections designated. [Added 12-5-1983]
A. The following intersections are designated as yield intersections, and
all traffic entering the intersection must yield to traffic as indicated:
(1) West Concourse and Montauk Highway. Yield to traffic eastbound
and westbound on Montauk Highway.
(2) Lakeview Avenue North and Lakeview Avenue East. Yield for traffic
southbound and eastbound on Lakeview Avenue North. [Added
5-1-1989]
(3) Lagoon Drive and Johnson Drive. Yield for traffic southbound on
Johnson Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(4) Lakeview Avenue West and Lawrence Drive. Yield for traffic
eastbound on Lakeview Avenue West. [Added 5-1-1989]
(5) Lakeview Avenue West and Johnson Drive. Yield for traffic
northbound and southbound on Johnson Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(6) Lakeview Avenue West and Lakeview Avenue North. Yield for traffic
northbound and southbound on Lakeview Avenue North. [Added
5-1-1989]
(7) Woodland Drive and Woodland Drive. Yield for traffic eastbound
and northbound on Woodland Drive. [Added 5-1-1989]
(8) Concourse North and Concourse West. Yield for traffic westbound
on Concourse North. [Added 5-1-1989]
(9) Concourse North and Concourse East. Yield for traffic eastbound
on Concourse North. [Added 5-1-1989]
§ 119-12 TAXATION § 119-12
113:171

ARTICLE VI
Through Truck Traffic Regulations
[Amended 2-2-1987]
§ 119-13. Limitations.
Through truck and bus traffic is hereby prohibited on all streets within the
Village, except County and state highways.
§ 119-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
THROUGH TRUCK OR BUS TRAFFIC — Any conveyance of goods or
passengers, with or without fares, by truck, bus, van or other mercantile
type of vehicle whenever articles or passengers being conveyed are not
destined for delivery or pickup within the corporate limits of the Village or
for transportation to other points from within such corporate limits. The
term shall also include the passage of trucks, vans, buses or other similar
vehicles even though carrying no goods, unless destination or starting point
thereof is within the Village.
§ 119-13 TAXATION § 119-14
113:173

ARTICLE VII
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 119-15. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 119-16. Storage and charges. [Amended 12-7-1987 by L.L. No.
4-1987]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Highway
Superintendent may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense
of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem
the same upon payment to the Village Clerk of the amount of all expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, such charge
not to exceed $250, together with any charges for storage, such storage
charges to be established by the Board of Trustees.
§ 119-17. Notice of removal.
The Superintendent of Highways shall, without delay, report the removal
and the disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article to the
Police Department, County of Suffolk, and it shall be the duty of the Police
Department to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle
or person having same in charge and to notify him of the removal and
disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which shall be required to
redeem same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within the
incorporated limits of the Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or
other public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway
upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be
removed by the Superintendent of Highways.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within the
incorporated limits of this Village where said vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may be removed by the
Superintendent of Highways.
§ 119-15 TAXATION § 119-17
113:175

ARTICLE VIII
Speed Regulations
§ 119-18. Speed limit 25 miles per hour. [Amended 9-4-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018]
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any public
highway within the corporate limits of the Village of Brightwaters at a rate
of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 119-19. Speed limit 15 miles per hour.
§ 119-19.1. Speed limit 25 miles per hour. [Added 11-5-2012 by L.L.
No. 11-2012]
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any of the
following public streets or highways at a rate of speed in excess of 15
miles per hour:
(1) West Orinoco Court.
(2) East Orinoco Court.
(3) Woodland Court.
(4) West Lake Court.
(5) Johnson Court.
(6) Orchard Court.
(7) East Lake Court.
(8) Windsor Court.
(9) North Lake Court.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any of the
following public streets or highways at a rate of speed in excess of 25
miles per hour:
(1) Lakeview Avenue West.
(2) Lakeview Avenue East between Montauk Highway and Lakeview
Avenue North.
(3) Lagoon Drive between Lakeview Avenue North and Lawrence
Drive.
(4) Lakeview Avenue South between Lakeview Avenue East and
Lakeview Avenue North.
(5) Lakeview Avenue North between Lakeview Avenue East and
Lakeview Avenue South.
§ 119-18 TAXATION § 119-19.1
113:177
§ 119-20. Speed limit 40 miles per hour.
§ 119-21. Speed limit on bridges and elevated structures.
(6) North Windsor Avenue. [Added 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
(7) South Windsor Avenue. [Added 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
(8) Windsor Avenue. [Added 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
(9) Concourse West. [Added 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
(10) Concourse East. [Added 4-1-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any of the
following public streets or highways at a rate of speed in excess of 40
miles per hour:
(1) Montauk Highway.
(2) Sunrise Highway.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any of the
following bridges or elevated structures within the corporate limits of
the Village of Brightwaters at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per
hour:
(1) Lake View Avenue East, between Lake View Avenue North and
South (bridge, 15 miles per hour).
(2) Lake View Avenue North, between Lagoon Drive and Lake View
Avenue West (bridge, 15 miles per hour).
(3) Johnson Drive, between Lagoon Drive and Lake View Avenue West
(bridge, 15 miles per hour).
§ 119-19.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-21
113:178
ARTICLE IX
Violations and Penalties
§ 119-22. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-7-1980; 4-1-1985]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York or another article of this chapter, every person,
firm or corporation convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter
or any amendment or supplement hereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $250 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 119-22 TAXATION § 119-22
113:179

ARTICLE X
Severability
§ 119-23. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 119-23 TAXATION § 119-23
113:181

ARTICLE XI
Repealer
§ 119-24. Repeal of prior ordinances.
All prior ordinances of this Village involving traffic and parking regulations
are hereby repealed.
§ 119-24 TAXATION § 119-24
113:183
Chapter 124
WATERS AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 84.
§ 119-24 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 119-24
113:184
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Waterways Ordinance of the Village of
Brightwaters, New York."
§ 124-2. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that the operation of boats in the waters
or waterways of the Village of Brightwaters is a matter affecting the public
interest and consequently should be subject to the supervision and
administrative control of municipal authority for the purpose of
safeguarding the public.
§ 124-3. Applicability of provisions.
§ 124-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT — Includes every vessel propelled in any manner other than by hand
but shall not be deemed to include public vessels of the United States or of
the State of New York or any municipality therein.
CHANNEL SYSTEM — Main channels, cross channels connecting with
them, basins and bathing areas.
OWNER — Includes the person under whose name the vessel was last
registered with the United States Coast Guard or other authority having
jurisdiction if requiring registration and in any other case the last known
owner or the person who claims lawful possession of such vessel by virtue
of legal title or equitable interest therein which entitles him to such
possession.
A. The following rules and regulations shall, except when prohibited by
the laws of the United States, apply to all waters or waterways in the
Village and to all waters or waterways adjacent to a distance of 1,500
feet from the shore, provided that they shall not apply to waters or
waterways in the channel system, if any, under the supervision of the
Long Island State Park Commission.
B. All provisions of the Navigation Law of this state, of the inland rules
enacted by Congress and governing the navigation of the inland waters
of the United States and of the Pilot Rules for the United States (inland
waters) applicable to the channel systems, relative to the rules for
vessels passing each other, as to lights on vessels and other matters
consistent with the proper use of the channel systems, shall be
complied with by all vessels navigating said systems.
§ 124-1 TAXATION § 124-4
113:185
SKIN DIVING — Includes any person swimming with the intent to explore
or photograph in local waters or to hunt fish therein, including any person
using any self-contained underwater breathing apparatus, commonly known
as an "Aqualung," but shall not include bona fide salvage operations
displaying proper signals.
§ 124-5. Mooring and anchoring restricted.
§ 124-6. Removal of hazardous vessels.
Any vessel which becomes a menace to navigation or unseaworthy or sinks,
grounds or becomes otherwise disabled shall be removed by the owner
or person in charge thereof on order of the Village Board or any duly
authorized officer or agent thereof or member of the police or Bay
Constable or Harbormaster of the Village. If said boat is not removed after
orders to so remove it, it may be removed by or at the direction of the
Village Board or any duly authorized officer or agent thereof, at the expense
of the owner or person in charge of said vessel, to be enforced by civil suit.
A vessel deemed by the Board or its agent to be a serious hazard may be
removed forthwith at the expense of the owner.
§ 124-7. Use of public docks, beaches and bulkheads restricted.
[Amended 3-5-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
No person shall cause any boat, vessel or watercraft of any kind to remain
at any public dock, beach or bulkhead for more than 24 consecutive hours,
except such boats and vessels as may be duly permitted to lie at moorings
as hereinafter provided.47
A. Boats shall not moor or anchor in any channel, and in no case shall
vessels moor to or anchor within 50 feet of any channel marker or so as
to interfere with the full use of the channel.
B. Boats shall not moor or anchor so as to endanger the safety of or cause
damage to any boat previously anchored or moored nor so as to
interfere with the mooring of any boat previously laid down. Any boats
so moored or anchored shall be removed by the owner or person in
charge thereof on order of the Village Board or any duly authorized
officer or agent thereof or member of the police or Harbormaster of the
Village. If said boat is not removed after orders to so remove it, it may
be removed by or at the direction of the Village Board or any duly
authorized officer or agent thereof or member of the police or
Harbormaster of the Village, at the expense of the owner or person in
charge of said vessel, to be enforced by civil suit.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 39-28, Use of boat or vessels as living quarters restricted, and
§ 39-29, Loading or unloading passengers: permit required, which immediately followed
this section, were deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 124-4 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 124-8
113:186
§ 124-8. Use of seaplanes to enter Yacht Harbor restricted.
No person shall enter Yacht Harbor with an aircraft or seaplane of any
description.
§ 124-9. Mooring permits. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
A permit is required to moor in either the harbor or Walker Park Basin. A
permit fee shall also be required in an amount to be set by the Board of
Trustees from time to time by resolution.48 The permit holder must comply
with the agreement that is a part of the permit application, and violation of
said agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 124-10. Assignment of berthings, moorings and dockings; license
required; obstructions prohibited. [Amended 3-5-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
Assignment of berthings, moorings and dockings for all boats in the
Incorporated Village of Brightwaters shall be under the jurisdiction and
control of the Harbormaster or such other officer as may be appointed by
the Board of Trustees. No person shall moor, anchor or fasten any boat or
other watercraft in the canal or harbor or adjacent to any dock, bulkhead,
pier or beach, except as provided in § 124-17, without first obtaining a
mooring license from the Harbormaster. No portion of any boat or other
watercraft moored, anchored or fastened in the canal may protrude beyond
the canal poles into the travel portion of the canal located in the center of
the canal between the canal poles on its eastern and western sides.49
§ 124-11. Operation and speed of boats near shore and bathers.
[Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 124-12. Waterskiing.
A. No boat shall be operated at a speed greater than five miles per hour
within the harbor and/or within 1/4 of a statute mile from shore except
where a channel approaches the shoreline closer than 1/4 of a statute
mile.
B. No boat or vessel shall cruise or be operated within 100 feet of any
lifeline or bathing float or, if there are no lifelines or bathing floats, then
within 150 feet of any public or semipublic beach regularly used for
bathing or swimming, nor shall such boat or vessel cruise or be
operated in excess of five miles per hour within 50 feet of any person
bathing or swimming, except at inlets or where a channel approaches
the shoreline closer than 1/4 of a statute mile.
48.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
49.Editor's Note: Former § 39-31A, which required permission for certain vehicles to enter
Walker Park Basin, and § 39-31C, which prohibited the use of boats in Village lakes, which
followed this section, were deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 124-8 TAXATION § 124-12
113:187
§ 124-13. Operation of boats.
§ 124-14. Mufflers.
No person shall operate a boat propelled wholly or partly by an engine
operated by gas, gasoline, naphtha, diesel oil or other substances without
having the exhaust from the engine run through a muffler or so controlled
by the introduction of water into the exhaust pipe or line so as to muffle the
noise of exhaust in a reasonable manner.
§ 124-15. Special events.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village Board from issuing
special permits for events, boat races or otherwise, under proper
supervision in limited areas for limited periods.
§ 124-16. Skin diving; use of spears or guns underwater prohibited.
A. No person shall operate a boat or vessel for towing a person on water
skis, a surfboard or a similar device unless there is in such boat or
vessel a person of suitable age and discretion, other than the operator,
in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed.
[Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
B. No person shall ride on water skis, a surfboard or a similar device or
use or operate a boat or vessel to tow a person thereon between the
period from one hour after sunset to one hour after sunrise.50
A. Every person operating a boat shall at all times operate the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed as not to
disturb the reasonable comfort or endanger the property of another or
the life or limb of any person or so as not to interfere with the free and
proper use of the waters.
B. No boat shall be operated in such a manner as to throw up a wake
which is dangerous to life or limb of a person, boats or other property.
A. No skin diving shall be undertaken in any fairway or channel or in any
waters where the same may interfere with reasonable and proper
operation of boats or within 150 feet of any public or semipublic beach
regularly used for bathing and swimming or within 50 feet of any
person bathing or swimming.
B. No person shall engage in skin diving without displaying the
international diving flag or an authorized skin-diving flag of suitable
size, consisting of a red flag with a diagonal white stripe, adequately
displayed by float, buoy or boat at all times, and without a person of
suitable age and discretion other than the skin diver in a position as
lookout.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 39-8C, which restricted the location of waterskiing and which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 124-12 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 124-16
113:188
§ 124-17. Enforcement agents. [Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
The Police Department and/or Bay Constable and/or Harbormaster and/or
Code Enforcement Officer of the Village is hereby empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and every person in charge of a vessel navigating
or using the waterways of the Village shall at all times obey the lawful
orders of the members of such Police Department and/or Bay Constables
and/or Harbormaster and/or Code Enforcement Officer, and such officers
shall have the right to stop any vessel navigating or using the waterways of
the Village for purpose of enforcing this chapter.51
§ 124-18. Discharges and deposits prohibited.
It is forbidden to discharge toilets or to deposit or to cause the deposit of
any offal, ashes, garbage, waste, oil or other offensive or rejected materials
into any of the waters within the Village limits, either from shore or from
any craft.52
C. No person shall use, operate or discharge underwater any spear, gun or
similar apparatus.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 39-14, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991. See now Art. IV of this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Bathing Beaches and Pools, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991.
§ 124-16 TAXATION § 124-18
113:189

ARTICLE II
Bathing
[Amended 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 124-19. Designated bathing areas.
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any waters of any park except at
such times and places and in such proper attire as the Board of Trustees
may designate. Such designated bathing areas shall be kept free from
any form of water equipment or other floating objects or other form of
device that may cause inconvenience or discomfort to bathers, except such
equipment as is intended for the protection of life.
§ 124-20. Use of bathing houses for dressing required.
No person shall dress or undress in the park except in such bathing houses
or places as may be maintained and designated for such use.
§ 124-19 TAXATION § 124-20
113:191

ARTICLE III
Fishing
[Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 124-21. Permit required.
Fishing is prohibited in any park, beach or harbor area unless permitted
specifically by the Board of Trustees and with a permit issued annually.
§ 124-22. Permit subject to inspection.
The permit is subject to inspection upon request by authorized personnel.
§ 124-23. Locations.
Fishing is permitted at Gilbert Park, bayside only, with a permit issued by
authorized personnel. No fishing is permitted in Walker Park and harbor
areas.
§ 124-21 TAXATION § 124-23
113:193

ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 124-24. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 124-25. Additional remedies.
The Village Board, in addition to any other penalty imposed by reason of
any violation of this chapter, may also maintain an action or proceeding
in the name of the Village in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of this chapter.
§ 124-24 TAXATION § 124-25
113:195
Chapter 128
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement officers — See Ch. 19, Art.
I.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 58.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 61.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 90.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 100.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 108.
§ 124-25 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 124-25
113:196
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 128-1. Interpretation of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing
restrictions of law or ordinance or with any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant
to law limiting the use of buildings or premises; nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any restrictive easements
or covenants or other restrictive agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of buildings or premises or upon heights of buildings or premises or
requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or
required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules,
regulations or permits or by easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 128-2. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "occupied" includes the phrase "designed or intended
to be occupied"; the word "used" includes the phrase "designed or intended
to be used"; and the word "shall" is mandatory.
§ 128-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A structure or use customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or use and located on
the same lot or plot with such principal structure or use.[Added 1-2-1996
by L.L. No. 1-1996]
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motorized vehicle intended to be operated off
a public highway and not registered as a motor vehicle by the State of New
York.[Added 5-3-2004 by L.L. No. 16-2004]
APARTMENT HOUSE OR GARDEN APARTMENT — A building arranged,
intended or designed to be occupied by three or more families living
independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises.
As the words "apartment house" or "garden apartment" are used in this
chapter, they mean a group of detached or attached apartment houses not
more than two stories in height. For the purpose of front yard, side yard
and rear yard, such "apartment houses" or "garden apartments" may be
treated as separate units, provided that the site plans showing the location
of the structure, parking facilities, screening and fencing are approved by
the Planning Board and Board of Trustees.
§ 128-1 TAXATION § 128-3
113:197
APARTMENT, SUITE OR FAMILY UNIT — That portion of an apartment
house or garden apartment consisting of one or more living rooms and
occupied by the members of one family, which room or group of rooms
is separated from all other groups within the apartment house or garden
apartment.
BOAT — A vessel capable of carrying one or more people and intended for
use on or in water.
CAMPER — A motorized self-propelled vehicle containing sleeping and
other facilities for habitation.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every type of motor-driven vehicle used for
commercial purposes on the highways and streets, such as the
transportation of goods, wares and merchandise and carrying passengers
with or without fares, including trailers and semitrailers, tractors when
used in combination with trailers and semitrailers, tow trucks and any
motor-driven vehicle bearing commercial advertisement or identification.
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE — A commercial vehicle customarily used in
the construction trades, including but not limited to vehicles used for
excavation and moving of earth and vehicles used for hauling of
construction materials.
DECK — Any floor-like platform or area surfaced with material such as but
not limited to wood, metal, brick or masonry, without walls or roof, and
constructed outside of the exterior walls of the principal building, whether
attached or unattached.
DEPTH OF A LOT — The mean distance from the street property line to the
rear line, measured in the mean direction of the side lines.
DEPTH OF THE REAR YARD — The least distance from any part or point of
a building, including an attached garage, garden house or similar extension,
to the rear line or its vertical projection.
DRIVEWAY — A private road giving access from a public way to a residence
or abutting grounds which is artificially prepared and covered with asphalt,
concrete, brick, block or other artificial products of such nature or by
loose stone or gravel and the length of which runs perpendicular, and
not parallel, to the public way. [Added 6-7-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010;
amended 3-5-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
DRIVEWAY WIDTH — That dimension of a driveway as measured across
from side to side or in a direction at right angles to the length.
DUMPSTER — A structure requiring truck transport to and from a premises
and which is placed outside on a premises as a receptacle for construction,
demolition, or other debris.[Added 12-4-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
DWELLING — A detached building arranged, designed for or occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for one family doing its own cooking in
one kitchen. It shall not include a building that has any one of the following
anywhere on its parcel:[Amended 9-7-2004 by L.L. No. 22-2004;
1-3-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 128-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-3
113:198
FAMILY — A single individual doing his own cooking in one kitchen and
living upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit or a collective
body of persons doing its own cooking in one kitchen and living together
upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based upon birth, marriage or other domestic bond, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, rooming house,
tourist house, club, fraternity or hotel.[Amended 9-7-2004 by L.L. No.
23-2004]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The square footage within the perimeter of all
structures and their overhangs on the parcel, excluding any driveways and
walkways but including any patios, divided by the total lot area.[Amended
9-7-1993]
FRONT YARD — The space included between the street property line, two
or more side lines and the principal building.
HALF STORY — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates
of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet
above the floor of such story.
HEDGE — Any series of plantings, shrubs, bushes or trees that is, or would
in time grow into, a wall of natural screening.[Added 2-7-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A person or group of persons living as a single
household utilizing the same cooking and sanitary facilities. All cooking
facilities shall be located in one kitchen.[Amended 9-7-2004 by L.L. No.
24-2004]
KITCHEN — Any area, room, section of a house, building or structure which
contains any two or more of the following:[Added 9-7-2004 by L.L. No.
25-2004]
More than one United States Postal Service address, unless a legal
nonconforming use for a two-or-more-family use has been granted by
the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 128-90C and/or a home occupation
use has been granted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 128-6B.
A.
More than one meter for any utility, unless a legal nonconforming use
for a two-or-more-family use has been granted by the Board of Appeals
pursuant to § 128-90C and/or a home occupation use has been granted
by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 128-6B and the additional meter
services only the home occupation space.
B.
More than one kitchen, unless a legal nonconforming use for a two-ormore-
family use has been granted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 128-90C.
C.
A device capable of maintaining and/or preserving food at a cold
temperature, including but not limited to a refrigerator of any style or
type, a refrigerator/freezer, an icebox or a cooler.
A.
§ 128-3 TAXATION § 128-3
113:199
LOT OR PLOT — A tract of land under one sole or undivided ownership,
vacant or occupied by one principal building or group of buildings and
its accessories and open spaces and abutting on one or more streets. In
the case of any building hereafter erected, the lot is that tract of land, a
description of which is filed with the Code Enforcement Officer as provided
in Article X.
MOBILE HOME — A structure mounted on axles and wheels, containing
living facilities and which may be towed by an automobile or truck from
place to place. Such structure will be considered a mobile home for
purposes of this chapter whether or not the wheels and axles are still in
place.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any building or use of a building, other
structure or tract of land which was lawfully existing prior to the adoption
or amendment of this chapter but which does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which such use is located by reason of such
adoption or amendment.
OUTSIDE STORAGE CONTAINER STRUCTURE — A structure resembling
the box of a box truck and requiring truck transport to and from a premises
and which is placed outside for storage use.[Added 2-7-2011 by L.L. No.
5-2011]
PARCEL — All the land contiguously owned and bounded by property lines.
PARKING, OFF-STREET — The area of a lot or building used or designed to
be used for the purpose of accessory parking of vehicles. Such area shall be
on or part of the same lot on which the principal use is located.
PARKING SPACE — The space required for each motor vehicle intended or
required to be parked in an off-street parking area.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
on public or private property.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
plumbing appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to
any structure, in connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage
Wall cabinets or floor cabinets storing or capable of storing cutlery,
dishes, pots, pans and groceries.
B.
C. What is known in the trade as "kitchen countertops or counters."
Any device, structure or utensil capable of heating and/or cooking food
or liquids, including but not limited to an oven, stove, range, burners or
hot plates.
D.
E. A microwave.
F. An automatic dishwasher. [Amended 1-5-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
A nonbathroom sink with a larger than twelve-inch-by-twelve-inch
basin. [Added 1-5-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
G.
§ 128-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-3
113:200
facilities, venting systems and public or private water supply systems, all as
defined by the Plumbing Code of the State of New York.53[Added 9-4-2007
by L.L. No. 6-2007]
REAR LINE — That boundary line or succession of boundary lines which is
opposite and most distant from the street property line.
REAR YARD — On any lot, an open space (unoccupied, except as hereinafter
specified) included between the rear line, two or more side lines and the
principal building.
RETAINING WALL — A wall designed of static material to retain ground
level with its top on one side and to be open to view to the lower grade of
the ground on its other side.[Added 8-5-2002 by L.L. No. 8-2002]
SEMITRAILER — A detachable trailer for hauling freight, having its forward
end supported by the rear of its truck tractor when attached.
SETBACK FROM THE SIDE STREET LINE — The least distance from
any part of or point on the building to the side street line or its vertical
projection.
SETBACK OF A BUILDING — The least distance from any part of or point
on the building to the street property line or its vertical projection.
SHED — An accessory structure without electric or plumbing service that is
customarily used for storage of items customarily incidental to the principal
use and located separately on the same plot with the principal use.[Added
5-3-2004 by L.L. No. 12-2004; amended 12-5-2016 by L.L. No.
8-2016]
SIDE LINE — Any lot boundary line not the street property line or the rear
line. A side line may be either a party line, a side street property line or a
line bordering on a street.
SIDE YARD — An open, unoccupied space included between a side line or
side lines and the principal building and extending from a front yard to a
rear yard.
SIGN — Any structure, device or display consisting of but not limited
to any letter, symbol, trademark, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia,
light, decoration, illustration, advertisement, announcement, identification
or other attention-directing intent. A sign does not include the flag, pennant
or insignia of a governmental institution and does not include any display of
official public notices.
SIGN AREA — The area of the largest single face of the sign within a
perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any frame, or forms
an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than
one section or module, all areas will be totaled.
53.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "POD," added 4-3-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006, which
immediately followed this definition, was removed at the request of the Village. See now
the definition of "outside storage container structure."
§ 128-3 TAXATION § 128-3
113:201
STORAGE — The location of goods, merchandise, unregistered motor
vehicles, registered or unregistered unattached trailers, shipping
containers, equipment and/or any other materials either inside or outside of
a building.
STORAGE SHED — A structure without electrical or plumbing service, not
exceeding 64 square feet in area and not extending more than eight feet
above the property grade, used only for the storage of items customarily
incidental to the principal use and located separately on the same plot with
such principal use.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor or roof next above. The first story of a
wall is the lowest story which is 75% or more above the average level of the
ground adjacent to said wall.
STREET — A public thoroughfare now existing or indicated on the Building
Zone Map.54
STREET PROPERTY LINE — In the case of a lot abutting on only one street,
the dividing line between such lot and such street. In the case of any other
lot, one of the dividing lines between the lot and the street shall, subject
to the approval of the Board of Appeals, be elected by the owner to be the
street property line, for the purposes of this chapter, by noting such election
on the plans officially filed with the Code Enforcement Officer as hereinafter
provided.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or built of a static construction or
assembly of materials, the use or occupancy of which requires a fixed
location on the ground or attachment to an object having such a fixed
location. Structures shall include, among others, buildings, sheds, storage
bins, reviewing and display stands, platforms, towers, walls, berms, fences,
swimming pools, decks, billboards, signs and mobile dwellings.55[Amended
10-1-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
TRACTOR — A short truck with a body containing only a cab for the driver,
used to haul detachable trailers.
TRACTOR-TRAILER — A combination trucking unit consisting of a tractor
and a trailer or semitrailer.
TRAILER — A vehicle drawn or towed by another vehicle, except motorcycle
sidecars.
TRAILER, BOAT — A trailer intended for the purpose of moving boats from
place to place.
TRAILER, CAMPER — A trailer containing sleeping and other facilities, the
outside walls of which are partially collapsible into the body of the trailer to
facilitate towing.
54.Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
55.Editor's Note: The former definition of "surfaced driveway or driveway," which
immediately followed this definition, was removed at the request of the Village. See now
the definition of "driveway."
§ 128-3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-3
113:202
TRAILER, HOUSE — A trailer containing sleeping and other facilities, the
outside walls of which are of rigid materials.
TRAILER, UTILITY — A trailer generally used for the hauling of
miscellaneous household and yard materials.
TRUCK-BOX-STYLE STORAGE STRUCTURE — A structure resembling the
box of a box truck, and requiring truck transport to and from a premises
and which is placed outside for storage use.[Added 3-1-2004 by L.L. No.
7-2004]
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" shall be deemed to include any nonconforming
use.
VEHICLE — Includes vehicles, automobiles, structures and trailers and also
includes every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power.[Amended 9-7-1993]
WALKWAY — A private way leading to or from a structure on a parcel
and surfaced with the same material as a surfaced driveway or driveway
as are defined by this section and which is constructed on the grade
of its surrounding area and having a maximum width of six feet.[Added
9-7-1993]
WIDTH OF A LOT — The mean width measured at right angles to the
depth.[Amended 9-7-1993]
WIND-POWER-GENERATING FACILITY — A facility at which wind is
converted to another form of energy for distribution to the property upon
which it is located or to others.[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 128-3 TAXATION § 128-3
113:203

ARTICLE II
Districts Established
§ 128-4. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 9-20-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Brightwaters is hereby divided
into seven classes of districts as follows:
Residence A District
Residence B District
Residence C District
Central Business District
Sunrise Business District
North Business District
South Business District
§ 128-5. Boundaries established; Building Zone Map. [Amended
9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
Building Zone Map which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part
of this chapter.56
56.Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 128-4 TAXATION § 128-5
113:205

ARTICLE III
Residence A and B Districts
§ 128-6. Permitted uses.
Within any Residence A and Residence B Districts as indicated on the
Building Zone Map, no building or premises shall be used for other than one
or more of the following specified classes of purposes:
A. One dwelling for one family as one housekeeping unit only.
B. Customary home occupations.
(1) Intent. The purpose of these provisions is to allow for home
occupations which are compatible with the neighborhoods in which
they are allowed and in keeping with the residential character of
the community.
(2) Definition. An accessory use of service character customarily
conducted within a dwelling shall include the professional office or
studio of a physician, dentist, teacher, artist, architect, engineer,
accountant, musician or attorney and other services of a
professional nature. It shall not include and such nonpermissible
home occupations shall not be limited to the following: beauty
parlors, barbershops, tourist homes, convalescent homes, funeral
homes, dancing schools, real estate offices, veterinarian offices,
animal hospitals and biological or medical testing laboratories.
(3) Conditions. The Board of Trustees may, upon application and after
a public hearing thereon, permit a home occupation in any
residence, subject to the applicant's ability to provide reasonable
evidence that all the following conditions will be met:
(a) The occupation will be conducted within a dwelling.
(b) The occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use and residential character of the dwelling.
(c) The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not
change the residential character or use of the dwelling
involved.
(d) No more than one person, in addition to the applicant, may be
engaged in any capacity in such home occupation. The
foregoing shall not include members of the immediate family
residing on the premises.
(e) Not more than 30% of the floor area of one story of the
dwelling is devoted to such home occupation.
(f) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or
equipment related to the operation of a home occupation shall
§ 128-6 TAXATION § 128-6
113:207
be visible from the outside of any structure located on the
premises.
(g) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
substantially greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation
shall be limited as follows:
[1] Parallel on-street parking within the property lines of the
premises.
[2] Off-street parking, other than in a front yard, except for an
existing driveway.
(h) There shall be no advertising visible from the street other than
a small professional sign as provided in Article VII of this
chapter.
(i) No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. nor on Sundays.
(j) Other conditions as shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(4) Procedure.
(a) Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be
made to the Board of Trustees on a form provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as set by the Board of Trustees.
(b) Planning Board review. All applications for a home occupation
permit shall be reviewed by the Planning Board, which shall
report its findings to the Board of Trustees.
(c) Board of Trustees review and public hearing. After considering
the Planning Board's recommendations and after a duly
scheduled public hearing, the Board of Trustees may issue a
home occupation permit valid for three years. Notices of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the Village Clerk to property
owners within 200 feet.
(5) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses existing prior to the
effective date of this section shall be permitted in accordance with
Article IX of this chapter.
C. Schools, publicly owned buildings not of a correctional or charitable
nature, memorial buildings, country clubs, public libraries, public
museums, art galleries for exhibition only, municipal recreation
buildings, municipally controlled playgrounds and public parks. A
clubhouse or a structure used for club purposes is a permitted use,
provided that a majority of the membership at all times is residents of
§ 128-6 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-6
113:208
§ 128-7. Residence A District minimum building requirements.
the Village of Brightwaters, and provided that all of the activities of
such club are recreational and social and that no activity is maintained
on a commercial or concessionaire basis for the use of the general
public, and provided that no bowling alleys or other noisy activities
shall be conducted in any such clubhouse or structure except under
a temporary revocable permit issued by the Village Board upon the
recommendation of the Board of Appeals upon a hearing, as in the
case of unnecessary hardship, and upon such terms, conditions and
limitations as the Village Board may require.
D. Churches and other places of worship, parish houses and Sunday school
buildings.
E. Accessory uses customary with or incident to any permitted use and
located on the same lot therewith. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, the term "accessory uses" shall not, in a residence district,
include any activity commonly conducted for gain or any driveway or
walk giving access thereto. Garages are classified as permitted
accessories, but, except as hereinafter specified, a garage in a
residence district may be on the same lot with a residence. Any
accessory building shall be limited to 1 1/2 stories or 24 feet in height
and shall be distant at least 10 feet from any party side line, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. No accessory building shall be
occupied in any part for residence purposes, nor may it contain any
cooking equipment, refrigerator or sink. [Amended 12-4-2000 by L.L.
No. 2-2000]
F. In connection with any use of property under Subsections C and D of
this section, except for use as a public school under Subsection C
hereof, off-street parking space shall be provided on the premises for
the parking of automobiles, the area of which shall be not less than
three times the floor area of the building, exclusive of setbacks as
provided in § 128-22.
G. No path, driveway or private roadway to be used by any mechanically
powered vehicle as a means of egress onto or ingress from Montauk
Highway shall hereafter be constructed or maintained in or upon any
lot or parcel of property abutting upon or contiguous to Montauk
Highway.
H. Storage of fuel. No bulk storage of coal or liquid fuels or other
flammable fuels in excess of 275 gallons is permitted above ground.
[Amended 8-4-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
A. General. The following are the minimum heights and cubical contents of
each type of house described below:
(1) One-and-one-half-story house: 15,000 minimum cubic feet.
(2) Two-story house: 20,000 minimum cubic feet.
§ 128-6 TAXATION § 128-7
113:209
§ 128-8. Residence B District minimum building requirements.
B. Houses built on lots under 100 feet in width.
(1) The following are the minimum lot widths and cubical content for
each type of house built on a lot under 100 feet in width that was in
single, undivided ownership prior to May 16, 1949, the original
date of this chapter:
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Length
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(stories) Minimum Cubic Feet
75 to 100 100 and
above
2 20,000
65 to 75 100 and
above
1 1/2 15,000
50 to 65 120 and
above
1 1/2 15,000
50 to 65 100 1 1/2 11,000
(2) No house may be built on a lot having a minimum width of less than
50 feet or a minimum depth of less than 100 feet. No two-story
house may be built on a lot less than 75 feet wide.
A. General. The following are the minimum heights and cubical contents of
each type of house described below:
(1) One-story house: 10,000 minimum cubic feet.
(2) One-and-one-half-story house: 12,000 minimum cubic feet.
(3) Two-story house: 15,000 minimum cubic feet.
B. Houses built on lots under 100 feet in width.
(1) The following are the minimum lot widths and cubical content for
each type of house built on a lot under 100 feet in width that was in
single, undivided ownership prior to May 16, 1949, the original
date of this chapter: [Amended 10-19-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994]
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Length
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(stories) Minimum Cubic Feet
75 to 99 100 2 15,000
50 to 74 100 to 120 1 1/2 10,000 for 1 story; 11,000
for 1 1/2 stories
(2) No house may be built on a lot having a minimum width of less than
50 feet or a minimum depth of less than 100 feet.
§ 128-7 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-9
113:210
§ 128-9. Spaces excluded from cubical contents computation.
Nonliving space is excluded in computing cubical contents in A and B
Districts. Cellar space or rooms extending below the level of the adjoining
street or streets shall be excluded in computing living space.
§ 128-10. Minimum pitch of roof.
The minimum pitch of roof in A and B Districts shall be five on 12.
§ 128-10.1. Utility meters in residential premises. [Added 1-3-2006
by L.L. No. 2-2006]
No parcel in Residence A District or Residence B District shall have more
than one water meter, one gas meter, or one electric meter anywhere on
the parcel, whether activated or not, unless a legal nonconforming use
for a two-or-more-family use has been granted by the Board of Appeals
pursuant to § 128-90C and/or a home occupation use has been granted by
the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 128-6B. Any water meter, gas meter, or
electric meter in existence upon the effective date of this section and not in
compliance with the conditions and limitations imposed by the provisions of
this section is hereby declared to be, and shall be deemed, a nonconforming
meter, and every such nonconforming meter shall be completely removed
from the parcel and the premises in which it is situated, and every such
parcel and its premises shall be made to fully conform with the provisions
of this section, on or before the expiration of one year from the date of the
adoption of this section, this one-year period being allowed for the specific
purpose of permitting the amortization of the remaining cost, if any, of such
meter(s) and the installation thereof.
§ 128-9 TAXATION § 128-10.1
113:211

ARTICLE IV
Residence C District
§ 128-11. General provisions.
§ 128-12. Minimum building requirements.
In addition to any other provisions of this chapter, each family unit as
may be contained within an apartment house or garden apartment shall be
not less than a minimum of 700 square feet, which is exclusive of areas
designated as hallways, closets, stairways and other areas used in common
within the apartment house or garden apartment.
A. Within any Residence C District, no building or premises shall be used
for any purpose other than an apartment house or garden apartment.
B. In any Residence C District, no building shall be erected or constructed
on a lot having an area of less than 10,000 square feet, and there shall
be not less than 2,500 square feet of lot area for each family unit in such
apartment houses or garden apartments. All buildings, including
accessory buildings, shall cover no more than 30% of the area of the
lot.
C. In a Residence C District, no building shall hereafter be erected on a lot
or plot less than 100 feet in width.
D. On all property in a Residence C District on which any building shall
hereafter be constructed, sidewalks and concrete curbing conforming
to Village specifications shall be constructed by the owner of such
property at his own cost and expense along all lines where the property
shall abut any street, and the location of all curb cuts in said curbing
shall be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. On all property in a Residence C District on which any building shall
hereafter be constructed, the area between the existing hard-surface
pavement of the abutting street and the concrete curbing shall be
paved by the owner of such property at his own cost and expense with
suitable material of a similar quality and nature as the existing roadway.
F. In all Residence C Districts wherein any building shall hereafter be
constructed, the owner of such property shall provide shade trees along
all streets at fifty-foot intervals where no such trees then exist, the
location, size and varieties to be approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
G. In any Residence C District, off-street parking space shall be provided
on the premises for the parking of automobiles, the area of which shall
not be less than 450 square feet for each family unit, including access
roads and aisles; provided, however, that each individual parking space
shall not be less than 200 square feet. No parking area hereafter shall
be located in any front or side yard except by special permission of the
Board of Trustees.
§ 128-11 TAXATION § 128-12
113:213

ARTICLE V
Business Districts
§ 128-13. Permitted uses in Central Business District. [Amended
9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
trade, manufacturing or commercial use or purpose other than one of the
following uses, and any use not specifically permitted herein is specifically
prohibited:
A. Retail sales of any goods or commodities, except sales or rentals of
videos, sexually oriented publications, videos or devices and
paraphernalia for use of illegal drugs.
B. Arts and crafts.
C. Automobile driving school.
D. Bank.
E. Barbershop.
F. Beauty shop.
G. Bicycle shop.
H. Burglar alarm.
I. Delicatessen, but only by special permit from the Board of Trustees.
J. Dry cleaners.
K. Eye glass shop.
L. Florist.
M. Home health care.
N. Ice cream parlor.
O. Income tax preparation.
P. Investigation office.
Q. Laundromat.
R. Liquor store.
S. Locksmith.
T. Pharmacy.
U. Picture framing.
§ 128-13 TAXATION § 128-13
113:215
§ 128-13.1. Permitted uses in Sunrise Business District. [Added
9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
trade, manufacturing or commercial use or purpose other than one of the
following uses, and any use not specifically permitted herein is specifically
prohibited.
V. Professional offices.
W. Real estate office.
X. Recruiting office.
Y. Sales of prepackaged dairy and other foods on a retail basis for offpremises
consumption.
Z. Shoe repair or sales.
AA. Surgical supply.
BB. Tanning salon.
CC. Telephone store.
DD. Television repair.
EE. Travel agent.
FF. Upholstery sales and repair.
GG. Dance school or dance studio. [Added 12-1-2003 by L.L. No. 7-2003]
A. Retail sales of any goods or commodities, except sales or rentals of
videos, sexually-oriented publications or devices if such sales are the
principal sales product, and paraphernalia for use of illegal drugs.
B. Ambulance equipment.
C. Arts and crafts.
D. Automobile driving school.
E. Barbershop.
F. Beauty shop.
G. Bicycle shop.
H. Burglar alarm.
I. Caterer.
J. Cleaners.
§ 128-13 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-13.1
113:216
K. Delicatessen, but only by special permit from the Board of Trustees.
L. Eyeglass shop.
M. Florist.
N. Gasoline station.
O. Home health care.
P. Ice cream parlor.
Q. Insurance.
R. Investigations.
S. Laundromat.
T. Liquor store.
U. Locksmith.
V. Mini-storage rental.
W. Picture framing.
X. Print shop.
Y. Professional offices.
Z. Real estate offices.
AA. Recruiting offices.
BB. Restaurant for consumption of food on premises without drive-through
take-out food, but only with a special permit from the Board of Trustees.
CC. Sale of prepackaged dairy and other foods on a retail basis for offpremises
consumption.
DD. Self-defense school.
EE. Shoe repair or sales.
FF. Surgical supply.
GG. Tanning salon.
HH. Telephone company.
II. Television sales and repair.
JJ. Window replacement.
KK. Dance school or dance studio. [Added 11-6-2006 by L.L. No.
10-2006]
§ 128-13.1 TAXATION § 128-13.2
113:217
§ 128-13.2. Permitted uses in North Business District. [Added
9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
trade, manufacturing or commercial use or purpose other than one of the
following uses, and any use not specifically permitted herein is specifically
prohibited.
A. Retail sales of any goods or commodities, except sales or rentals of
videos, sexually-oriented publications or devices if such sales are the
principal sales product, and paraphernalia for use of illegal drugs.
B. Ambulance equipment.
C. Art gallery.
D. Arts and crafts.
E. Automobile driving schools.
F. Awnings.
G. Barbershop.
H. Beauty shop.
I. Beer and soda sales, but only by special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
J. Bicycle shop.
K. Burglar alarms.
L. Exercise salon.
M. Eyeglass shop.
N. Florist.
O. Home health care.
P. Income tax preparation.
Q. Insurance.
R. Investigation office.
S. Lighting fixtures.
T. Liquor store.
U. Locksmith.
V. Picture framing.
W. Print shop.
§ 128-13.2 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-13.2
113:218
§ 128-13.3. Permitted uses in South Business District. [Added
9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
trade, manufacturing or commercial use or purpose other than one of the
following uses, and any use not specifically permitted herein is specifically
prohibited.
X. Professional offices.
Y. Railings.
Z. Real estate office.
AA. Recruiting office.
BB. Sale of prepackaged dairy and other foods on a retail basis for offpremises
consumption.
CC. Self-defense school.
DD. Shoe repair or sales.
EE. Surgical supply.
FF. Tanning salon.
GG. Telephone company office.
HH. Television sales and repair.
II. Travel agency.
JJ. Uniform supply.
KK. Upholstery sales and repair.
LL. Dance school or dance studio. [Added 11-6-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
A. Air conditioning.
B. All uses permitted by § 128-13.2 in the North Business District.
C. Auto body and fender, but only by special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
D. Automobile repair, but only by special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
E. Automotive detailing, but only by special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
F. Cabinet maker.
G. Caterer.
§ 128-13.2 TAXATION § 128-13.3
113:219
§ 128-14. Special permits. [Amended 9-20-1995 by L.L. No.
6-199557]
H. Delicatessen, but only by special permit from the Board of Trustees.
I. Dry cleaner.
J. Electrical contractor.
K. Fencing.
L. Garden and lawn center, but only with special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
M. Glass and mirror.
N. Heating equipment.
O. Home appliance repair.
P. Landscape business, but only with special permit from the Board of
Trustees.
Q. Laundromat.
R. Refrigeration.
S. Replacement windows.
T. Restaurant for consumption of food on premises without drive-through
take-out food, but only with a special permit from the Board of Trustees.
U. Restaurant supplies.
V. Roofer.
W. Sheet metal.
X. Sale of prepackaged dairy and other foods on a retail basis for offpremises
consumption.
Y. Dance school or dance studio. [Added 11-6-2006 by L.L. No. 9-2006]
A. A special permit may be granted by the Board of Trustees following a
public hearing on an application for a use for which a special permit is
required by this Code. In granting any special permit, the Board of
Trustees shall have the right to impose conditions therefor and the
filing of Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions against the subject
property.
B. For any restaurant or food establishment that serves and consumes
food on the premises, located within any Village business district, a
57.Editor's Note: This local law superseded former § 128-14, Prohibited uses.
§ 128-13.3 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-14
113:220
§ 128-14.1. Storage. [Added 9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
Other than the mini-storage rental permitted by § 128-13.1. no storage of
any type shall be allowed as a principal use in any business district in the
Village of Brightwaters. Storage shall only be allowed as an accessory use
to a principal use authorized by this Code. All storage shall be located
within a building, except that outside storage as an accessory use may
be permitted by the Planning Board of the Village of Brightwaters which
shall be authorized to require screenings, setbacks and other restrictions
as it deems appropriate. No explosives, flammable materials or other
commodities which are noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of
odor, dust, fumes, smoke or gas may be stored, except that liquid petroleum
gases may be stored in accordance with the standards of the National Board
of Fire Underwriters and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code under a permit obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Village. However, no gasoline, liquid petroleum gas or oil storage in
bulk above the ground in excess of 50 gallons shall be permitted.
§ 128-14.2. Multiple business uses. [Added 9-20-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995; amended 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 10-2007]
Any unimproved parcel in any business district which has a road frontage
of more than 50 feet in excess of the minimum road 50 feet required shall
be entitled to use the parcel for more than one of the uses permitted
under this Code for that district. There shall be no more than one use
permitted for each 50 feet of road frontage in excess of the required 50
feet of road frontage, and each such additional use must extend the depth
of the property from the road frontage to its rear property line. Any parcel
in a business district improved by a building shall have a minimum road
frontage of 100 feet and shall be entitled to use the building for no more
than two of the uses permitted under this Code for that district. There shall
be no more than one extra use permitted for each additional 50 feet of
road frontage, unless the building is a legal two-story building, whereupon
it shall be entitled to two extra uses for each additional 50 feet of road
frontage.
§ 128-15. Conduct of uses within buildings. [Amended 1-2-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
Any use contemplated by this section shall be conducted entirely within a
building or buildings which is or are stationary in position and permanently
equipped with electricity, heat, telephone, sanitary hookup, water and
bathroom.
special permit, as defined under Village Code, shall be required for the
operation of outside dining. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 128-14 TAXATION § 128-16
113:221
§ 128-16. Roof requirements.
In any business district, business buildings shall have a facade roof on front
and side streets rising four to six feet and with a 45° angle above the upper
ceiling height or have a peaked roof and/or a front conforming to the type
of existing buildings in the Village and shall be no more than one story high
and approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 128-17. Side yards for tennis clubs. [Amended 3-1-2004 by L.L.
No. 8-2004]
In connection with any use as a tennis club, if the side yard of any such use
abuts a residential use, then such side yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
§ 128-18. Off-street parking. [Amended 3-1-2004 by L.L. No.
9-2004; 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 128-19. Sidewalks and curbing.
A. All plans for a new building, expansion of an existing building or change
of use for an existing building shall include provisions for off-street
parking in accordance with the table found in 128 Attachment 5 of this
Code, annexed herewith.
B. Modifications to off-street parking requirements may be granted by the
Board of Appeals upon application and public hearing.
A. On all business property on which any building shall hereafter be
constructed, sidewalks and concrete curbing conforming to Village
specifications shall be constructed by the owner of such property at his
own cost and expense along all lines where the property shall abut any
street, and the location of all curb cuts in said curbing shall be
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. On all business property on which any building shall hereafter be
constructed, the area between the existing hard-surface pavement of
the abutting street and the concrete curbing shall be paved by the
owner of such property at his own cost and expense, with suitable
material of a similar quality and nature as the existing roadway, and
shall be so maintained by the owner.
§ 128-16 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-19
113:222
ARTICLE VI
Supplemental Regulations
§ 128-20. Performance standards.
No building or premises in any part of the Village of Brightwaters shall
be used for any trade, industry or purpose that is noxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes or noise or that is
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, nor shall any activity of
any kind be conducted in any part of the Village which shall cause noxious
or offensive odors, fumes, smoke or dust.
§ 128-20.1. Maintenance of properties. [Added 10-19-1994 by L.L.
No. 8-1994]
Every real property in the Village, whether a residential or business parcel,
shall be maintained by the owner(s) of record, tenant and/or contractor in
possession thereof in a neat and orderly manner, including the mowing of all
grass, trimming of all hedges and bushes and removal of all junk and debris.
Should any owner, tenant and/or contractor in possession fail or refuse to
maintain any property as set forth above after the expiration of 10 days from
the date a demand to do so was sent to said owner, tenant and/or contractor
in possession by the Village Code Enforcement Officer by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the Village shall have the right to provide for said
maintenance and to include the cost thereof as a charge against that real
property tax parcel in the next Village property tax levy on that parcel.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the
Village to enforce this provision of the Village Code under § 128-86 of this
Code.
§ 128-21. Split-level houses.
In split-level houses, living space below the street level may be included if,
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, it is actual living space.
§ 128-22. Setbacks.
A. Buildings in Residence A or Residence B Districts.
(1) Any building in any Residence A or Residence B District shall set
back from the street property line a distance not less than the
average setback of the existing buildings within the block in
question and on the same side of the street, with an additional twofoot
setback, or, if there are no existing buildings on the same side
of the street in the same block, the average setback of existing
buildings on the opposite side of the street within the block, with an
additional two-foot setback, shall govern; provided, however, that
any building hereafter constructed upon any lot or parcel of
property abutting upon or contiguous to Montauk Highway shall
set back not less than 50 feet from Montauk Highway. [Amended
2-7-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
§ 128-20 TAXATION § 128-22
113:223
§ 128-23. Permitted encroachments.
The following encroachments are hereby permitted:
§ 128-24. Minimum lot road frontage; single-building limitation.
[Amended 4-1-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002; 11-6-2006 by L.L. No.
7-2006]
§ 128-25. Vision clearance on corner lots.
On any corner lot in any district, no fence, hedge or other obstruction
more than 3 1/2 feet in height above the average street elevation shall be
caused to exist within the triangle formed by the intersecting street lines
and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are 30 feet in
distance from the point of intersection measured along said street lines.
(2) Special exceptions. Where a building is not controlled by
Subsection A(1) above, any building in a Residence A or Residence
B District shall be set back not less than 30 feet from any street
property line. In case of a corner lot, a front yard shall be required
on each street on which the lot abuts, provided that if, at the time
this chapter becomes effective, any corner lot is held in single and
separate ownership with a width of less than 100 feet, the depth of
the front yard on one side of the lot may be decreased when
authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
B. Buildings in the Residence C District. No building in a Residence C
District shall set back from any street property line a distance of less
than 15 feet.
C. Buildings in a business district. Any building in any business district
shall set back from the street property line a distance not less than
12 1/2 feet
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys projecting not more than 24
inches.
B. Bay windows and fireplaces not wider than six feet and not projecting
more than 24 inches.
C. Open and unroofed entrance platforms or terraces not more than five
feet in width nor more than three feet in height.
A. No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot or plot with less than 100
feet of road frontage on a named street on the Building Zone Map,
excepting those lots or plots with less than 100 feet of road frontage on
a named street on the Building Zone Map that were in single undivided
ownership prior to May 16, 1949, the original date of this chapter.
B. No lot or plot in any Business District shall have more than one
principal, nonaccessory, building or structure.
§ 128-22 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-25
113:224
This restriction shall apply to all hedges, fences and landscaping heretofore
erected and now existing at a height greater than herein allowed.
§ 128-26. Fences, hedges and retaining walls.58
A. Residence A and B Districts.
(1) In any Residence A or Residence B District, no fence which is more
than six feet high shall be permitted; provided, however, that the
finished side of any fence shall face outward from the property on
which it is constructed. Every fence facing a public street shall be
nonsolid and ventilating and shall be screened from view to half of
its height above ground level by natural plantings spaced 36 inches
apart at ground level. [Amended 11-6-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995;
8-6-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001; 6-2-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
(2) In the case of an interior lot, a rear fence may extend the entire
width of the rear line. No fence or hedge in any residence district
shall extend nearer a street property or a side street property line
than the front line of the dwelling. The height of the fence shall be
measured above the ground level.
(3) In the case of corner lots, a natural fence or artificial or man-made
fence, screened from view by a natural fence no higher than six
feet, may extend along the rear property line to a point 15 feet from
the street property line, thence parallel to the architectural side of
the dwelling to a point perpendicular to the rear corner of the
architectural side of the dwelling facing the street.59 [Amended
11-6-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995; 6-2-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
B. Residence C District. In a Residence C District, a solid rustic fence six
feet in height or adequate screen planting approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be provided along any property line which
divides a Residence C District from any other residential district;
provided, however, that no fence or screen planting under this section
shall extend nearer a street property line or a side street property line
than 15 feet. The height of a fence shall be measured above ground
level.
C. Business districts.
(1) Any fence erected in a business district must be of a chain link type
and no more than eight feet in height. [Amended 5-2-1994 by
L.L. No. 1-1994; 2-7-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section with respect to
the maintenance or erection of fences on any premises, all or part
58.Editor's Note: The fence and hedge requirements provided in this section are illustrated
in Diagrams A and B at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), regarding issuance of a building permit prior to
fence construction, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-7-2005 by
L.L. No. 2-2005.
§ 128-25 TAXATION § 128-26
113:225
of which is used for business, there shall be erected and maintained
a solid board fence along the rear and side property lines in cases
where the contiguous property is zoned for residential use, with the
finished side facing the residential property, said fence or fences to
be sufficiently high to screen the contents from public view and at
least seven feet high, the maintenance of which in good repair is a
prerequisite to the continued use of such premises.
D. Fences or hedges across lot fronts are prohibited in every residential
district. No fence in any district shall be equipped with any razor-like
wire. [Amended 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
E. No retaining wall may be higher than three feet above the lower ground
level at its base, and the ground being retained must be level with its
top, and its average grade must at least equal or be higher than its top.
It must be constructed of a nonwood static material and may not be
positioned on the Village's right-of-way. [Added 8-5-2002 by L.L. No.
8-2002]
F. Procedure. [Added 2-7-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(1) No fence or retaining wall may be constructed in any district
without first obtaining a fence permit from the Village, after
submission of an application on a form prescribed by the Board of
Trustees and a survey indicating the planned placement of the
fence or retaining wall.
(2) No fence permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the
fence permit fee and has also posted a cash bond, both sums to be
established by the Board of Trustees.
(3) A fence permit shall expire one year from the date of its issuance
and may not be renewed for another year without permission from
the Board of Trustees.
(4) Upon completion of the fence or retaining wall, including plantings
if required, within one year from the issuance of the fence permit,
the applicant shall notify the Village, on a form prescribed by the
Board of Trustees, of such completion and, upon inspection and
approval by the Building Inspector, the fence permit shall be
stamped "Approved as Built" by the Building Inspector.
(5) Upon the approval of the fence or retaining wall, the cash bond
shall be returned to the applicant without interest. Upon the
expiration of a permit by surrender, or the passage of one year
without commencement of the construction, the cash bond shall be
returned to the applicant without interest. Should construction be
commenced but not completed and approved within one year of the
issuance of the permit, or not properly completed, or if the permit
is revoked for any reason, the cash bond shall be forfeited to the
Village.
§ 128-26 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-27
113:226
§ 128-27. Reduction of lot size.
No lot or property shall be hereafter so reduced in area as to cause any yard
or other open space to be smaller in any dimension than is prescribed in
this chapter for the district involved.
§ 128-28. Obstructions in yards.
Yards shall be open and unobstructed to the sky, except that nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the projection of a cornice or the overhang of eaves
over a front yard, side yard or rear yard to an extent not exceeding three
feet and not exceeding 1/4 of the width of such yard or to a distance of one
foot in any case.
§ 128-28.1. Wind-power-generating facilities prohibited. [Added
1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Wind-power-generating facilities are prohibited on all parcels in the Village.
§ 128-29. Total building area.
§ 128-30. Side yards.
§ 128-31. Rear yards.
A. The total building area, including all buildings, accessory buildings,
structures and decks, shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.20.
[Amended 9-7-1993]
B. In a business district, the total building area, including all buildings,
shall not exceed or occupy more than 50% of the total lot area. Upon the
granting of an application therefor, the requirement concerning the
percentage of lot occupancy in a business district may be decreased or
increased not exceeding 15% by the Board of Trustees, either on its
own motion or at the request of the applicant, when and if conditions
warrant.
A. Residence A and B District requirements. In any Residence A or
Residence B District, except as hereinafter specified, a side yard is
required on each side of each lot. The aggregate width of the two side
yards shall be in any case not less than 25 feet. No side yard shall have
a width less than 10 feet. In the case of any building permitted under
§ 128-6C or D of this chapter in a Residence A or Residence B District,
no side yard shall be less than 50 feet wide.
B. Residence C District requirements. In any Residence C District, the
aggregate width of the two side yards shall not be less than 25 feet. No
side yard shall have less than 10 feet; provided, however, that a side
yard facing a street shall not be less than 15 feet.
A. A rear yard is required as hereafter specified in any business district.
§ 128-27 TAXATION § 128-31
113:227
B. The depth of a rear yard, except as hereinafter specified, shall not be
less than:
(1) Fifty feet in a Residence A or B District.
(2) Thirty-eight feet in a Residence C District.
(3) Twenty-five feet in a business district, except where the rear of the
property abuts a railroad right-of-way; or in connection with any
indoor tennis club, if the rear yard of such use abuts any residential
use, then a rear yard of not less than 50 feet shall be required.
[Amended 3-5-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
C. Rear yard ground area ratio (GAR). [Amended 3-3-2014 by L.L. No.
3-2014]
(1) Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
REAR YARD AREA — That area behind the line created by the line
between the two rear outermost points of the main dwelling at
a straight line and concurrent with the rear of said dwelling and
continuing to points on either which intersects the side property
lines of the dwelling.
(2) All livable extensions that project into the rear yard but are not the
outermost corners of said dwelling are to be deducted from the
total rear yard area.
(3) If said dwelling is a corner lot, then the legal address is the front
yard. The rear of that front address would be used to calculate the
rear yard area as noted above. The area in the rear yard behind the
parallel line running concurrent with the home along the second
front yard (not on the side where address is stated) and which runs
parallel with the side street will not be calculated as part of the
rear yard area.
D. Rear yard area limited for nonvegetative use. The ground area ratio
(GAR) available for use of nonvegetative or impervious surfaces is to be
no more than 30% of the rear yard area for plots over 15,000 square
feet. Where the property size is less than 15,000 square feet, GAR
allowable usage will be calculated at not more than 35% of the total
rear yard. "Nonimpervious surfaces" includes items such as patios,
decks, pavers, open-jointed flagstone, walkways and the like and also
includes, but is not limited to, sheds, rear garages, and other
outbuildings. Walkways greater than 42 inches, fixed generator and
fixed air-conditioning pads are not included in the GAR computation. All
impervious surfaces forward of the rear yard house lines shall be part of
the floor area ratio (FAR) under Village of Brightwaters Code § 128-29.
Pools, garages, sheds, and patios will continue to be calculated as part
of the Village's FAR. [Added 3-3-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014; amended
10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
§ 128-31 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-32
113:228
§ 128-32. Location of accessory buildings. [Amended 5-3-2004 by
L.L. No. 13-2004; 12-5-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
§ 128-33. Adequate light and ventilation required.
A yard or court conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be
provided on the same lot with any room in which persons live, sleep, work
or congregate whenever needed to give adequate light and ventilation to
such room.
§ 128-34. Building height. [Amended 9-20-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995;
5-3-2004 by L.L. No. 14-2004; 10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
Unless otherwise stated, the vertical distance from the average crown of
the road or average top of the curb (if more than five inches or greater
of reveal) that fronts the property, whichever is less, to the highest point
of the roof, provided that chimneys and similar permitted projections shall
not be included in the height. For any single-family residential structure
or accessory structure thereto, no principle building or structure shall be
erected to a height in excess of 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories within an area of
special flood hazard elevation zone pursuant to this chapter, the structure or
the minimum elevation necessary to meet the prerequisites for federal flood
insurance as determined by the National Flood Insurance Program (FEMA)
as shown on any applicable Flood Insurance Map. The Village Building
Department shall be responsible for the interpretation and application of
Flood Grade Elevations relevant to any specific project.
A. No accessory building shall be nearer any street property or side street
property line than the principal building on the same lot.
B. No accessory building shall be located in any required side yard.
C. Accessory buildings shall be located no nearer than 10 feet to any side
or rear property line. However, one accessory building, per lot, that
meets the definition of "shed" as defined in § 128-3 of this chapter, and
is neither greater than 144 square feet in area nor greater than 10 feet
in height, may be located to within four feet of side and rear property
lines.
D. No shed shall be located nearer a street or side street property line
than the rear wall of the principal building.
A. In a residential district, no principal building or structure shall be
erected to a height that exceeds 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
B. Accessory structures shall not exceed 24 feet in height or shall be a
maximum of one story, whichever is less.
C. Flagpoles shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
D. Architectural protrusions above the ridge line such as a cupola, and/or
weather vane may not exceed five feet above the highest peak of the
§ 128-32 TAXATION § 128-34
113:229
§ 128-35. Decks.
No deck may be constructed unless a building permit has been first applied
for and granted, and no deck shall be deemed a legal structure until a
certificate of occupancy for the same has been issued by the Village.
§ 128-36. Drainage.
In any district within the Village, drainage shall be provided as approved by
the Code Enforcement Officer or other designated official to accommodate
all surface water.
§ 128-37. Electrical distribution and transmission lines.
residence or structure. Other protrusions such as solar panels, dish
receivers and/or ornamental temporary fixtures cannot exceed the
building height code § 128-34.
A. A deck shall be constructed only at the rear and/or side of the building;
however, no deck shall be constructed at the part or side of the building
that faces a street, except that a deck may be constructed at the rear of
a building that faces a street. [Amended 11-2-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; 11-1-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993]
B. A deck constructed of wood shall be natural wood or pressure-treated
lumber which is rot-resistant and in conformity with all applicable
building codes.
C. If the surface of any deck is elevated so as to be level with the second
floor of living space of any dwelling, said deck shall only be located at
the rear of such dwelling, shall not contain any stairway to the ground
but rather must be accessible only through the interior of the dwelling,
shall not be any longer than 1/2 of the rear width of such dwelling as
measured along the rear from side to side and shall not be any more
then eight feet in width as measured outward from the rear of the
dwelling. A balcony shall also be considered a deck for the purposes of
this subsection and shall be governed thereby. [Added 9-7-1993]
D. No deck shall be constructed or maintained in the rear 2/3 of the rear
yard of any premises. [Added 9-7-1993]
E. A deck which to any extent surrounds a swimming pool shall not be
governed by this section but rather by § 128-38 of this chapter. [Added
9-7-1993]
A. Voltage of overhead lines restricted. No overhead distribution or
transmission line having a voltage exceeding 15,000 volts shall be
installed or constructed above ground in the Village without the express
consent, permission and approval of the Board of Trustees of the
Village.
§ 128-34 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-37
113:230
§ 128-38. Swimming pools. [Amended 9-7-1993]
All swimming pools and all decks partially or wholly surrounding such pools
shall be considered accessory uses requiring a building permit and shall
not be deemed a legal structure until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued and, in addition to all requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code:
§ 128-39. Lighting and banners.
In any district, unreasonable excessive lighting or the use of bright-colored
banners and whirling pennants and other novelties shall be prohibited
at all times. Exposed bulb lighting, security lighting and unreasonable or
excessive external lighting shall not be directed outside property lines.
§ 128-40. Garages.
B. Conformity to National Electric Safety Code. Any and all distribution
and transmission lines within the Village must conform to the
requirements of the National Electric Safety Code.
A. They shall be completely enclosed by a restrictive-type fence four feet
in height with a self-closing gate and spring latch. A fence enclosing a
swimming pool shall also conform to the requirements of § 128-26 of
this Code. [Amended 11-6-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995]
B. An acceptable drainage system is to be self-contained upon the
premises.
C. No pool or deck partially or wholly surrounding such pool shall be
constructed or erected wholly or in part in the front or side yard of any
lot or plot in any zone.
D. Side yards and rear yards are to be a minimum of 10 feet in any district.
The measurement of the side yards and rear yards shall be taken from
any deck partially or wholly surrounding any pool where and to the
extent a pool deck exists.
A. Residence district restrictions.
(1) In residence districts, no garage is permitted in which any
business, service or industry is carried on, except as hereinafter
provided. In any residence district, space for two cars may be
provided on any lot, and space for one additional car may be
provided for each 25 feet of lot frontage in excess of 75 feet or for
each 2,500 square feet of lot area exceeding 7,500 square feet; but
in the case of corner lots, only the street of least frontage shall be
considered as a basis for the determination of permissible garage
space. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, subsequent to the
date of enactment of this chapter, no residence that has an existing
garage may convert such garage to dwelling or living space without
providing for garage space in accordance with Subsection B hereof.
§ 128-37 TAXATION § 128-40
113:231
§ 128-41. Use of vacant land in residential districts for parking.
Upon application made to the Board of Trustees, such Board, after a public
hearing, may authorize the use of any vacant land in a residential district
which borders on land in a Business District to be used for parking of motor
vehicles, subject to such conditions and safeguards as it deems advisable
for the public interest.
(2) If any residence shall be constructed after the effective date of this
subsection without garage space for at least one automobile,
additional side and/or rear yard shall be provided to permit the
construction of detached or connected garage space with proper
access to accommodate one automobile without encroaching upon
the required side and/or rear yards, and the location of such space
and access shall be indicated on the filed plans.
B. (Reserved)60
C. Use for residence purposes prohibited. No building occupied as a public
garage shall be used in any part for residence purposes. No garage for
more than six cars shall have any opening in the side or rear wall or roof
within 15 feet of any party lot line. No automobile repair or adjustment
work shall be done out-of-doors. No public gasoline pump, greasing,
oiling or filling station shall be allowed in a residence district. The
entrance and exit driveways for any public garage having a capacity for
more than six cars in one room shall be at least nine feet wide and shall
communicate directly with a street not less than 60 feet wide. For any
public garage having a capacity for more than 12 cars in one room, such
driveway shall not be less than 10 feet wide.
60.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Detached garages, was repealed 12-5-2016 by L.L. No.
10-2016.
§ 128-40 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-41
113:232
ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 128-42. Intent.
This Article is intended to control outdoor signs of all types in all zoning
districts by regulating size, location, quantity, quality, content and design
to:
§ 128-43. Advertising signs; size restrictions.
No "for sale" or "for rent" or advertising signs of any character in any
district of the Incorporated Village of Brightwaters shall be of greater area
than six square feet except as hereinafter provided.
§ 128-44. Signs in Business District.
In the Business District, a sign referring only to business conducted on the
same premises may have an area not to exceed 10 square feet, and it shall
be limited to one sign on the front of the place of business. "For sale" or "for
rent" signs on improved or unimproved property are limited to six square
feet.
§ 128-45. Signs in residential districts.
Only one sign shall be permitted on each parcel of real property, except
in the case of parcels fronting on more than one street, other than service
roads, in which case one sign shall be allowed to be placed in the area of
each street frontage.
§ 128-46. Permit required to erect or maintain signs.
A. Protect the safety of the public.
B. Enhance the aesthetic environment of the Village.
C. Reduce motorist distraction.
D. Provide for uniform design standards.
E. Encourage excellence in sign design.
F. Improve business identification and sign comprehension.
A. Before any sign, other than a "for sale" or "for rent" sign relating to real
property, shall be erected or maintained, an application, in writing,
shall be signed and filed with the Village Clerk by the owner in fee
simple or by his duly authorized agent, setting forth a full description of
the construction, material and reading matter of said sign and the
proposed location thereof on the plot. A written permit shall be issued
by said Village Clerk if, from said application, it shall appear that said
sign complies with this Article.
§ 128-42 TAXATION § 128-46
113:233
§ 128-47. Location restrictions.
No sign, except in a Business District, shall be posted, erected or
maintained within five feet of any property line of the parcel on which it
is situated. Signs are to be placed within the boundaries of the parcel as
reduced by said five-foot setback. The setback from any street property line
is to be measured from the property line of the ownership parcel and not
from the edge of any pavement within a roadway or from any other point or
line; however, no such sign shall be so placed as to obstruct clear view of
roadways at intersecting streets.
§ 128-48. Attachment restrictions.
Signs shall not be attached to any tree, fence or structure but shall be
attached to a standard sunk in the ground and shall not extend more than
five feet above the ground.
§ 128-49. Real estate signs.
§ 128-50. Overhanging or projecting signs prohibited.
No overhanging or projecting signs shall be permitted.
§ 128-51. Construction or contractors' signs.
No construction or contractors' signs shall be permitted during the
construction or alteration of a building or any other structure, except for
signs giving warning of hazard or danger.
B. No signs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be permitted on
public streets or rights-of-way or on Village lands or lands of any other
public or quasi-public entity without the approval, in advance, of the
Board of Trustees of the Village.
A. Signs may contain the name, address and telephone number of the
party to be contacted with respect to the offering and may include such
additional customary items as company logos and the words "agent,"
"broker," "owner," "realtor," etc., and may indicate whether the
property is for sale and/or for rent and may contain other typical
language such as "by appointment only," "open house" or "sold," except
that which may be specifically prohibited by future resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees. "Sold" signs may not remain in place after
the consummation of the transaction to which they refer.
B. Signs are to relate only to the offering of the property on which they are
placed, and directional signs placed on private properties of others or
on public property or within public rights-of-way, parklands or any other
nonprivately owned parcels are prohibited without specific approval in
advance by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 128-46 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-52
113:234
§ 128-52. Illuminated signs.
No outside illuminated signs may be erected or maintained unless a full
description of the same is submitted to the Village Clerk and a permit for
the erection and maintenance thereof is obtained. No neon signs utilizing
exposed neon tubes shall be erected or maintained, and no flashing or
moving neon or electric or similar signs shall be permitted. No spot- or
floodlights for the purpose of illuminating buildings or parking areas will
be permitted, except when allowed as a special exception by the Board of
Trustees upon application therefor, and then only upon the observance of
the following conditions:
A. All area lightings shall be provided by means of controlled light sources,
such as enclosed-type floodlights, refractors or equal, in order to
minimize light shining above the horizontal line measured by the height
of the equipment.
B. Light from luminaries shall be controlled, if necessary, by means of
louvers or lighthoods. No bare bulbs shall be permitted.
§ 128-52 TAXATION § 128-52
113:235

ARTICLE VIII
Parking and Storage of Vehicles, Trailers and Boats.
§ 128-53. Legislative findings.
The Village Board of Trustees finds that the unrestricted outside storage
and parking of vehicles, trailers and boats on public and private property
has an adverse impact on the visual character of the Village and diminishes
the available open space required in the front, rear and side yards. In order
to protect the residents from the adverse impact of such vehicles, the Board
of Trustees determines that the parking and storage of such vehicles and
boats shall be regulated as follows.
§ 128-54. Storage of campers and trailers.
§ 128-55. Storage of boats.
A. No camper, camper trailer, mobile home or house trailer shall be stored
outside any place in the Village on public property.
B. No camper, camper trailer, mobile home or house trailer having an
overall length in excess of 20 feet shall be stored or parked outside on
private property. A camper, camper trailer, mobile home or house trailer
20 feet or less in length may be stored or parked outside on private
property for up to 96 consecutive hours only upon obtaining a permit
from the Village Clerk. No such permit shall be issued for the outside
storage or parking of the same camper, camper trailer, mobile home or
house trailer on any private property in the Village until the expiration
of 180 days from the date of expiration of the last permit issued for it.
[Amended 10-19-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994; 3-7-2005 by L.L. No.
5-2005]
C. A camper, camper trailer, mobile home or house trailer having an
overall length of 20 feet or less may be stored for more than 96 hours
outside on private property subject to the following regulations:
(1) Only one such vehicle per family may be stored for more than 96
hours on any lot containing the dwelling unit of such family. The
foregoing notwithstanding, there shall be no restrictions on the
number of such vehicles parked or stored within an enclosed
garage.
(2) Such vehicle shall only be parked or stored in a driveway or garage.
(3) The parking or storage of such vehicle shall be in full compliance
with the off-street parking requirements of § 128-18 of this Code
and shall not preempt the use of space needed for the off-street
parking of other vehicles.
(4) Such vehicle shall not be used for any residential purpose while
parked or stored on public or residential property.
§ 128-53 TAXATION § 128-55
113:237
§ 128-56. Storage of commercial vehicles.
A. No boat shall be stored outside at any place in the Village on public
property, and no boat having an overall length in excess of 25 feet shall
be stored outside at any place in the Village on private property.
[Amended 6-6-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 5-1-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
B. A boat having an overall length of 25 feet or less may be stored on
private property subject to the following regulations:
(1) No more than one such boat per family may be stored on any lot
containing the dwelling unit of such family. The foregoing
notwithstanding, there shall be no restriction on the number of
such boats stored within an enclosed garage.
(2) Storage must be in the rear yard of any property containing a
building.
(3) The storage of such boat shall not preempt the use of space needed
for the off-street parking of other vehicles.
(4) Such boat must belong to the owner or resident of the premises
upon which it is being stored.
C. Private property.
(1) Regardless of size, in no event shall more than one boat be stored
outside at any one time in the Village on any privately owned lot
containing the dwelling unit of a family.
(2) Regardless of size, no boat shall be stored outside on any privately
owned vacant lot in the Village.
A. Parking of commercially registered pickup trucks or vans having a
maximum gross weight of less than 9,000 pounds, provided that either
type of vehicle does not bear any commercial advertising or
identification, is permitted in a residential district.
B. All commercially registered vans, pickup trucks and other vehicles with
a maximum gross weight of 9,000 pounds or more, and pickup trucks
and vans having a maximum gross weight of less than 9,000 pounds
bearing commercial identification or advertising, must be garaged and
are prohibited from being left on the highways, driveways or yards for
other than delivery or service calls. [Amended 8-2-2004 by L.L. No.
21-2004]
C. Vehicles used for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise or
carrying passengers with or without fares are prohibited from being left
on the highways, driveways or yards for other than delivery or service
calls.
§ 128-55 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-57
113:238
§ 128-57. Outside storage container structures.61 [Added 3-1-2004
by L.L. No. 11-2004; amended 4-3-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006; 2-7-2011
by L.L. No. 7-2011]
No outside storage container structures are permitted on any vacant or
improved residential property in the Village of Brightwaters, except that
one outside storage container structure is allowed for up to seven specific
consecutive business days after obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk
and paying the permit fee as may be established from time to time by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 128-57.1. Dumpsters. [Added 12-4-2006 by L.L. No. 12-2006;
amended 4-2-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007; 10-5-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015]
No dumpster is permitted on any vacant or improved residential property
in the Village of Brightwaters, except that one dumpster is allowed on
improved residential property for up to 10 consecutive business days. A
single dumpster may be placed in any part of a yard only after obtaining
a permit from the Village Clerk and paying the permit fee as may be
established from time to time by the Board of Trustees. At no time may the
dumpster be placed on any Village street or its right-of-way.
§ 128-58. Unlicensed, inoperative or discarded vehicles.
§ 128-59. Repairs to vehicles.
No major repairs, whether involving the dismantling of vehicles or not, shall
be made to such vehicles outside of enclosed buildings. Minor repairs, such
as but not limited to engine tuning, changing of spark plugs, changing of oil,
changing of tires and similar procedures, shall be permitted. The provisions
of this section shall not prohibit the repair of vehicles inside an enclosed
garage or other building. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting
the commercial repair of vehicles in residence districts.
§ 128-60. Permit procedure.
A. No property shall be used for the outside storage of unlicensed,
inoperative or discarded vehicles in any district.
B. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the storage of vehicles
inside an enclosed garage or other building located on the property,
subject to the foregoing restrictions of this chapter as to the maximum
number of such vehicles which may be stored.
A. An application for a permit as required under this article shall be made
on a form provided by the Village Clerk, and the Village Clerk shall
61.Editor's Note: Former § 128-57, Storage of vehicles on vacant property, was repealed
3-1-2004 by L.L. No. 10-2004. See now Ch. 119, Vehicles and Traffic, § 119-11.2.
§ 128-57 TAXATION § 128-60
113:239
§ 128-61. Driveways. [Amended 1-18-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995;
10-1-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001; 2-6-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002; 3-1-2004
by L.L. No. 6-2004; 8-1-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005; 1-6-2014 by L.L.
No. 1-2014]
issue the permit if the proposed storage is in conformance with this
chapter. [Amended 8-1-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
B. After a duly scheduled public hearing, the Village Board of Trustees
may issue a permit. Such hearing may be waived by the Village Board of
Trustees if it determines upon the application that the size of the
vehicle or boat to be stored and manner or placement of such vehicle or
boat to be stored will not adversely impact the visual character of the
Village nor significantly diminish the available space required in the
front, rear or side yard.
A. The definition of a "driveway" is that which is used or can be used for
parking vehicles. Its surface is impervious, including but not limited to
asphalt, gravel, stone or other nonvegetative material. It shall lead
perpendicular from a public road directly to a garage. If the property
does not have a garage, the driveway is that which has been established
for the use as the parking area of said dwelling. An allowable driveway
surface shall not exceed 35% of the total front yard area.
B. The front yard area is calculated from the two outermost front corners
of the dwelling (Diagram D-1, the area between lines A-1 on either side
of the property62) and that are perpendicular to the front property line
that borders the right-of-way ("ROW"). ROWs are not included in the
calculation. All proposed plans must be reviewed by the Village
Engineer and Highway Department for feasibility, approval and bond
amounts.
C. Primary driveways shall not exceed 22 feet in width and must have a
minimum side yard setback of four feet to impervious surface consisting
of vegetative matter. If both a primary driveway and a circular driveway
are established, a minimum setback from the impervious surface to the
property lines must be a minimum of four feet and 14 feet of vegetative
area, respectively.
D. Circular driveways shall not be less than 12 feet nor greater than 22
feet of drivable surface.
E. No property shall be allowed to have more than two means of egress to
public roads. Curb cuts at the property line may not be less than 12 feet
and not exceed 22 feet. Driveways at the intersection of the edge of
pavement may not be greater than 27 feet on said public road. Said
driveway may not flare out to more than 2.5 feet on either side between
the property line and edge of pavement known as the ROW. A corner lot
may only have a total of two curb cuts or two means of egress. A curb
62.Editor’s Note: Said diagram is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 128-60 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-61
113:240
§ 128-61.1. Alterations to Village right-of-way prohibited. [Added
3-5-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
No person shall alter, or cause to be altered, any Village right-of-way,
whether to create a parking area or for any other purpose, without the
written consent of the Village.
cut on a corner lot must be a minimum of 25 feet from the corner of the
property line. A primary and/or secondary driveway without a garage
cannot have impervious surface beyond the front or side corners of the
house.
F. In the case where a garage may not exist or if the garage is set back
beyond the outermost corners of the front of the main dwelling, then
the area between the two points of the main dwelling to that of either
where the driveway ends or the two outermost points of the front of the
garage begins shall be calculated as part of the total front lot area as
well as the impervious surface thereof.
G. The center island that is created by a circular driveway and that which
abuts the right-of-way must have a minimum vegetative area of 15% of
the total front yard area and not be less than 60 feet in width. Rights-ofway
are not included in the calculation.
H. In the case of a corner property which is deemed to have two front
yards, the primary front yard area is determined by the legal address or
front door. The other is the second front yard. The proposed or existing
driveway for the second front yard will be determined by the secondary
front yard area and calculated at 25% of the primary front yard and
must be reviewed by the Village Engineer and Highway Department for
feasibility and approval. The primary front yard area will be used to
calculate under this Code for the purposes of defining a driveway.
I. Diagrams D-1 and D-263 are a part hereof and similarly adopted
pursuant to this section.
63.Editor’s Note: Said diagrams are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 128-61 TAXATION § 128-61.1
113:241

ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses; Restorations; Abandonment
§ 128-62. Compliance required; continuance of existing
nonconforming uses.
Except as hereinafter provided, no premises shall be used and no building
shall be used, constructed, reconstructed, extended or structurally altered
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code which apply to the district
involved. However, any nonconforming use existing at the time of passage
of this chapter may be continued. No nonconforming use, once changed to
a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall ever thereafter be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
§ 128-63. Restoration of partially destroyed buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a building destroyed
less than 50% of its value, exclusive of the foundations, by fire, explosion,
act of God or act of the public enemy subsequent to the passage of this
chapter or shall prevent the continuance of the use of such building or part
thereof as such use existed at the time of such destruction of such building
or part thereof, except where it is a use hereinafter prohibited.
§ 128-64. Restoration of walls.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any wall declared unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 128-65. Discontinuance.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for one year, the
right to have, maintain or operate such nonconforming use shall terminate,
and the same may not be reestablished in any manner.
§ 128-66. Abandoned or damaged buildings; declaration of
nuisance.
Any structure that has been abandoned, damaged or found unsuitable for
occupancy may, after written notice to the owner of record and due hearing,
be declared a nuisance by the Board of Trustees, and the owner of said
structure shall be required to repair or remove the same and, in the event
of occupancy, secure a new certificate of occupancy.64
64.Editor's Note: See also the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 128-62 TAXATION § 128-66
113:243

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 128-67. Building permit required; application requirements.
§ 128-68. Building permit amendments. [Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L.
No. 8-2007]
Amendments to any application, plan or specifications may be filed at any
time prior to commencement of the work. Such amendments shall likewise
be subject to the written approval of the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire
Marshal or Plumbing Inspector, as may be appropriate.
§ 128-69. Posting of permit on premises; validity of permit.
§ 128-70. Pending building permit applications.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building for which application for a
permit shall have been filed prior to the passage of this chapter and for
the erection of which a permit may be issued within one month from the
passage of this chapter or which may be under construction at the time
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal, improvements, demolition or
conversion of or installation in any building or structure or a change in
use or occupancy of any building or structure without first obtaining the
appropriate required permits from the Code Enforcement Officer or
Fire Marshal. No permit shall be required for construction work which
is not structural in nature and does not entail installation of plumbing,
electrical, heating or ventilation systems already in use. No permit shall
be required for work of an ordinary replacement or maintenance
nature, except as otherwise stated in this article.
B. All other requirements shall be as outlined on the building permit
application.
C. No permit for any work which includes plumbing shall be issued
without the written approval of the plumbing plans by the Plumbing
Inspector. [Added 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
A. Permits issued shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the
property or premises covered by the permit for as long a period of time
as the permitted activity continues.
B. Such permit shall be valid for the period so stated on said permit and
shall be renewed as required upon application therefor and the
payment of the applicable permit fee.65 Work must begin within one
year of the issuance of the permit, or the permit is canceled.
65.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 128-67 TAXATION § 128-70
113:245
of such passage if the construction of such building shall be diligently
prosecuted within one month of the date of such passage and if the groundstory
framework, including the second tier of beams, shall be completed
within six months of the date of such passage and if such building shall be
completed in its entirety, according to such plans as may have been filed,
within one year from the date of the passage of this chapter.
§ 128-71. Penalties for violations of building permits, these
provisions or Uniform Code.66
"It is the intent of this amendment to this chapter of the Village Code to
prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practices
for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the construction or renovation of
buildings, structures or premises within the Village or the use or occupancy
of buildings, structures or premises and, in so doing, to comply with the
provisions of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of New York and
all appropriate codes, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
"Therefore, the Village hereby adopts the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code in its entirety except where the same is
superseded by the provisions of Village of Brightwaters ordinances, local
laws or rules and regulations enacted pursuant thereto."
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, party, firm or corporation to
construct, alter, repair, move, equip, use or occupy any building or
structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, or any
amendment hereafter made thereto, as well as any regulation or rule
promulgated by the Village Board, or to fail to comply with a notice,
order or directive of the Code Enforcement Officer or to construct,
alter, repair, move or equip any building or structure or part thereof in a
manner not permitted by an approved building permit.
B. Upon determination by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer that a
violation of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or this chapter exists in, on or about any building, structure or
premises, the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall order, in writing,
the remedying of the condition. Such order shall state the specific
provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or this chapter which the particular condition violates and may
grant such time as may be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance before proceedings to compel compliance shall be
instituted. Such order shall be served personally or by sending it by
registered mail to the owner as shown in the records of the Village
Assessor.
66.Editor's Note: The preface of L.L. No. 2-1991, which previously amended this section, read
as follows:
§ 128-70 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-71
113:246
§ 128-72. Stop-work orders.
C. Any person, party, firm or corporation who or which fails to comply with
a written notice or order of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer within
the time fixed therein and any owner, builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents
or any other person taking part or assisting in the construction,
alteration, repair, movement or equipping or use of any building who
shall violate this section or any provision of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code or Village ordinance or local law or
any lawful notice, order, directive, permit or certificate of the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject to such fine as is established
from time to time by the Village Board for each day that the violation
continues. Prior to the imposition of a fine, a violator may be given a
reasonable period of time to correct the violation. If, after such time has
elapsed, the violation still exists, then such fine shall be imposed for
each day the violation continues, commencing from the day of the
original notice.
D. Any action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Brightwaters may
be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provisions
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
Village ordinance or local law or any rule or regulation relating thereto.
Such remedy shall be in addition to any other penalties prescribed by
law.
A. Whenever the Chief Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that work on any building or structure is proceeding without
a building permit issued pursuant to this chapter or is otherwise in
violation of the provisions of any applicable law, code, ordinance or
regulation or is not in conformity with any of the provisions of the
application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a permit was
issued or is being conducted in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he
shall notify either the owner of the property as shown in the records of
the Village Assessor or the owner's agent or the person, party, firm or
corporation performing the work to immediately suspend all work. In
such instance, any and all persons shall immediately suspend all related
activities until the stop-work order has been duly rescinded.
B. Such stop-work order shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the
Chief Code Enforcement Officer and shall state the reasons of the stopwork
order, together with the date of issuance. The stop-work order
shall bear the signature of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer or that
of an assistant and shall be prominently posted at the work site.
C. Penalties for violating a stop-work order.
(1) Any person, party, firm or corporation who or which fails to comply
with a written stop-work order and any owner, builder, architect,
tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or
§ 128-71 TAXATION § 128-72
113:247
§ 128-73. Demolition permit required. [Amended 1-7-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
their agents or any other person taking part or assisting in the
construction, alteration, repair, movement or equipping or use of
any building in violation of a stop-work order shall be subject to
such fine as is established from time to time by the Village Board
for each day that the violation continues.
(2) Any action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Brightwaters
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to
compel compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of
such stop-work order. Such remedy shall be in addition to any other
penalties prescribed by law.
A. It shall be unlawful for any entity or individual to raze, remove or
demolish or to allow the removal or demolition of a building or
structure on behalf of the property owner without first obtaining a
permit or a copy of the permit issued by the Building Department. A
permit shall be issued only upon the satisfaction of all requirements as
imposed by the Building Department and upon payment of the required
fee. A renovation affecting more than 75% of a structure shall be
classified as a "substantial construction" or a "new structure" and will
require the issuance of a demolition permit. This permit shall be
displayed on site at all times during the demolition. A demolition permit
is valid for four months. An application to renew a demolition permit
shall be made prior to expiration of the existing permit. [Amended
10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
B. Any person found to have violated § 128-73 shall be guilty of a violation,
which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; each day's
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
C. The following must be submitted and accepted by the Village of
Brightwaters Highway Department prior to the issuance of a demolition
permit:
(1) A separate application for a demolition permit must be submitted
for each building to be demolished. If more than one building or
structure is to be demolished on the same premises, the separate
demolition and plumbing permits secured for each such building or
structure must satisfy all of the requirements required by such
permits.
(2) Application must be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of
either, or by the architect, engineer, builder, excavator or
demolition company employed in connection with the proposed
work. Where such application is made by a person other than the
owner, it must be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the
§ 128-72 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-73
113:248
proposed work is authorized by the owner and that the applicant is
authorized to make such application.
(3) A certificate of workers' compensation insurance, and of
contractor's liability insurance naming the Village of Brightwaters
as an additional insured thereon, and identifying the subject site.
(4) A recent tax bill for the subject property.
(5) Three updated surveys showing subject property prior to
demolition, with the building to be demolished shaded thereon and
all utilities and underground structures marked thereon.
(6) An affidavit must be submitted by a certified and licensed asbestos
handler, including the license number thereof, to verify the absence
or presence of asbestos. In cases where asbestos or other
hazardous materials are found to exist, the demolition permit may
not be issued until the asbestos or other hazardous materials have
been removed and lawfully disposed of and a certification thereof
by a licensed asbestos removal firm has been filed with the Village
of Brightwaters Building Department.
(7) A letter from the Long Island Power Authority and National Grid, or
its successors, indicating that all gas and electric services to the
building or structure to be demolished have been disconnected or
have not been installed.
(8) A letter from either a private water company or the Suffolk County
Water Authority indicating that the water service in the premises
has been disconnected to the satisfaction of such water provider.
(9) If the building or structure to be demolished is connected to a
municipal sewer, a Suffolk County sewer permit, a road-opening
permit and a Village of Brightwaters Plumbing Permit for the sewer
disconnection must be obtained and submitted with demolition
application.
(10) If the building or structure to be demolished is not connected to a
municipal sewer, a letter from the Suffolk County Health
Department, Suffolk County Department of Public Works, or the
Southwest Sewer District indicating that a sewer spur has never
been installed at the subject site, and an affidavit of the owner
certifying that all cesspools and septic tanks have been emptied
and filled with clean fill.
(11) A voids affidavit certifying that all underground wells, basins,
cellars or other known voids will be filled with clean fill and that
every buried storage tank, including all connections thereto, will be
removed and the void filled with clean sand immediately upon
completion of demolition.
§ 128-73 TAXATION § 128-73
113:249
§ 128-73.1. Dangerous structures. [Added 5-2-2011 by L.L. No.
11-2011]
§ 128-73.2. New structures. [Added 10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
A new structure shall be defined as and henceforth considered: Any building
constructed from a new foundation or a preexisting building that has a
certificate of occupancy of which the floor area is proposed to be increased
or altered by more than 75% of the existing floor area. If an alteration
constitutes greater than 75% of the existing altered structure, a demolition
permit is required.
(12) A Suffolk County Department of Health extermination certification,
which will expire 10 days after issuance.
D. All of the foregoing requirements must be satisfied prior to the issuance
of a demolition permit. All applications for demolition permits must be
reviewed by the Village of Brightwaters Building, Plumbing and
Highway Departments. The person to whom the demolition permit is
issued must notify the Village of Brightwaters Building, Plumbing and
Highway Departments at least 48 hours in advance of the actual
scheduled start time of the demolition. Demolition is restricted to
Mondays through Fridays during normal construction hours.
E. The demolition shall comply with Part 608, Sections 1, 2 and 3, of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Once
demolition has commenced, debris shall be removed and all excavations
filled to within one foot of grade and approved by the Building Inspector
within 10 business days from that commencement date.
F. The demolition permit fees for demolition of one-family dwellings, other
residential structures and commercial structures shall be determined
from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
A. A dangerous structure is one having any or all of the following
conditions:
(1) A structure in which any walls or other structural load-bearing
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line,
passing from any overhead supporting member through the center
of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base; or
(2) A structure in which, exclusive of its foundations, shows 33 1/3% or
more of deterioration of the supporting member or members, or
50% or more damage to, or deterioration of, the nonsupporting,
enclosing or exterior walls or covering.
B. The removal of a dangerous structure requires a demolition permit.
§ 128-73 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-74
113:250
§ 128-74. Work to conform to permit.
All work performed under a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer,
signed by him or his authorized assistant, shall conform to the approved
applications, plans and approved amendments thereof.
§ 128-75. Expiration of permits; renewals.
A permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance. Upon payment
of the proper fees,67 a permit may be renewed, but not more than three
renewals may be granted.
§ 128-76. Revocation of permits or approvals.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized assistant may revoke a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case there
has been any false statement or any misrepresentation as to a material fact
in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based or
upon a check or draft that has been returned for any reason.
§ 128-77. Order to stop or suspend work.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
assistant, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision
or a requirement of this chapter or the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, the continuance of a building operation is
contrary to public welfare, he may order, orally or in writing, all further
work to be stopped, and he may require suspension of the work until the
condition in violation has been remedied.
§ 128-78. Certificate of occupancy required.
A. No land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure
hereafter erected, enlarged, extended or altered shall be so occupied or
used, in whole or in part, until a certificate of occupancy, certifying that
such building conforms to the approved plans and the requirements of
this chapter and stating the purposes for which the building or
structure may be used in its several parts and any special stipulations,
shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and signed by
him or his authorized assistant. If the occupancy or use of a building is
not discontinued during the work or alteration, the occupancy or use of
the building or structure shall not be continued for more than 30 days
after completion of the alteration unless a certificate shall have been
issued.
B. The owner or his agent must submit to the Code Enforcement Officer an
instrument survey map showing the true location of the new building or
additions in reference to all the property lines and existing structures.
67.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is available from the Village Clerk at the Village
offices during regular office hours.
§ 128-74 TAXATION § 128-78
113:251
§ 128-79. Change of occupancy.
No occupancy or use shall be made of land or a building or structure that is
not consistent with the last-issued certificate of occupancy for such building
or structure or use of land unless a permit is secured. In case of an existing
building or structure, no change of occupancy that would be under some
special provision of this chapter shall be made unless the Code Enforcement
Officer, upon inspection, finds that such building conforms substantially
to the provisions of this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code with respect to the proposed new occupancy
and use and issues a certificate of occupancy.
§ 128-80. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
Upon request, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a building or structure or part thereof before
the entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided
that such portion or portions as have been completed may be occupied
safely without endangering life or public welfare. A temporary certificate of
occupancy shall remain effective for a period not exceeding 30 days from
the date of issuance. For good cause, the Code Enforcement Officer may
allow a maximum of two extensions for periods not exceeding 30 days each.
§ 128-81. Certificates of compliance.
The Code Enforcement Officer may waive this requirement for minor
additions.
A. Certificates of compliance shall be used to indicate conformance to this
chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code for installations which require inspection but would not be issued
a certificate of occupancy. Such installations include but are not limited
to solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, plumbing installations, other
equipment installation and removal of underground tanks and firesafety
inspections.
B. Certificates of compliance shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer or Fire Marshal only after an inspection which shows that the
installation is in conformance with this chapter and the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and the written approval of
the Plumbing Inspector, if applicable. [Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No.
9-2007]
C. Certificates of compliance may be revoked when there has been
substantial and unauthorized change in conditions which renders or
may render the installation in nonconformance with this chapter and
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 128-78 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-82
113:252
§ 128-82. Imposition of conditions or restrictive covenants.
An application to the Village Board of Trustees or the Zoning Board of
Appeals may result in the imposition of conditions or restrictive covenants
by deed or stipulation, and the owner or tenant shall perform the obligations
created thereby. The conditions or restrictions so imposed shall be a
continuing obligation requiring that compliance therewith be continued
during the duration of the use of the building or structure pursuant to such
application. The failure to comply with any and all covenants, conditions or
restrictions so imposed shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, subject
to the penalties provided herein.
§ 128-83. Records and reports.
§ 128-84. Intent; conflict of provisions with Uniform Code.
It is the intention of this chapter to effectuate full compliance in the
administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as enacted pursuant to Article 18 of the New
York State Executive Law and the codes, rules and regulations thereunder
enacted. In any event where any Village ordinance or local law is deemed
or found to prescribe standards less than the minimum provided for in such
state enactment, it shall be deemed, for that purpose only, that the same
is amended so that the provisions thereof shall be the minimum standards
provided by said New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
§ 128-85. Enforcement agency.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Trustees.
§ 128-86. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-1-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 6-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999; 11-6-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation
has been committed or shall exist and the occupant lessee or tenant of an
entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed
or shall exist and the owner, general agent or contractor, occupant, lessee
or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violation
A. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official
records of all transactions and activities conducted by him and code
enforcement officers serving under him, including all applications
received, plans approved, permits and certificates issued, fees charged
and collected, inspection reports, all notices and orders issued and all
certificates of occupancy issued. All such reports shall be public
information open to public inspection during normal business hours.
B. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Board a written report of all business conducted.
§ 128-82 TAXATION § 128-86
113:253
has been committed or shall exist and the general agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in or assists in
such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any
such violation shall exist shall, for each and every violation, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
six months, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for a conviction of
a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
or both. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the first offense by any person who
violates § 128-6A by using, or allowing to be used, a residential dwelling for
more than a one-family occupancy, or § 128-6E by occupying, or allowing
to be occupied, an accessory building for residence purposes, shall be
a violation, as defined by the Penal Law of the State of New York and
subject to a mandatory fine of $1,500 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both. The second and any further similar offense
of either § 128-6A or 128-6E by the same person shall be an unclassified
misdemeanor, as defined by the Penal Law of the State of New York, and
subject to a mandatory fine of $3,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. Each week's continued violation shall constitute
a separate additional violation. Penalties for such violation shall be collected
and violations shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law or
ordinance effective in the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 128-86.1. Presumption of illegal occupancy. [Added 1-3-2006 by
L.L. No. 3-2006]
In all civil and criminal prosecutions brought for the enforcement of this
chapter in respect to nonpermitted occupancy of a dwelling, the following
provisions shall apply:
A. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any parcel containing
more than one gas meter, or more than one electric meter, or more than
one water meter, anywhere on the parcel, is being used as the residence
of two or more families, unless a legal nonconforming use for a two-ormore-
family use has been granted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 128-90C and/or a home occupation use has been granted by the Board
of Trustees pursuant to § 128-6B and the additional meter services only
the home occupation space.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a dwelling, required by
this chapter to be occupied by only a single family, which maintains any
entrance(s) thereto which has not been set forth on any plans approved
by and on file with the Building Department is being used as the
residence of two or more families, except that this provision shall not
apply in the case of any entrance that was constructed prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 128-86 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-86.2
113:254
§ 128-86.2. Advertising of illegal occupancy or use prohibited.
[Added 1-2-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
No owner of any premises, or any licensed real estate agent, broker or
salesperson on behalf of the owner of any premises, shall knowingly
represent to any potential purchaser, tenant or the general public, either by
use of the media or in person, that the premises being offered for sale or
rent includes any occupancy or use prohibited by this chapter. A violation
of this section is punishable under § 128-86 of this chapter, and each media
publication or oral representation shall be a separate violation. A conviction
under this section of any person or entity holding a real estate broker, agent
or salesperson license issued by the Secretary of State of the State of New
York shall be filed with the Secretary of State.
§ 128-86.2 TAXATION § 128-86.2
113:255

ARTICLE XI
Board of Appeals
§ 128-87. Board established; membership; terms of office.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established. Such Board shall consist of five
members, to be appointed by the Village Trustees and to serve without pay.
Initial appointments shall be made for one-, two-, three-, four-, and fiveyear
terms or for the unexpired portion of the term of any member who
may retire. At the expiration of each original appointment, the succeeding
members shall be appointed for five-year terms.
§ 128-88. Meetings; voting; minutes.
All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be public. A quorum shall consist
of three members. The concurrent vote of three members shall be necessary
for any decision. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
§ 128-89. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Appeals shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary to interpret and carry into effect the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 128-90. Powers.
A. The Board of Appeals shall have no power to amend this chapter or the
Building Zone Map,68 but where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter, such Board, after due notice and public hearing, may
prescribe, in a specific case, a variation in the application of any such
provision, in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter, so that the public health, safety and welfare may be conserved.
The Board of Appeals shall have general power of review of any
decision rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to permit the change of a
nonconforming use to another no more harmful or objectionable
nonconforming use under limitations hereinbefore recited.
C. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to establish a legal
nonconforming use and to establish its own requirements for
application and proof therefor. [Added 11-1-1993 by L.L. No.
5-1993]
68.Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where it
is available for inspection during regular office hours.
§ 128-87 TAXATION § 128-91
113:257
§ 128-91. Building Zone Map application to improperly mapped
streets.
Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout
as shown on the Building Zone Map, the designation shown on the map shall
be applied to the improperly mapped street on the ground by the Board of
Appeals, after due notice and public hearing, in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the chapter and map for the particular section in
question.
§ 128-91 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-91
113:258
ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 128-92. Power of Board of Trustees.
The Village Board of Trustees may from time to time, on its own motion or
on petition, after notice and public hearing, amend, supplement or change
the regulations and districts herein established.
§ 128-93. Petition by landowners.
Whenever the owners of 2/3 or more of the area of the land in any district
or part thereof shall present a petition duly signed and acknowledged to the
Village Trustees requesting an amendment, supplement, change or repeal
of the regulations herein prescribed for such district or such part thereof or
for any adjoining district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Village
Trustees to vote upon said petition within 90 days after the filing of the
same by the petitioners with the Village Clerk.
§ 128-94. Amendments protested by landowners.
In case, however, of a protest against such change signed by the owners of
20% or more of the area of the land included in such proposed change or by
the owners of 20% or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100
feet therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the land directly opposite
thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land,
such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of
all the members of the Board of Trustees. The provisions of the previous
sections relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to
all changes or amendments.
§ 128-95. Effect of district boundary changes on nonconforming
uses.
If any area is hereafter transferred from one district to another district by
a change in district boundaries as herein provided, the provisions of this
chapter with regard to nonconforming buildings or premises existing in
such transferred area at the time of passage of this chapter shall apply to
nonconforming buildings or premises existing in such transferred area at
the time of passage of such amendment.
§ 128-96. Subdivision of real property. [Added 5-22-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994; amended 10-1-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001; 2-6-2002 by L.L. No.
2-2002; 12-3-2007 by L.L. No. 12-2007; 11-7-2011 by L.L. No.
14-2011]
No parcel of real property in the Village of Brightwaters may be subdivided
into two or more separate parcels without permission of the Board of
Trustees. Every application for a proposed subdivision shall first be
submitted to the Planning Board of the Village of Brightwaters on an
application form to be promulgated thereby. The Planning Board, upon such
§ 128-92 TAXATION § 128-96
113:259
application, may schedule and hold a public hearing at which the public
may be heard. Such hearing, if so scheduled by the Planning Board, shall
be held within 62 days of the date of submission of a completed and proper
application for subdivision. Notice of said public hearing shall be published
in the official newspaper of the Village of Brightwaters at least once and no
sooner than five days before the date of the public hearing, and such further
notice, if directed by the Planning Board, shall also be given. Within 45 days
of the completion of the hearing or, if no public hearing was scheduled by
the Planning Board, within 45 days of the submission of a complete and
proper application for the subdivision, the Planning Board shall make such
recommendation, first to the Board of Appeals if any variance is required,
and to the Board of Trustees on the application as it sees fit. At the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees following receipt of
the recommendation of the Planning Board, the Board of Trustees shall
take such action on the application as it sees fit. Nothing herein contained
shall in any way affect the exclusive jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals
of the Village of Brightwaters to approve any proposed subdivision which,
if granted, would violate any zoning provision of this Code. No subdivision
requiring Board of Appeals approval shall be submitted to the Board of
Appeals until and unless it has been reviewed by the Planning Board. No
lot may be subdivided unless all lots created thereby will have the required
minimum lot width on the same named street on the Building Zone Map.69
No subdivision may be approved unless it complies with the stormwater
standards set forth in Article XIV of this chapter, if applicable.
69.Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where it
is available for inspection during regular office hours.
§ 128-96 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-96
113:260
ARTICLE XIII
Planning Board
[Added 10-19-1994 by L.L. No. 9-1994]
§ 128-97. Board established; membership; terms of office.
[Amended 8-4-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
A Planning Board is hereby established. Such Board shall be increased
from five to seven members to be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve
without pay. The Mayor shall appoint one of the members as a Chairperson.
Initial appointments shall be for terms expiring at the end of the next five
successive official Village years, the first of which shall be the official Village
year in which this article is enacted. Thereafter, at the end of each initial
term, the appointment for each term shall be for five years.
§ 128-98. Meetings; voting; minutes.
All meetings of the Planning Board shall be public. A quorum shall consist of
three members. The concurrent vote of three members shall be necessary
for any decision. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
§ 128-99. Rules and regulations.
The Planning Board shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary to interpret and carry into effect the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 128-100. Powers. [Amended 12-3-2007 by L.L. No. 13-2007;
1-3-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011; 9-2-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
The Planning Board shall investigate and review such matters as are
referred to it by the Mayor or Board of Trustees, shall hold public hearings
when and as required by law and in other matters as it sees fit and shall
report to the Mayor and Board of Trustees thereon, including any and all
recommendations. No subdivision of any parcel of land in the Village shall
be approved unless the application therefor is referred by the Building
Inspector, following Board of Appeals approval if necessary, to the Planning
Board for its review. Following Planning Board review of each subdivision
application and its recommendations to the Board of Trustees thereon, the
subdivision must be approved by the Board of Trustees before it is to be
effective. Additionally, every site plan submitted to the Building Inspector,
pursuant to an application for new construction or renovation construction
on any parcel in a Business Zone, must be submitted to the Planning Board
for review and recommendations prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance. In any matter where the Board of
Trustees has determined that the recommendations of the Planning Board
shall be requirements for the granting of any final approval, permit or
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance, no such approval,
permit or certificate shall be issued until those requirements have been met.
Planning Board review of subdivisions and site plans shall include but not be
§ 128-97 TAXATION § 128-100
113:261
limited to all parking, drainage, curb/sidewalk and shrubbery requirements
and conformance with the stormwater standards set forth in Article XIV of
this chapter, if applicable.
§ 128-100 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-100
113:262
ARTICLE XIV
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
[Added 12-3-2007 by L.L. No. 11-2007]
§ 128-101. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 128-102. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within the Village and to address
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the Village;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety;
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 128-101 TAXATION § 128-102
113:263
the findings of fact set forth in § 128-101 of this article. This article seeks to
meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 128-103. Applicability.
§ 128-104. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this article:
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This article shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in this article.
B. The Village shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer who
shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and
may accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
C. All land development activities subject to review and/or approval by any
Board of the Village shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this article.
§ 128-102 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-104
113:264
§ 128-105. Definitions.
The terms used in this article or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this article shall have the meaning as set forth in this section.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Board of Trustees on or before the effective date of this article.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this article.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or holes.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 128-104 TAXATION § 128-105
113:265
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, that serves as
the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g. building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
§ 128-105 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-105
113:266
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Coldwater fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 —
A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Board of Trustees to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable Village Board
and inspect stormwater practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
§ 128-105 TAXATION § 128-105
113:267
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York, and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the State of New York or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste
treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons, which also meet
the criteria of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion
applies only to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally
created in waters of the state (such as disposal area in wetlands) nor
resulted from impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 128-106. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. No application for approval of a land development activity shall be
reviewed until the appropriate Board has received a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the
specifications in this article. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s).
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
§ 128-105 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-106
113:268
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP.
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
(6) Description of the construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill-prevention and response.
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project. from initial land clearing and
grubbing to project closeout.
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures.
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s).
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
B. Land development activities as defined in this article and meeting
Condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity and water
quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set
forth below, as applicable:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
§ 128-106 TAXATION § 128-106
113:269
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the course of
the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties.
C. SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(1) All information required by this section, as set forth above.
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms.
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevdopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(7) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(8) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in
effect with transfer of title to the property.
(9) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with § 128-108 below.
(10) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements of this article.
§ 128-106 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-106
113:270
§ 128-107. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
D. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been or will be acquired for the land development activity
prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
E. Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify
under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards." The certification must include the
name and title of the person providing the signature, address and
telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other
identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is
made. The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP
for the land development activity.
F. A copy of the SWPP shall be retained at the site of the land development
activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction
activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
article:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current Version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual");
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the Erosion Control Manual).
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in subparagraph 1 of Section 128-107 and the SWPPP shall be
prepared by a licensed professional.
§ 128-106 TAXATION § 128-107
113:271
§ 128-108. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction. The applicant or
developer of the land development activity or their representative shall
at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the
conditions of this article. Sediment shall be removed from sediment
traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been
reduced by 50%. For land development activities as defined in
§ 128-105 of this chapter and meeting Condition A, B or C as set forth in
§ 128-106 of this chapter, the applicant shall have a qualified
professional conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness of
all erosion and sediment control practices every seven days and within
24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inches of precipitation or
more. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintenance easements. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has
a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk of the County of Suffolk after
approval by the Village Attorney.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 128-107(c) of this chapter.
§ 128-107 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108
113:272
§ 128-108.1. Illicit discharges, activities and connections to
separate storm sewer system prohibited. [Added 7-7-2008 by L.L.
No. 3-2008]
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding
on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the County
Clerk of the County of Suffolk as a deed restriction on the property prior
to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent
with the terms and conditions of Schedule B of this article, entitled
"Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."70 The
Village, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management
facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article
and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by
easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Purpose/intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Brightwaters
through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This section establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to
comply with requirements of the SPDES general permit for municipal
separate storm sewer system. The objectives of this section are:
(1) To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for
stormwater discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as
amended or revised;
(2) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process, or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
(3) To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
(4) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this section; and
(5) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the
improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet
waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning
products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other
pollutants into the MS4.
B. Definitions. Whenever used in this section, unless a different meaning is
stated in a definition applicable to only a portion of this section, the
following terms will have meanings set forth below:
70.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 128-108 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:273
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
waters, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under
the SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such
activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional
engineer or licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
MS4, including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater
discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in Subsection F of this
section.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge,
including treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and
washwater, to enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted,
or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
(1)
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
(2)
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108.1
113:274
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one
or more parcels of land or residential household, or a private,
commercial or institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid
wastes for discharge into the groundwaters of New York State, except
where a permit for such a facility is required under the applicable
provisions of Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains):
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Brightwaters.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial,
municipal, agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water, which
may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the
waters of the state in contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land,
whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and
parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
(1) Owned or operated by the Village of Brightwaters;
(2) Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
(3) Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
(4)
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition
that applies where a municipality has been notified that the
discharge of stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may
have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute
to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under
this condition the municipality must take all necessary actions to
(1)
§ 128-108.1 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:275
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village
of Brightwaters to enforce this section. The SMO may also be
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable
municipal board and inspect stormwater management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which
beneficial uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and
industrial use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by
the Department as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act.
Section 303(d)-listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall
short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation
of water quality standards.
303(d)-listed waters: the condition in the municipality's MS4
permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d)-listed
water. Under this condition the stormwater management program
must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the
303(d)-listed water.
(2)
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements
for control of stormwater discharges has been approved by the EPA
for a water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If
the discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater
allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was
required to modify its stormwater management program to ensure
that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is
achieved.
(3)
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a
TMDL is approved in the future by the EPA for any water body or
watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the
municipality must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not
meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must,
within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(4)
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108.1
113:276
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant
to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses
of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
C. Applicability. This section shall apply to all water entering the MS4
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
D. Responsibility for administration. The Stormwater Management
Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this section. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in writing by the
SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
E. Severability. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
section or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
other provisions or application of this section.
F. Discharge prohibitions.
(1) Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than
stormwater except as provided in Subsection F(1)(a) below. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the MS4 is prohibited, except as described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this section, unless the Department
or the municipality has determined them to be substantial
contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains, crawl
space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning condensate,
irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential car
washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street
washwater, water from fire-fighting activities, and any other
water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate
plan for reducing pollutants.
(b) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm, provided that such approval
shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that
§ 128-108.1 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:277
such discharges may be permitted for a specified time period
and under such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate
to protect such life and property while reasonably maintaining
the purpose and intent of this section.
(c) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws
is an allowable discharge but requires a verbal notification to
the SMO prior to the time of the test.
(d) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted
under an SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the Department, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
that written approval has been granted for any discharge to
the MS4.
(2) Prohibition of illicit connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of
illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable
or prevailing at the time of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's
MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
G. Prohibition against failing individual sewage treatment systems. No
persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in
areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has any one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The backup of sewage into a structure.
(2) Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground
surface.
(3) A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer
system.
(4) Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
(5) Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage
treatment system that could lead to any of the other failure
conditions as noted in this section.
(6) Contamination of off-site groundwater.
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108.1
113:278
H. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
(1) Activities that are subject to the requirement of this section are
those types of activities that:
(a) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4
SPDES permit.
(b) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the
special conditions as defined in Subsection B of this section.
(2) Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems
as defined in Subsection G, improper management of pet waste or
any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the
municipality's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
(3) Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities
that cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4
SPDES permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable
actions to correct such activities such that he or she no longer
causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.
I. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
use of best management practices.
(1) Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in Subsection B or activities contaminating
stormwater as defined in Subsection H, the municipality may
require implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to
control those illicit discharges and activities.
(a) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other waste into the MS4 through the use of structural or
nonstructural BMPs.
(b) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or
may be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in
Subsection B may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to
reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(c) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated
with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
J. Suspension of access to MS4; illicit discharges in emergency situations.
(1) The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
§ 128-108.1 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:279
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such
suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the
reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
(2) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any persons
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this section
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator
in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the
reasons therefor. The violator may petition the SMO for a
reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the SMO if
he/she finds that the illicit discharge has ceased and the discharger
has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access may be denied if
the SMO determines in writing that the illicit discharge has not
ceased or is likely to recur. A person commits an offense if the
person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this subsection, without the prior approval of the SMO.
K. Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person subject to an
industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge permit
shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance
with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
L. Access and monitoring of discharges.
(1) Applicability. This subsection applies to all facilities that the SMO
must inspect to enforce any provision of this section or whenever
the authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition
which constitutes a violation of this section.
(2) Access to facilities.
(a) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to this regulation under this section as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and the copying of records as may be required to
implement this section.
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108.1
113:280
(c) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this section such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of
the facility's stormwater discharge.
(d) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject
to this section to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this section. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(e) Unreasonable delay in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this section is a violation of this section. A
person who is the operator of a facility subject to this section
commits an offense if the person denies the municipality
reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting
any activity authorized or required by this section.
(f) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this section or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this section or any order
issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
M. Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the municipality in
person or by telephone or by facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the municipality within three
business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
N. Enforcement.
§ 128-108.1 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:281
(1) Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this section, he/she may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine;
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which
such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said
notice shall further advise that should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work
will be done by a designated governmental agency or a
contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
(2) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by the fines and
imprisonments contained in § 128-86 of this chapter. However, for
the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this section shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
O. Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation
may appeal the determination of the SMO to the Village of Brightwaters
Board of Trustees within 15 days of its issuance, which Board shall hear
the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal and, within five
days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of the Village
Clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the discharger.
P. Corrective measures after appeal.
(1) If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirement
set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal,
within five business days of the decision of the municipal authority
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-108.1
113:282
upholding the decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request
the owner's permission for access to the subject private property
to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property.
(2) If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek
a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to
enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has
occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the
SMO may seek a court order to take any and all measures
reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures
shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger.
Q. Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
section, the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create
further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
R. Alternative remedies.
(1) Where a person has violated a provision of this section, he/she may
be eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney and concurrence of the
Village's Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(a) The violation was unintentional.
(b) The violator has no history of previous violations of this
section.
(c) Environmental damage was minimal.
(d) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
(e) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
(2) Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(a) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(b) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(c) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
S. Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided, if any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to
public health, safety, and welfare and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, it may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
§ 128-108.1 TAXATION § 128-108.1
113:283
§ 128-109. Administration; enforcement.71 [Added 5-5-2008 by L.L.
No. 2-2008]
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
T. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized
enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The Village of Brightwaters Stormwater Management Officer
may require such inspections as are necessary to determine
compliance with this article and may either approve that
portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein
the work fails to comply with requirements of this article and
the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the
Village enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the
following, as required by the Stormwater Management Officer:
[1] Start of construction.
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
[3] Completion of site clearing.
[4] Completion of rough grading.
[5] Completion of final grading.
[6] Close of the construction season.
[7] Completion of final landscaping.
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the
required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections. The Village's
Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All
71.Editor's Note: Former § 128-109, Severability; when effective, was renumbered as
§ 128-110 5-5-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008.
§ 128-108.1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-109
113:284
applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for
all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a
professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based on complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries
of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges; surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The Village's Stormwater Management
Officer may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject
to this article as are necessary to determine compliance with this
article.
(5) Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when any
new connection is made between private property and the public
stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village of
Brightwaters the right to enter the property at reasonable times
and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as
specified in Subsection A(3).
B. Performance guarantee.
(1) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of
Brightwaters in its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan, the Village may require the applicant or developer to provide,
prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety
institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project
and names the Village of Brightwaters as the beneficiary. The
security shall be in an amount to be determined by the Village
based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual
§ 128-109 TAXATION § 128-109
113:285
construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee
shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by
the Village of Brightwaters, provided that such period shall not be
less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facilities have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found
to be acceptable to the Village of Brightwaters. Per-annum interest
on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the
surety is released from liability.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to
construction, may be required to provide the Village of
Brightwaters with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities
are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to
properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of Brightwaters
may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation
and maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Village of Brightwaters may require entities
subject to this article to maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this article.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Village of Brightwaters determines
that a land development activity is not being carried out in
accordance with the requirements of this article, it may issue a
written notice of violation to the landowner, developer or applicant.
The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant.
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
land development activity into compliance with this article and
a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
§ 128-109 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-109
113:286
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Village of Brightwaters may issue a stopwork
order for violations of this article. Persons receiving a stopwork
order shall be required to halt all land development activities,
except those activities that address the violation leading to the
stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
Village of Brightwaters confirms that the land development activity
is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily
addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner
may result in civil, criminal or monetary penalties in accordance
with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article, may be restrained by injunction
or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both, upon conviction for a first offense; upon conviction
for a second offense, both of which were committed within a period
of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than
$700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the
purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors,
and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
article the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of
Brightwaters may take necessary corrective action, the cost of
which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
§ 128-109 TAXATION § 128-109
113:287
§ 128-110. Severability; when effective.
If any provision of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of this article, and this article shall take effect upon filing with
Office of the Secretary of State.
D. Fees for services. The Village of Brightwaters may require any person
undertaking land development activities regulated by this article to pay
reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections,
or SMP maintenance performed by the Village of Brightwaters or
performed by a third party for the Village of Brightwaters.
§ 128-109 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § 128-110
113:288
ARTICLE XV
Exterior Lighting Standards
[Added 2-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 128-111. Standards for lighting in business districts.72
A. Every new or replaced lighting fixture on any parcel in any business
district or on any parcel owned by the Village of Brightwaters, whether
attached to a structure, freestanding, or affixed to a utility pole, shall be
directed downward with a zero-degree horizontal cutoff to the
illumination. No reflectors shall be mounted within 20 feet of the fixture
to redirect the light emanating from the fixture. Replacement of a bulb
within an existing fixture is not a replacement of a fixture and thus not
governed by the above standards.
B. The above standards do not apply to:
(1) Illumination of any United States flag pursuant to the U.S. Flag
Code (4 U.S.C.) or pursuant to any U.S. presidential order;
(2) Temporarily installed decorative lighting no greater than 1,000
cumulative wattage per parcel between November 15 of any year
and January 7 of its immediately succeeding year; and
(3) Internal lighting of translucent signs for which a Village permit is in
effect, but external lighting of opaque signs is not exempt and must
comply.
72.Editor’s Note: See also Art. V, Business Districts.
§ 128-111 TAXATION § 128-111
113:289
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 2-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2005 2-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2005 2-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
4-2005 2-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
5-2005 3-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2005 5-2-2005 Removal of trees along
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 90, Art. II
7-2005 6-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
8-2005 8-1-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
9-2005 8-1-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2006 1-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2006 1-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2006 1-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
4-2006 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
5-2006 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2006 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
7-2006 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
8-2006 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
9-2006 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
10-2006 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
11-2006 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
12-2006 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2007 1-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2007 3-5-2007 Waters and waterways
amendment
Ch. 124
3-2007 3-5-2007 Waters and waterways
amendment
Ch. 124
4-2007 4-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
§ 128-111 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § DL-1
113:290
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2007 9-4-2007 Officers and employees:
code enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
6-2007 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
7-2007 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
8-2007 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
9-2007 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
10-2007 11-5-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
11-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
12-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
13-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2008 5-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2008 5-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2008 7-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
4-2008 8-4-2008 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment
Ch. 58
5-2008 8-4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2009 1-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2009 6-1-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
3-2009 6-1-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
4-2009 6-1-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
5-2009 6-1-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
6-2009 6-1-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
7-2009 11-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
1-2010 1-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2010 1-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2010 2-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
4-2010 4-5-2010 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 75
5-2010 6-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2011 1-3-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
113:291
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2011 2-7-2011 Sales of personal property
amendment
Ch. 97
3-2011 2-7-2011 Sales of personal property
amendment
Ch. 97
4-2011 2-7-2011 Sales of personal property
amendment
Ch. 97
5-2011 2-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2011 2-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
7-2011 2-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
8-2011 2-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
9-2011 2-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
10-2011 2-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
11-2011 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
12-2011 7-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
13-2011 9-6-2011 Parks amendment Ch. 84
14-2011 11-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2012 1-3-2012 2012 tax levy limit override NCM
2-2012 2-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2012 3-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
4-2012 3-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
5-2012 3-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2012 6-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
7-2012 6-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
8-2012 6-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
9-2012 7-25-2012 Parks amendment Ch. 84
10-2012 9-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
11-2012 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
12-2012 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
§ DL-1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § DL-1
113:292
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2012 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
1-2013 1-7-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2013 3-4-2013 2013 tax levy limit override NCM
3-2013 8-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
4-2013 9-3-2013 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 11
1-2014 1-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
2-2014 3-3-2014 Property maintenance:
removal of trees along
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 90, Art. II
3-2014 3-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
4-2014 4-7-2014 2014-2015 tax levy limit
override
NCM
5-2014 9-2-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2014 10-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
1-2015 2-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
2-2015 4-6-2015 Outdoor and public
assembly
Ch. 33
3-2015 6-1-2015 Solid waste amendment Ch. 105
4-2015 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
5-2015 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
6-2015 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
7-2015 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
8-2015 Tabled
9-2015 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2016 1-4-2016 Officers and employees:
term limits; consecutive
terms of office
Ch. 19, Art. III
2-2016 3-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
3-2016 4-4-2016 2016 tax levy limit override NCM
4-2016 7-18-2016 Parks amendment Ch. 84, footnote
only
5-2016 9-19-2016 Parks amendment Ch. 84, footnote
only
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
113:293
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2016 10-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
7-2016 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 119
8-2016 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
9-2016 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
10-2016 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
1-2017 3-6-2017 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 61
2-2017 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 128
3-2017 4-3-2017 2017 tax levy limit override NCM
4-2017 9-5-2017 Bamboo Ch. 106
5-2017 Not adopted
6-2017 8-1-2017 Limited permission for
consumption of alcohol on
Walker Beach
Temporary
measure
7-2017 12-4-2017 Noise amendment Ch. 81
1-2018 4-9-2018 2018 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM
2-2018 7-16-2018 Limited permission for
consumption of alcohol on
Walker Beach
Temporary
measure
3-2018 9-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 119
4-2018 9-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 119
5-2018 11-19-2018 Property Maintenance:
Removal of Trees Along
Sidewalks Amendment
Ch. 90, Art. II
6-2018 12-3-2018 Rental Registration Ch. 107
1-2019 1-7-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 128
2-2019 4-1-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 119
3-2019 5-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 119
§ DL-1 BRIGHTWATERS CODE § DL-1
113:294