The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code.
[Adopted 8-18-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Brockport, as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 59, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Village of Brockport," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the Village of Brockport" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or
resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport, and it is
the intention of said Board of Trustees that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
A. Repeal of inconsistent enactments. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected, below, all local
laws and ordinances, or parts of such local laws or ordinances,
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
local law are hereby repealed as of the adoption and filing of this local
law as set forth in § 1-13; provided, however, that such repeal shall only
be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the
Village of Brockport which is not in conflict with the provisions of the
Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific enactments. The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Brockport has determined that the following local laws and/or
ordinances are no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the
following legislation:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(1) Chapter 2, Adoption of Ordinances, of the 1969 Code.
(2) Chapter 19B, Fire Lanes, of the 1969 Code, adopted by L.L. No.
8-1983.
(3) Chapter 19C, Fire Department Elections, of the 1969 Code,
adopted by L.L. No. 1-1986.
(4) Chapter 25, Joint Cable Television Advisory Board, of the 1969
Code, adopted by L.L. No. 3-1985.
(5) Chapter 30, Milk, of the 1969 Code, adopted 2-16-1931.
(6) Chapter 31, Motion Pictures, of the 1969 Code, as amended.
(7) Chapter 50, Traffic Control Board, of the 1969 Code.
(8) Chapter 52, Transient Retail Business, of the 1969 Code.
(9) Chapter 53, Carbon Monoxide Detectors, of the 1969 Code,
adopted by L.L. No. 1-1995.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Brockport prior to the effective
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Brockport or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of
Brockport.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of
Brockport.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Brockport providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Brockport or any portion
thereof.
§ 1-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Brockport and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Brockport by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Village of Brockport, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Brockport appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Brockport or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Village employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Village.
N. Any local law or ordinance adopted subsequent to June 2, 2014.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Brockport" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code
so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Brockport required to be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board of Trustees to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such
changes, local laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Village of Brockport
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of
Brockport to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision
of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a
term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Village of Brockport, no changes in the
§ 1-7 BROCKPORT CODE § 1-11
1:6
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Brockport, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENT GAMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Electrical inspection — See Ch. 17.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
§ 3-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to control the establishment of game rooms
by licensing in order to determine whether premises containing game
rooms comply with all fire, health, sanitary and building codes and laws
and other applicable state and local laws, ordinances and regulations and to
adopt rules and regulations governing the occupancy and use of each game
room.
§ 3-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any mechanical, electric, electronic device used
or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game of skill by the
insertion of a piece of money, coin, token or other article or by paying to
have it activated. This definition does not include:
AMUSEMENT GAME ROOM — A room or place used for and containing
more than four amusement games and meeting the specifications
prescribed in this chapter.
PERSON — One or more individuals, a corporation, partnership,
association, trust, firm, trustee, receiver or assignee or any other legal
entity.
PREMISES — Any room, building or place to which the general public has
access or to which individuals have access with the permission of the person
in control thereof.
A. A jukebox.
B. Bowling lanes.
Any device maintained within a private residence for use of the
occupants thereof or their guests.
C.
D. Any device, the possession or use of which is prohibited by law.
E. Pool tables.
§ 1-13 BROCKPORT CODE § 3-2
1:8
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
§ 3-3. Restriction on number.
No person shall place or permit to be placed upon any premises owned
by him or under his control as manager, proprietor, lessee or otherwise
more than four amusement games, unless he shall have established an
amusement game room in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 3-4. License required.
No person shall operate an amusement game room in the Village of
Brockport unless the person is licensed to do so pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 3-5. Application for license.
A. Each application for a license hereunder shall be filed with the Village
Clerk, in duplicate, and shall specify:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if a
firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers
thereof and their addresses and telephone numbers.
(2) The address of the premises where the game room is to be
operated, together with the character of the business carried on at
such premises if used other than exclusively as an amusement
game room.
(3) The name and address of the registered agent, if any, of the
applicant upon whom service of process is authorized to be made.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if any, of
the applicant, who shall be in charge of the applicant's amusement
game room in the Village of Brockport.
(5) The floor area of the amusement game room and the number of
amusement games which the applicant proposes to place in the
amusement game room.
B. Except as provided in the New York State Correction Law, Article 23-A,
no license shall be issued for an amusement game room if the owner
thereof or the applicant thereof has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of any crime.
C. The application shall contain a certification, under oath, made by the
applicant or a principal officer thereof, if the applicant is other than a
natural person, that the information contained in the application is
complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his/her knowledge and
belief.
D. If the establishment of the amusement game room necessitates
construction, reconstruction, alteration or remodeling of a premises so
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:9
§ 3-6. License fees, expiration and renewal.
§ 3-7. Review of application by Building Inspector; compliance with
other standards.
§ 3-8. Inspection of premises; issuance or denial of license.
The Building Inspector shall review the application and, with the advice
and assistance of such other Village personnel as may be necessary, except
the Village Clerk-Treasurer, inspect the premises to ascertain whether the
premises comply with all applicable fire, housing, building, sanitary,
electrical and plumbing codes, state or local. The inspection and review
shall be completed within 14 working days after date of receipt of the
copy of the application by the Building Inspector or within seven working
days of the final completion of any construction, alteration or remodeling
of a premises authorized by a building permit after, if necessary, site plan
review. Within six working days after completion of the inspection and
review, the Building Inspector shall, by letter to the Village Clerk and a
copy to the applicant, make his recommendations for or against issuing a
permit with his reasons set forth, the denial of such license shall be subject
to review by certiorari.
that a building permit is required therefor, the application shall not be
submitted until such time as the permit is obtained by the applicant.
If a site plan approval is a prerequisite to the issuance of the building
permit, the site plan review shall be completed prior to the submission
of the license application.
A. The annual fee for each proprietor shall be $50 for each amusement
game over four.
B. The license year shall be from June 1 to May 31 of each year, and all
licenses shall expire on the 31st day of May each year.
C. The license shall be payable annually in advance and shall accompany
the application for a license.
D. The license may be renewed by the licensee by payment to the Village
Clerk of the fee in effect at the time of renewal.
E. The annual fee for each proprietor with four or less amusement games
shall be $25.
A. The Village Clerk shall, within three working days of receipt thereof,
forward a copy of the application to the Building Inspector for review
and report.
B. No license shall be granted unless the premises in which the
amusement game room is to be situate meets all requirements of fire,
housing, building, sanitary, electrical and plumbing codes of the Village
and any other applicable Village or state laws, rules and regulations,
ordinances or local laws.
§ 3-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 3-9
1:10
§ 3-9. Display of license; nontransferability.
§ 3-10. Restrictions on use.
§ 3-11. Effect on existing game rooms.
If any person shall have on the premises under his control four amusement
games on the effective date of this chapter, the person shall apply for a
game room license within 30 days after such effective date. The utilization
of the amusement games by such person shall be permissible without a
license pending a final determination by the Building Inspector on the
application in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter.
A. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the amusement
game room.
B. All licenses shall be nonassignable and nontransferable.
A. The license shall not permit any individual to bet or gamble on the
premises in which the amusement game room is situate.
B. The licensee shall, at all times, maintain good order and shall not
permit any disturbance, congestion or loitering within or outside the
premises in which the amusement game room is situate.
C. No game room shall be without sanitary facilities as required by local or
state law or contain any fire, safety or health hazard prohibited by local
or state law.
D. No licensee shall refuse to cooperate fully with the Village Clerk, any
law enforcement officer or agency of the Village Building Inspector.
E. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except upon
premises licensed for on-premises possession or consumption is
prohibited.
F. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall not allow it to
be open or used unless it is under the control and supervision of a
person at least 21 years of age who shall ensure that it is operated in
compliance with these regulations.
G. No cash awards shall be offered or given in any contest, tournament,
league or individual play on any amusement game.
H. Hours of operation:
(1) There shall be no operation before 12:00 noon on Sundays.
(2) There shall be no operation during school hours.
(3) No minors shall be allowed after 9:00 p.m. Sundays through
Thursdays, after 11:00 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:11
§ 3-12. Revocation of license.
§ 3-13. Penalties for offenses.
§ 3-14. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not have application to the possession or operation
of amusement games by nonprofit corporations, associations or groups
unless the amusement games are available for use by the general public.
Additionally, this chapter shall not have application to all premises holding a
valid New York State liquor license where there is on-premises consumption
of alcoholic beverages.
A. Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the Board of
Trustees, Village of Brockport, for the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter. Any material misstated or omitted in the license
application shall constitute grounds for revocation. The revocation shall
occur only after a hearing before the Board of Trustees, Village of
Brockport.
B. The licensee shall be given 10 days' notice of the date of such hearing,
and such notice shall state the grounds therefor. At such hearing, the
licensee may submit pertinent information on his own behalf. The Board
of Trustees, Village of Brockport, shall render its decision in writing
within 10 days of the date of the hearing. A copy thereof shall be served
on the licensee. If the decision is to revoke the license, the licensee
shall forthwith cease the operation of amusement games on the
premises.
A. Violations. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter will be guilty of an offense punishable by a
fine of no less than $100 but not to exceed $250 or imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each week's
continuous violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. The
Board of Trustees, Village of Brockport, shall have such other remedies
as are allowable by law. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
B. Complaints. Any individual may file a complaint. Such complaint shall
be in writing and shall be filed with the Village of Brockport's Police
Department. Such complaint shall immediately be investigated, and a
written report thereon filed with the Board of Trustees, Village of
Brockport, via the Village Clerk, within 30 days. The Board of Trustees,
Village of Brockport, may, by majority vote, order a hearing as provided
in § 3-12 above.
C. Civil action. In addition, the Board of Trustees, Village of Brockport,
may authorize the institution of any appropriate civil action, including
an action for injunction, for the purpose of enforcing this chapter.
§ 3-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 3-15
1:12
§ 3-15. Severability; modifications of fees and regulations.
If any section or provision of this chapter shall at any time be declared
unconstitutional, it is the expressed legislative intent that no other section
or provision hereof be thereby affected. The Board of Trustees, Village of
Brockport, may from time to time, on public notice, modify the fees herein
established. The Board of Trustees, Village of Brockport, may hereafter
adopt rules and regulations to govern the operation and control of
amusement games and the issuance of licenses to provide for the orderly
operation of amusement centers and to encourage the public safety, peace
and tranquility of the neighborhood where the centers are located.
Chapter 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 4-1. Sale in parks prohibited.
The sale, offering for sale or serving in connection with other commodities
sold or offered for sale of beer or other intoxicating beverages in any public
parks in the Village of Brockport is hereby prohibited.
§ 4-2. Penalties for offenses.
§ 4-3. Publication and effective date.
This chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the proceedings of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport, New York, and published
in the Brockport Republic Democrat, the official paper of the Village of
Brockport, New York, on September 23, 1937, and a printed copy thereof
posted conspicuously in at least three public places in said Village, upon
the date of publication thereof in the official paper, and an affidavit of the
publication and posting thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk; and this
chapter shall take effect 11 days after such posting and publication.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or
both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 11-16-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
B. In addition to the penalty above prescribed, it is hereby ordained that
each and every violation of § 4-1 shall constitute disorderly conduct,
and the person violating the same shall be a disorderly person; and
such violation shall constitute disorderly conduct, and such person shall
be a disorderly person and shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
$100 for each and every violation thereof and, in case of default in the
payment of such penalty, the defendant shall be committed to the
Monroe County Penitentiary for a term not exceeding one day for each
dollar of the penalty imposed.
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:13
§ 4-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances conflict with the foregoing
ordinance.
§ 4-5. Drinking in public; penalties for offenses; effective date of
amendment. [Added 9-22-1969; amended 4-18-1983 by L.L. No.
2-1983; 8-6-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984; 10-1-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984;
3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 12-13-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Chapter 5
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45. Zoning — See Ch. 58.
A. Public drinking. No person shall possess nor consume from any open
bottle or container containing liquor, beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages while such person is on any public highway, public street,
public sidewalk, public parking area, playground, public park or in any
vehicle or public place or grounds appurtenant thereto, except those
premises duly licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
on the premises. Such public consumption or possession is detrimental
to the public good.
B. Violations. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to
exceed $250 or both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended
11-16-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
C. Local Law No. 2 of the year 1983 shall be effective upon filing with the
Secretary of the State of New York.
§ 4-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 4-5
1:14
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Swine
[Adopted 5-21-1934]
§ 5-1. Keeping of farm animals prohibited. [Amended 3-16-1998 by
L.L. No. 3-1998]
No person shall keep or permit to be kept farm animals, swine, goats, cows,
horses, sheep or snakes, poisonous or nonpoisonous, on his/her premises
within the limits of the Village of Brockport.
§ 5-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
A violation of this article shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of
no less than $100 but not exceeding $250.
§ 5-3. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:15

ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted 6-5-1961; amended in its entirety 5-3-1993 by L.L. No.
3-1993]
§ 5-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Village of Brockport and to contribute to the public welfare and
good order of its people by enforcing certain regulation and restrictions on
the activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and privileges of the
other citizens in the Village of Brockport.
§ 5-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — An unleashed dog off the property of the owner.
DANGEROUS DOG — In addition to the definitions set forth in § 108,
Subdivision 24, of the Agriculture and Markets Law, a dog shall be
considered a "dangerous dog" and subject to the provisions of § 121,
Subdivision 3 et seq., of the Agriculture and Markets Law1 if such dog,
without justification, attacks a dog or cat and causes physical injury or
death to such dog or cat.[Added 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
DOGS — Both male and female dogs, unless the context requires otherwise.
FARM ANIMAL — An animal, other than a household pet, that is typically
housed outside the primary residential structure.[Added 6-20-2005 by
L.L. No. 2-2005]
LEASHED or RESTRAINED BY A LEASH — The dog is equipped with a
collar or, if the dog weighs over 25 pounds, with a choke collar, to which is
attached a leash not more than eight feet long, both collar and leash to be of
sufficient strength to restrain the dog, which leash shall be held by a person
having the ability to control and restrain the dog by means of the collar and
leash.
OWNER — Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody
or control of a dog. Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the
care, custody and control of the minor's parents and/or the other head of
household where the minor resides.
§ 5-6. Restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful to suffer or permit any dog to attack any person
peaceably conducting himself in any place where such person may
lawfully be.
1. Editor's Note: Section 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law has been renumbered and
amended; effective Jan. 1, 2011, see Agriculture and Markets Law § 123, Subdivision 3 et
seq.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:17
B. It shall be unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept on the premises
occupied by the owner or harborer of any dog any dog which engages in
habitual howling, barking or whining or conducts itself in such a
manner as to unreasonably disturb the comfort and repose of any
reasonable person of normal sensitivities outside the owner's premises.
Specifically, no dog shall be allowed to bark or make other noises for a
period in excess of 10 consecutive minutes. The barking or other noises
may be intermittent and not continuous. [Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L.
No. 2-2005]
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any female dog to permit the dog
off the premises of the owner or leave such dog out of doors and
unconfined while such dog is in heat.
D. It shall be unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept a dog in the habit of
continually chasing or barking at automobiles, bicycles or other moving
vehicles or which, by its running at large, shall cause disturbances or
damages in the neighborhood, impair the safety or disturb the safety
and comfort of any persons.
E. It shall be unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept any dog which kills any
other dog or farm animal without just cause.
F. It shall be unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept any dog which destroys
the property of a neighbor.
G. It shall be unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept any dog which commits
a nuisance in a public street, public building, public park or on any
private property except with the consent of the owner of the property
thereof.
H. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to permit such dog to be at
large in the Village of Brockport, Monroe County, New York, unless
under leash not exceeding eight feet in length, other than when on the
premises of the person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody
and control of such dog or upon the premise of another with the
knowledge, consent and approval of the owner of such premises or
when hunting in the company and under the control of a hunter or
hunters.
I. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to permit the premises,
structures or enclosures in which such dog is kept to be unclean or
unsanitary.
J. It shall be unlawful to own or harbor a dog unless licensed as provided
by Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law. Licenses shall not be
required for dogs under the age of four months which are not at large.
[Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
K. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, possesses or harbors a
dog to suffer, permit or allow such dog to defecate any place, except
upon the property of such person, unless the feces is removed
§ 5-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 5-6
1:18
§ 5-7. Judicial jurisdiction. [Amended 12-15-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
Any Village Justice of the Village of Brockport shall have jurisdiction to
hear all actions and proceedings hereunder and of all prosecutions for the
violation of this article.
§ 5-8. Complaints.
All complaints concerning alleged violations of this article shall be
communicated to the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy Dog
Control Officer. All such complaints shall be investigated, and it shall be
the duty of the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy Dog Control
Officer in the appropriate case to proceed with civil or criminal enforcement
of the article or any provision of law pertaining hereto.
§ 5-9. Appearance tickets.
The Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy Dog Control Officer,
having reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated this article,
shall issue and serve upon such person an appearance ticket for such
violation. The appearance ticket shall be in the form prescribed by the
Village Board by resolution in accordance with provisions of § 124 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and this article. An answer to such
appearance ticket may be made within five days of the violation, by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, in lieu of a personal
appearance on the return date at the time and court specified in the
appearance ticket, in accordance with the provisions of § 124 of the
Agriculture and Market Law and this article.2
§ 5-10. Enforcement; seizure of dogs at large. [Amended
12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
It shall be the duty of the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy
Control Officer to enforce the provisions of this article and to seize all dogs
found at large in violation of the article or which are ordered seized by a
Village Justice.
§ 5-11. Notification and redemption procedures; fees.
immediately in a sanitary manner. [Added 4-17-1995 by L.L. No.
5-1995; 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
L. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or harbor a
dangerous dog. [Added 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
A. For any dog seized pursuant to § 5-10 above, the following notification
and redemption procedures shall be followed:
2. Editor's Note: Section 124 of the Agriculture and Markets Law has been renumbered and
amended; effective Jan. 1, 2011, see § 122 of Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:19
§ 5-12. Failure to redeem.
If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog, and the dog
shall be sold or destroyed by the Town of Sweden Dog Warden. In the case
of sale, the purchaser must pay all accrued charges to the Village Clerk or
the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer and obtain a license for such dog.
The Dog Control Officer who destroys a dog shall immediately dispose of
the carcass and take a written report of such destruction and disposition to
the Village Clerk, who shall keep a record thereof.
§ 5-13. Kennel fees.
The Village Board of Trustees, pursuant to § 118 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law3 and § 5-11 of this article, will from time to time set forth fees
to be charged the owner of a dog seized and kept at the Town of Sweden
kennel, such fees to be paid to the Village Clerk before the dog may be
redeemed.
§ 5-14. Authorization.
The Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer is hereby authorized to pick up
unwanted dogs that are owned by residents who are financially unable to
take proper care of their pets, including the cost of rabies vaccination and
licensing, when such owner requests the Village to dispose of these animals,
in accordance with the following rules:
(1) Unidentified dogs, whether or not licensed, shall be held for a
period of five days from the day seized, during which time the
owner may redeem the dog.
(2) For identified dogs, whether or not licensed, the owner shall be
notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of
the facts of seizure and the redemption procedures. If notification
is made personally, the dog shall be held for seven days after the
day of notice; if notification is made by mail, the dog shall be held
for a period of nine days, during which period the owner may
redeem the dog.
B. In either of the above cases, the owner must produce proof of licensing
and pay seizure and impoundment fees in order to redeem the dog. The
seizure and impoundment fees shall be as set from time to time by the
Village Board of Trustees.
A. The owner must execute a form relinquishing all claim of ownership to
the dog and agreeing to its disposition according to law and absolving
the Village and the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer of any liability.
B. No fee will be charged for the first call, and any number of dogs may be
taken. Any dog or dogs remaining on the premises must be properly
3. Editor's Note: Section 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law has been renumbered and
amended; effective Jan. 1, 2011, see Agriculture and Markets Law § 117.
§ 5-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 5-14
1:20
§ 5-15. Limitation of pickup; discontinuance.
The Village reserves the right to pick up those unwanted dogs as space is
available in the kennel or to discontinue the service by resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees, if necessary.
§ 5-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
Any person who violates or knowingly permits violation of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $75, except that where the person
was found to have violated this article or Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law within the preceding five years, the fine may not be more than
$150; where the person was found to have committed two or more such
violations within the preceding five years, it shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $300 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
Nothing contained in this section is intended to eliminate, reduce, diminish
or replace the provisions set forth in § 121 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law4 with respect to fines, civil penalties or imprisonment with respect to
dangerous dog violations.
§ 5-17. Severability; repealer.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder
of the article shall be deemed valid and effective. Any ordinance or part
thereof in conflict herewith is hereby repealed.
licensed. For second or successive calls, owners will be required to pay
the cost of euthanasia charged to the Village.
4. Editor's Note: Section 121 of the Agriculture and Markets Law has been renumbered and
amended; effective Jan. 1, 2011, see Agriculture and Markets Law § 123.
§ 5-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-17
1:21

ARTICLE III
Cats
[Adopted 9-8-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
§ 5-18. Intent; community cat program. [Amended 4-15-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
The Village of Brockport Board of Trustees recognizes that state law
preempts the Village from regulating cats that are lost, strayed, homeless
and/or abandoned pursuant to New York Agriculture and Markets Law
Chapter 26 regulating said animals. The Board further recognizes that the
Agriculture and Markets Law does encourage municipalities to promote
humane population control programs for said animals. Therefore, the Board
finds and declares that a community cat program is an effective method
to both care for and meet the public's desire to see community cats cared
for in a humane manner. It improves neighborhood tranquility and public
health, while at the same time reducing the number of community cats,
"nuisance" complaints, impound and killing, and wasteful expenditures of
public and private resources.
§ 5-19. Definitions. [Amended 4-15-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — A member of the species Felis catus.
COLONY — A group of one or more community cats.
COMMUNITY CAT — A free-roaming cat.
COMMUNITY CAT CARETAKER — A person who provides care to one
or more community cats. However, community cat caregivers are not the
owner, harborer, controller, or keeper of a community cat.
COMMUNITY CAT PROGRAM — The nonlethal process of humanely
trapping, sterilizing, vaccinating for rabies, ear-tipping, and releasing
community cats to their habitats .
EAR-TIPPING — The removal of the one-fourth-inch tip of a community cat's
left ear, performed while the cat is under anesthesia in compliance with
any applicable federal or state law and under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian.
STERILIZE — To spay or neuter a cat to render it incapable of reproduction.
TRAP, NEUTER, VACCINATE, AND RETURN or TNVR or TNR — A program
in which community cats are humanely trapped, evaluated, vaccinated,
sterilized, and ear tipped by a veterinarian and returned to the trap location
with the intent of humanely controlling or reducing feline population and
reproduction.
VETERINARIAN — A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the
State of New York.
§ 5-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:23
§ 5-20. Implementation of community cat program. [Added
4-15-2019 by L.L. No. 1-20195]
§ 5-21. Restricted acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any cat to
permit or allow such cat in the Village of Brockport to:
A. TNVR of community cats shall be legal in the Village of Brockport and
interested citizens are encouraged to participate in and support TNVR
activities on a voluntary basis. Persons who are actively engaged in
TNVR activities may register with the Village Clerk.
B. All persons who attempt to trap community cats for TNVR in the Village
of Brockport shall be familiar with the guidelines, supported by regional
and national feral and community cat organizations, regarding
appropriate methods of TNVR.
C. An ear-tipped cat received by local shelters shall be returned to the
location where trapped unless veterinary care is required.
D. A trapped, ear-tipped community cat shall be released on site unless
further veterinary care is required, in which case the cat will be
returned once the animal no longer needs care.
E. A community cat caretaker may reclaim a community cat if impounded
at a local shelter or impoundment facility, without fee, if sterilized or for
purposes of placing the cat in a community cat TNR program.
F. Trapping of a community cat is only permitted for purposes of a
community cat program, providing needed veterinary care, adoption,
transfer to a rescue group, or reunification with his/her owner.
G. Socialized cats and all kittens subject to TNVR shall be eligible to be,
but not mandated to be, resocialized and put up for adoption.
H. It shall not be a violation of this section to determine that the best
course of action for a particular cat, or cat colony, is to be left alone.
I. Leash laws, stray laws, licensing laws, and limitations on the number of
cats owned, kept, held, or harbored, and feeding bans shall not apply to
community cat caretakers.
J. All enforcement officers shall use appropriate opportunities to inform
stakeholders about TNVR.
K. The Village of Brockport shall implement and administer this article in
consultation with community cat welfare experts who make themselves
known to the Village Board.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance redesignated former § 5-20, Definitions, as § 5-19.
§ 5-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 5-21
1:24
§ 5-22. Judicial jurisdiction. [Amended 12-15-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
Any Village Justice of the Village of Brockport shall have jurisdiction to
hear all actions and proceedings hereunder and of all prosecutions for the
violation of this article.
§ 5-23. Complaints. [Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
All complaints concerning alleged violations of this article shall be
communicated to the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy Dog
Control Officer. All such complaints shall be investigated, and it shall be
the duty of the Town of Sweden Dog Control Officer or Deputy Dog Control
Officer, in the appropriate case, to proceed with civil or criminal
enforcement of the article or any provision of law pertaining thereto.
§ 5-24. Appearance tickets.
The Animal Control Officer or Deputy Animal Control Officer, having
reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated this article, shall
issue and serve upon such person an appearance ticket for such violation.
The appearance ticket shall be in the form as prescribed by resolution of the
Village Board in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 5-25. (Reserved)6
§ 5-26. Notification and redemption procedures; fees.
A. Be vicious or to spray or to defecate in such a way as to cause
annoyance to any person other than the owner or person harboring
such cat.
B. Cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a nuisance upon
the premises of a person other than the owner or person harboring such
cat.
C. Remain in the Village of Brockport unless vaccinated currently against
feline rabies.
A. For any cat seized pursuant to § 5-25 above, the following notification
and redemption procedure shall be followed:
(1) Unidentified cats shall be held for a period of five days from the day
of seizure, during which time the owner may redeem the cat.
(2) For identified cats, the owner shall be notified personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the facts of the seizure
and the redemption procedure. If notification is made personally,
the cat shall be held for seven days after the day of notice; if
6. Editor's Note: Former § 5-25, Enforcement, seizure of cats at large, was repealed
6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005.
§ 5-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-26
1:25
§ 5-27. Failure to redeem.
If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the cat, and the cat
shall be sold or destroyed by the Village of Brockport Animal Control Officer.
In the case of sale, the purchaser must pay all accrued charges and have
said cat vaccinated against feline rabies, if proof of vaccination does not
already exist. The Animal Control Officer who destroys or has destroyed
a cat shall make written report of such destruction and disposition to the
Village Clerk, who shall keep a record thereof.
§ 5-28. Authorization.
The Village of Brockport Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to pick
up unwanted cats that are owned by residents who are financially unable to
properly care for their cats, including the cost of vaccination against feline
rabies, when such owner requests the Village to dispose of these cats, in
accordance with the following rules:
§ 5-29. Limitation of pickup; discontinuance.
The Village of Brockport reserves the right to pick up those unwanted cats
as space is available and to discontinue the service by resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees if necessary.
§ 5-30. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-20-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
A violation of this article shall be deemed a violation, which shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding
15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 5-31. Severability; repealer.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder
notification is made by mail, the cat shall be held for a period of
nine days, during which period the owner may redeem the cat.
B. In either of the above cases, the owner must produce proof of current
vaccination against feline rabies and pay seizure fees and impoundment
fees in order to redeem the cat. The seizure and impoundment fees
shall be as set, from time to time, by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. The owner of the cat must execute a form relinquishing all claim of
ownership to the cat and agreeing to its disposition according to the law
and absolving the Village of Brockport and the Village of Brockport
Animal Control Officer of any liability.
B. The owner is responsible for paying all costs related to the disposition
of the cat.
§ 5-26 BROCKPORT CODE § 5-31
1:26
of this article shall be deemed valid and effective. Any ordinance or part
thereof in conflict herewith is hereby repealed.
§ 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-31
1:27

ARTICLE IV
Chickens
[Adopted 4-15-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 5-32. Permit requirements.
§ 5-33. General rules and regulations.
Required setback and shelter requirements:
§ 5-34. Nuisance odors and unsanitary conditions prohibited.
No person or persons shall harbor, maintain, or possess chickens of any
description in such a manner as to create offensive odors or unsanitary
conditions.
§ 5-35. Disturbance of peace prohibited.
No person shall keep, harbor, maintain, or possess any chickens in such a
manner as to cause a disturbance of the peace or to in any way interfere
with the quiet use and possession by any person or persons of his or her
property.
§ 5-36. Private use only.
Chickens shall be kept for personal use only.
§ 5-37. Restraint systems and requirements.
A. Upon successful application including payment of the permit fee and
proof of adequate shelter and fencing, a triannual permit will be issued
to allow a maximum of six chicken hens and zero roosters on any lot
occupied by one single-family, detached dwelling.
B. The permit shall be renewed every three years for as long as chickens
are harbored on the property.
C. Permit fees shall be established by the Village Board and published in
the Village Fee Schedule.
A. A structure to shelter the hens shall be located in the rear yard, a
minimum of 10 feet from any lot line and a minimum of 15 feet from any
dwelling. The coop shall not exceed 144 square feet in total floor area
and shall not exceed 12 feet in height from grade.
B. Chickens' quarters shall be constructed of ordinary construction
materials using ordinary construction techniques. Improvised shelters
such as, but not limited to, truck caps, tanks or vessels, truck bodies, et
seq., are specifically prohibited.
C. Chickens' quarters shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be adequately ventilated and protected from weather.
§ 5-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-37
1:29
§ 5-38. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates a provision of this
article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. Fencing/restraint systems shall be installed and maintained to confine
chickens to the rear and/or side yards behind the front setback of the
home.
B. Loose chickens observed or photographed anywhere other than the
rear and/or side yard of the premises shall be considered prima facie
evidence of inadequate restraining systems.
§ 5-37 BROCKPORT CODE § 5-38
1:30
Chapter 5A
ASSESSMENTS
§ 5-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-38
1:31

ARTICLE I
Termination of Status as Assessing Unit
[Adopted 6-19-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 5A-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport is to
implement § 1402(3) of the Real Property Tax Law, providing for the
voluntary termination of the Village's status as an assessing unit, as
provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also
the intent of this article to abolish the position of Assessor (or Board of
Assessors) and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for
the review of the assessments of real property located within the Village of
Brockport.
§ 5A-2. Village to cease as assessing unit.
On or after the effective date of this article, the Village of Brockport shall
cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 5A-3. Assessor's position abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Brockport is hereby abolished.
§ 5A-4. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Brockport is hereby
abolished.
§ 5A-5. Town of Sweden to control for Village purposes.
On or after the effective date of this article, taxes in the Village of Brockport
shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the
Town of Sweden with the taxable status date of such Town controlling for
Village purposes.
§ 5A-6. Copy of article to be filed.
Within five days of the effective date of this article, the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Brockport shall file a copy of such local law with the Clerk and
Assessor (or Board of Assessors) of the Town of Sweden and with the State
Board of Real Property Services.
§ 5A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5A-6
1:33
Chapter 6
BERMS, FENCES, HEDGES AND SCREEN PLANTINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 6-1. Compliance with provisions.
Berms, fences, hedges and screen plantings shall be permitted, subject to
restrictions as provided in this chapter.
§ 6-2. Harmful devices on fences.
§ 6-3. Provisions applicable to residential districts (O and T).
A. In no case shall barbed wire, spikes, chipped glass, electricity or similar
materials or devices be used in conjunction with or as a part of any
fence. The exceptions to this rule are certain types of fences listed in
§ 6-4B.
B. No fence shall be permitted which is expressly designed with the intent
to injure or malign anyone who attempts to climb such a fence. The
exceptions to this rule are certain types of fences listed in § 6-4B.
A. Any fence in a residential district shall have its most pleasant or
decorative side facing the adjacent lot with all posts being in the
applicant's yard, unless such posts or supports are an integral part of
the decorative design of the fence.
B. No fence, hedge or screen plantings shall be erected or maintained over
six feet in height, and they shall not extend beyond any required front
setback line.
C. No solid fence shall be constructed or maintained in a manner which
shall impede or otherwise obstruct access to the rear of the dwelling for
emergency equipment such as firefighting equipment, etc.
D. Open decorative fences, hedges or screen plantings may be permitted
within any required front yard subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit by the Planning Board. In addition to any other
requirements of a conditional use permit, no such permit shall be issued
where:
(1) The fence exceeds a height of three feet.
§ 5A-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 6-3
1:34
§ 6-4. Provisions applicable to nonresidential districts (B and I).
(2) The fence is nearer than three feet to any front lot line or nearer
than three feet to any public sidewalk. [Amended 9-15-1997 by
L.L. No. 1-1997]
(3) The fence is not uniformly constructed.
(4) There is objection to the fence by more than 50% of the adjoining
owners within a radius of 100 feet.
(5) The fence obstructs the traffic vision of pedestrian and/or motor
vehicles.
E. Fences shall be continually maintained, and no fence, hedge or screen
plantings shall be permitted to become unsightly or in a state of
disrepair.
F. Open decorative fences, hedges and screen plantings not exceeding
three feet in height and not extending beyond the side foundation walls
of the house are permitted within 10 feet of the front foundation wall.
G. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting, in any
required front yard, decorative or landscape plantings, such as bushes,
flowers, trees and the like, which are not designed or intended as a
fence.
A. Any fence facing a residential district shall have its most pleasant or
decorative side facing the residential district with all posts and
supports being on the side of the fence opposite the residential area,
unless such posts or supports are an integral part of the decorative
design of the fence. This relationship shall prevail where any more
restrictive district abuts any less restrictive district, the less restrictive
district having the posts and/or supports on its side.
B. Barbed wire or electric fences.
(1) A fence eight feet high with a barbed wire top or an electric shock
fence which would not be detrimental to health, safety or welfare of
any person coming into contact with it may be permitted in the
general commercial and industrial districts, upon issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Board, where it can be
demonstrated that:
(a) The fence is needed to prevent entry to an area which could be
hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of a person or
persons.
(b) The fence is needed to secure an area where materials and/or
equipment is stored.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:35
§ 6-5. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; exceptions.
Chapter 7
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 7, Baseball on Sunday, adopted 4-4-1927, was repealed
11-19-1973.]
Chapter 9
BINGO
§ 9-1. Purpose. [Added 4-15-1963]
The purpose of this chapter is to amend an ordinance adopted by the
Village Board of Brockport, Monroe County, New York, dated April 1, 1958,
authorizing the conduct of bingo in such Village, to change the reference in
such ordinance from Article 14-G of the General Municipal Law to Article
(c) The fence is needed to keep animals other than common
household pets, except in a kennel situation, from leaving the
site.
(d) In the Planning Board's opinion, other reasons are presented
which, in the general community interests or interests of
national safety, justify the need for such a fence.
(2) Where such fences are permitted, the fact that they are either
barbed or electrified shall be clearly indicated on the fences at
intervals of not more than 75 feet.
A. In the event of a violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall
give written notice, by registered or certified mail, of the alleged
violation to the owner or occupant of the property on which the fence is
located to repair or remove said fence and rectify the violation. Said
owner or occupant shall have 30 days from the date of the written
notice to comply with the provisions of these sections regulating fences.
B. There shall be a penalty of a fine of $50 per day after the expiration of
the thirty-day notice. The Building Inspector shall be authorized to
issue an appearance ticket and complaint against the alleged violator to
appear in the Municipal Court for the collection of the fine or to request
the Village Attorney to institute an action in the appropriate court to
have said fence repaired or removed. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998]
C. These fence regulations shall not apply to the erection of an open-wire
fence within a publicly owned park, playground or school premises if
the need for such a fence for such uses as athletic fields is
demonstrated to and approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 6-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 9-1
1:36
14-H of the General Municipal Law, as so renumbered by Chapter 438 of the
Laws of 1962, and to set forth therein the following additional amended and
renumbered restrictions concerning the conduct of the game of bingo by an
authorized organization in such Village, as required by § 479 of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York, as amended by Chapter 438 of the
Laws of 1962:
§ 9-2. Regulations. [Amended 4-15-1963]
§ 9-3. Additional restriction: Sunday bingo prohibited.
In addition to the several restrictions imposed by Article 14-H of the
General Municipal Law, as amended by Chapter 438 of the Laws of the State
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease, or otherwise make
available for conducting bingo, a hall or other premises for any
consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law7 or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted
to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum of $1,000 in any single game of bingo.
[Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
7. Editor's Note: See Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-3
1:37
of New York of 1962, the following additional restriction is hereby imposed
on the conduct of such games in the Village of Brockport:
§ 9-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days after enactment thereof, as provided
by § 497 of the General Municipal Law (after due publication and posting as
provided by the Village Law).
Chapter 10
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODE
[A resolution accepting the applicability for the Village of Brockport
of the State Building Construction Code was adopted by the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport on 6-17-1954. The State
Building Construction Code is available for examination in the office
of the Village Clerk.]
Chapter 11
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 11-1. Building Inspector appointed.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport is hereby authorized to
appoint or employ a Building Inspector.
§ 11-2. Powers and duties.
The Building Inspector shall have all of the powers relating to
administration and enforcement of the State Building Construction Code
set forth in Article 18 of the Executive Law and shall have the power
to administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance8 and any and all other
building regulations applicable to the Village under any other law and
ordinance relating to building regulations now or hereafter applicable to
this Village.
A. No game of chance shall be conducted, under any license issued under
this chapter, on the first day of the week, commonly known and
designated as Sunday.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 9-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 11-3
1:38
§ 11-3. Compensation.
The Building Inspector may be appointed or employed by the Board of
Trustees in conjunction with one or more municipalities. The compensation
of the Building Inspector shall, from time to time, be fixed by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 11-4. (Reserved)9
§ 11-5. Repealer.
The provisions of any other ordinance in this Village inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 11-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective October 1, 1954.
Chapter 12
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 12, Burning, adopted 5-4-1914, as amended, was
repealed 7-19-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004.]
Chapter 13
CODE OF ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of public
officers — See Ch. 37.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 11-4, Application for building permits; fees, was repealed
2-4-1974.
§ 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:39

ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 13-1. Need for standards.
As local government becomes increasingly complex and as our democratic
processes draw citizens from every walk of life, there is increasing need for
standards of ethical conduct as a guide for public officers. These standards
must rest primarily on personal integrity and on community vigilance; law
cannot in itself create moral fiber, nor can law quicken the civic conscience.
In support of these basic standards, it is the purpose of this chapter to
define areas of conflicts of interest in Village transactions. This chapter
has as its purpose the protection of the public from municipal contracts
influenced by avaricious officers, and to protect public officers from
unwarranted assaults on their integrity.
§ 13-2. Purpose of Board of Ethics.
The establishment by this chapter of a Board of Ethics as an arm of Village
government, together with standards of ethical conduct, is intended to
provide honest, efficient government to the citizens of the Village of
Brockport.
§ 13-3. Purpose of Code of Ethics.
The primary purpose of this Code of Ethics is to provide a formula of
conduct which is not only clear but reasonable and which will permit
governmental employees to share the normal benefits of the democratic
society and economy they serve and to attract and hold competent
administrators.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:41

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 13-4. Definitions and usage.
A. Definitions.
AGENCY — Any Village department or division, board, commission,
committee or bureau, including the Village Board or any successor to
the Village Board.
COMPENSATION — Any money, thing of value or financial benefit
conferred for services rendered or to be rendered.
INTEREST — For the purpose of this Code of Ethics, shall be deemed to
include the affairs of the officer's or employee's spouse, minor children
and dependents; a firm, partnership or association in which such officer
or employee is a member or employee; a corporation of which such
officer or employee is an officer, director or employee; and a
corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by such officer or employee.
OFFICER — Includes every elected official of the Village, every Village
officer, elected or appointed, as defined in the Village Law or any
other law referring to "officers," acting on behalf of the Village or any
agency thereof, all members of boards or commissions or committees
created by law or appointed by the Village Board or Village Mayor,
including members of so-called advisory committees, whether any of
such persons mentioned in this definition are paid or unpaid.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE or EMPLOYEE — Any person directly employed
and compensated by the Village of Brockport.
VILLAGE MATTER — Any litigation in which the Village is or may
become an adverse party; any zoning board application, planning board
application, permit application, or historic preservation board
application.[Added 12-7-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
B. Usage. The masculine gender as used herein shall include the feminine
where appropriate.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4
1:43

ARTICLE III
Rules and Standards
§ 13-5. Conflicts of interest.
No officer or employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, or
engage or invest in any business or transaction or professional activity,
or incur any obligation of any nature, which is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his duties in the public interest. To this end, no officer or
employee shall:
§ 13-6. Employment and other transactions.
No officer or employee shall accept other employment or engage in any
business transaction which will impair his independence of judgement in
the exercise of his official duties or create a conflict of interest with his
official duties.
§ 13-7. Improper use of official position.
No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
§ 13-8. Conduct.
No officer or employee shall by his conduct give a reasonable basis for the
impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy
his favor in the performance of his official duties, or that he is affected by
the kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or person.
§ 13-9. Compensation for services prohibited.
No officer or employee shall receive or enter into any agreement, express
or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any
case, proceeding, application or any other matter before any Village agency,
whereby his compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action
by such agency with respect to any license, contract, certificate, ruling,
decision, opinion, franchise or other benefit.
§ 13-10. Use of Village-owned equipment or property.
No officer or employee shall request or permit the use of Village-owned
vehicles, equipment, material or property for personal convenience or
A. Be or become interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever in any business or professional dealings with the Village of
Brockport or any agency thereof.
B. Act as attorney, agent, broker, employee or representative in business
or professional dealings with the Village of Brockport or any agency
thereof for himself or any person, firm or corporation, directly or
indirectly.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-10
1:45
profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are
provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer or employee in the
conduct of official business.
§ 13-11. Exceptions.
A. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this chapter, any
person serving the Village or any agency thereof without compensation
shall not be deemed to be in violation of this chapter unless such
interest is in conflict with the proper discharge of his official duties.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the designation of a
bank or trust company as a depository, paying agency, registration
agent or other investment in the funds of the Village in which the
municipal officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock
holdings when less than 5% of the outstanding stock of the corporation
is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or employee,
except when the chief fiscal officer or his deputy or employee have an
interest in such bank or trust company.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the designation of a
newspaper, including, but not limited to, an official newspaper, for the
publication of any notice, resolution, ordinance or other proceeding,
where such publication is required or authorized by law.
D. No conflict shall be deemed to arise under this chapter by virtue of
stock ownership where such ownership constitutes less than 5% of the
outstanding stock of the corporation involved.
E. Where a member of a body, serving without pay, appointed by the
Village Board, enters into contract with the Village for the performance
of services or sale of goods or equipment, which contract does not
appertain to or involve dealings with the body upon which the said
member is serving, the Ethics Board may find that said contract creates
only a technical conflict and may advise that such a conflict is not a
violation of the Code of Ethics. Before the appointment of a member to
a body, the Board of Ethics shall have the duty to give an opinion on the
facts to be submitted by the appointing officer with respect to possible
conflicts and shall have the discretionary power to hold that a technical
conflict of interest does not disqualify a particular person from serving.
§ 13-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 13-11
1:46
ARTICLE IV
Compliance
§ 13-12. Compliance required.
Compliance with the Code of Ethics shall be deemed a condition of
employment for all officers and employees, and every officer and employee
shall, subsequent to the date of enactment of this code, be given a copy
of this code, together with all amendments thereto, and a receipt for same
shall be signed by such employee or officer. Such receipt shall be filed with
the Village Clerk, who shall supply the necessary forms.
§ 13-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-12
1:47

ARTICLE V
Future Employment
§ 13-13. Restrictions after employment.
No officer or employee shall, within a period of two years after the
termination of such service or employment, appear before any agency of
the Village or receive compensation for any service rendered on behalf
of any person, firm, corporation or association in relation to any case,
proceeding or application with respect to which such person was directly
concerned or in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment, or which was under his active consideration. Nor
shall any person who has served as a member of the legislative body of the
Village within a period of two years after termination of such service receive
compensation of any service on behalf of any person, firm, corporation or
association to promote or oppose, directly or indirectly, the passage of bills
or resolutions by such legislative body of the Village.
§ 13-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-13
1:49

ARTICLE VI
Gifts and Favors
§ 13-14. Gifts and favors from those interested in dealings with
Village. [Amended 5-21-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 12-7-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
No officer or employee of the Village of Brockport, whether paid or unpaid,
shall accept any gift or gratuity having a value of $25 or more per instance,
nor $100 or more per annum, whether in the form of services, loan or
any promise or benefit of any kind, from any person, firm or corporation
which is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in any
business or professional transaction or dealing with the Village or any
agency thereof.
A. This prohibition shall not apply to gifts or gratuities given by civic/
charitable organizations having a value of $200 or less and given with
the purpose of securing official representation from the Village at a
function of the organization. No organization, however, shall qualify for
this exception where the organization has a Village matter pending,
active or resolved within the last 30 days.
B. Any gift in excess of these monetary limits shall be presumed to be
improper for purposes of any action under Article IX of this chapter.
§ 13-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-14
1:51

ARTICLE VII
Disclosure of Interest
§ 13-15. Persons participating in discussion.
Any officer or employee of the Village of Brockport, whether paid or unpaid,
who has, will have or intends to acquire an interest, direct or indirect, in any
matter being considered by the Village Board or by any other official board,
agency, officer or employee of the Village of Brockport, and who participates
in discussion before or gives opinions or advice to any board, agency or
individual considering the same, shall publicly disclose on the official record
the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 13-16. Persons having knowledge of discussions.
Any officer or employee of the Village of Brockport, whether paid or unpaid,
who has knowledge of any matter being considered by any board, agency,
officer or employee of the Village of Brockport in which he has or will have
or intends to acquire any direct or indirect interest, shall be required to
disclose in writing his interest to such board, agency, officer or employee
and the nature and extent thereof.
§ 13-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-16
1:53

ARTICLE VIII
Disclosure of Confidential Material
§ 13-17. Restriction.
No officer or employee of the Village of Brockport, whether paid or unpaid,
shall disclose confidential information concerning the property, government
or affairs of the Village or any other confidential information of an official
character except when required by law, nor shall he use such information to
advance the financial or other private interests of himself or others.
§ 13-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-17
1:55

ARTICLE IX
Penalties for Offenses
§ 13-18. Forfeiture of pay; suspension or removal.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute cause for
forfeiture of pay, suspension or removal from office or employment.
§ 13-19. Contracts voided.
Any contract knowingly entered into by or with the Village of Brockport or
any agency thereof in which there is an interest prohibited by this chapter
shall be null, void and wholly unenforceable.
§ 13-20. Imprisonment and/or fine.
In addition to any of the foregoing penalties, any officer or employee who
willfully and knowingly violates the foregoing provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense punishable for a term of imprisonment not in
excess of 15 days and/or a fine not in excess of $250.
§ 13-21. Other laws may apply.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit any other applicable laws or
ordinances which are now or may hereafter be provided.
§ 13-22. Actions not constituting violations.
No action, express or implied, permitted under Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 13-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-22
1:57

ARTICLE X
Severability
§ 13-23. Amendment.
The code may be amended from time to time by the Village Board or its
successor legislative body by the adoption of further rules and standards
designed to improve the administration of the Village and protect the public
or by supplementing the coverage of this chapter to the extent permitted by
law.
§ 13-24. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such portion thereof shall be
deemed inoperative, and the balance of said chapter shall be deemed to be
in full force and effect.
§ 13-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-24
1:59

ARTICLE XI
Board of Ethics
[Amended 5-21-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 13-25. Creation of Board; membership; advisory opinions; rules
and regulations.
§ 13-26. Membership disqualifications.
No person may be appointed as members of such Board who shall be:
A. Membership. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting
of five members to be appointed by the Board of Trustees, all of whom
shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Brockport. Four of such members shall be
persons other than Village officers or employees or members of other
Village boards. These members must live within the Village and shall
have voting rights. One member shall be a Village employee of the
Village of Brockport. This Village employee shall be a nonvoting
member and need not live within the Village. The members of the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport are ineligible to serve as voting
members of the Board of Ethics or as observers or advisors to the Board
of Ethics. Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled by the Board
of Trustees as soon as practically feasible.
B. Advisory opinions. The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall
render advisory opinions to Village officers or employees on written
request and/or upon written request of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Brockport; in addition, the Board of Ethics may make
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a code of
ethics or amendments thereto upon request of the Board of Trustees.
The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and confidential
and in no event shall the identity of the Village officer or employee be
disclosed except to authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions
shall be on the advice of counsel employed by the Board of Ethics or, if
none, of the Village Attorney.
C. Rules and regulations. Such Board of Ethics, upon its formation, shall
promulgate its own rules and regulations as to its form and procedures
(subject to Village Board approval) and shall maintain appropriate
records of its opinions and proceedings.
A. Political committeemen or officials of any political club in the Village.
B. Persons closely related by family or business to any Village officer or
employee.
C. Persons having business dealing with the Village or any Village agency,
directly or indirectly, either personally or through some firm,
association or corporation in which such person has any business
interest or in which such person has an official capacity.
§ 13-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-27
1:61
§ 13-27. Election of Chairman and Secretary.
The members of such Board of Ethics shall elect from their group a
Chairman and Secretary.
§ 13-28. Coordination.
All agencies of the Village shall furnish to such Board, in connection with its
investigations, such data, information and statements as may in the opinion
of the Board be necessary for the proper exercise of its functions, powers
and duties.
§ 13-29. Confidential matter; matter for records.
All requests for advisory opinions or interpretations, and all complaints and
investigations, shall be deemed confidential. All findings, recommendations,
advisory opinions, interpretations and proposed revisions to this chapter
shall be matters of public record.
§ 13-27 BROCKPORT CODE § 13-29
1:62
ARTICLE XII
When Effective
§ 13-30. Effective date.10
This chapter shall become effective January 1, 1971.
10.Editor's Note: This section, which formerly was numbered § 13-32, was renumbered due to
the effect of L.L. No. 2-2007, which was adopted 5-21-2007.
§ 13-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-30
1:63
Chapter 13A
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM
§ 13A-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 13A-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Brockport ("Municipality") and the
State of New York to reduce costs and provide price certainty for the
purpose of consumer protection and economic development, to expand
access and opportunities for consumers in retail energy markets, as
well as to promote the sustainability and resilience of energy systems
through the proliferation of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and
distributed energy resources (DER, as defined below). Among the
initiatives that may advance these objectives in New York is community
choice aggregation (CCA), a policy that empowers local governments to
determine the source of electricity and/or natural gas supply on behalf
of its residents and small businesses, reflecting local resources,
priorities, and challenges. Energy delivery remains the responsibility of
the distribution utility.
B. This chapter establishes the authority for the Village of Brockport, in
connection with the implementation of a CCA program, to acquire
utility data, to select, through competitive solicitation, energy
supplier(s) on behalf of default consumers within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Village, and to maximize value for participating
consumers through enhanced services related to DER. The municipality
may choose to collaborate with other local governments to form an
intermunicipal program. As a result, consumers will have the
opportunity to lower and stabilize their energy costs, to spur local clean
energy innovation and investment, and to reduce their environmental
impact; thereby fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and fulfilling an
important public purpose.
C. The Village of Brockport is authorized to implement this Community
Choice Aggregation Program pursuant to § 10(l)(ii)(a)(l2) of the New
York Municipal Home Rule Law; and consistent with State of New York
Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion
of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs
(issued April 21, 2016) as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0224, to the extent that orders related to Case
No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the municipality.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation Program Law of the Village of Brockport."
§ 13-30 BROCKPORT CODE § 13A-2
1:64
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information including,
but not limited to, the number of consumers by service and rate class,
the aggregated peak demand (kW) (for electricity) by month for the past
12 months by service and rate class, and the aggregated energy (kWh)
for electricity or volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12
months by service and rate class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — The third party duly authorized to request
aggregated and customer-specific data, competitively solicit suppliers for
the aggregated demand for electricity and/or natural gas on behalf of
default consumers, and to offer participating consumers additional
opportunities to participate or enroll in programs or projects related to
distributed energy resources. CCA administrator is responsible for program
organization, administration, procurement, communications, and for
meeting all requirements for program implementation specified in the PSC
CCA order, unless otherwise specified.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all default consumers including the customer of
record's name, mailing address, telephone number, account number, and
primary language, if available, and any customer-specific alternate billing
name, address, and phone number.
DEFAULT CONSUMERS — Customers of electricity and/or natural gas
within opt-out eligible service classes (as delineated in the PSC CCA order),
who receive supply service from the distribution utility as of the date
the supply contract goes into effect, or consumers within these service
classes that subsequently become eligible to participate in the program
including those that have terminated a supply contract with an ESCO,
removed a freeze or block on their account, have voluntarily suspended
service pursuant to a special rate, or are new residents of the municipality.
Consumers within opt-out eligible service classes, as of the date the supply
contract goes into effect, taking service from an ESCO, those that have
placed a freeze or block on their account, and those for whom enrollment in
the CCA program would interfere with a choice they have already made to
take service pursuant to a special rate are not considered default consumers
and will not be enrolled on an opt-out basis. For the avoidance of doubt,
all default consumers must reside or be otherwise located at one or more
locations within the geographic boundaries of the municipality, as such
boundaries exist as of the date the supply contract with the goes into effect.
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES (DER) — Local renewable energy
projects, community-distributed generation (e.g., shared solar), peak
demand management, energy efficiency, demand response, energy storage,
community resilience microgrid projects, and other innovative Reforming
the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives that further engage and/or reduce cost
of service for participating consumers, optimize system benefits, and/or
§ 13A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13A-2
1:65
address infrastructure and demand challenges within geography of the
CCA.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity in the municipality. The distribution utility
also serves as the default supplier of electricity and natural gas preceding
the establishment of a CCA program.
ESCO or ENERGY SERVICES COMPANY — An entity duly authorized to
conduct business in the State of New York as an ESCO.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Default consumers who have not opted
out, and non-default consumers of any service class that have voluntarily
enrolled in the program.
PSC CCA ORDER — The PSC's Order Authorizing Framework for
Community Choice Aggregation Opt-Out Program, issued on April 21, 2016,
in Case 14-M-0224, "Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable
Community Choice Aggregation Programs."
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION or PSC — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIER — An ESCO that procures electric power and natural gas for
participating consumers in connection with this chapter or, alternatively,
generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities who procure and
resell electricity or natural gas.
§ 13A-3. Authorization of community choice aggregation program.
A. A community choice aggregation program is hereby authorized by the
Municipality, whereby the municipality may implement a CCA program
to the full extent permitted by the PSC CCA order, as set forth more
fully herein.
B. The municipality may enter into contracts with one or more suppliers
for electric and/or natural gas supply and other services on behalf of
default consumers.
C. The municipality may enter into agreements and contracts with other
municipalities, nonprofits, consultants, and/or other third parties to:
(1) Develop and implement the CCA program;
(2) Act as CCA administrator; and/or
(3) Develop offers of opt-in DER products and services to participating
consumers.
D. The operation and ownership of the utility service shall remain with the
distribution utility. The municipality's participation in a CCA program
constitutes neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the
furnishing of utility service. The municipality shall not take over any
part of the electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will
§ 13A-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 13A-3
1:66
§ 13A-4. Eligibility.
§ 13A-5. Opt-out process.
§ 13A-6. Data protection requirements.
not furnish any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with
suppliers on behalf of participating consumers.
E. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the uniform business practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. All default consumers shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis. Default
consumers will have the right to opt out before the supply contract goes
into effect, or disenroll any time thereafter with no penalty. Those that
do not opt out before the supply contract goes into effect will be
enrolled automatically.
B. All non-default consumers within the municipality, regardless of service
class, shall be eligible to participate in the CCA program on an opt-in
basis.
C. CCA administrator, on behalf of the Village of Brockport, shall issue one
or more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
program.
A. A program notification letter, printed on municipal letterhead, shall be
mailed to default consumers at least 30 days prior to customer
enrollment. The letter shall include information on the CCA program
and the contract signed with the selected supplier(s) including specific
details on rates, services, contract term, cancellation fee, and methods
for opting out of the CCA program. The letter shall explain that
consumers that do not opt out will be enrolled in the program under the
contract terms and that information on those consumers, including
energy usage data and APP status, will be provided to the ESCO.
B. After the thirty-day opt-out period, all consumers shall have the option
to disenroll from the CCA program at any time without penalty.
A. The municipality, or CCA administrator on its behalf, may request
aggregated data and customer-specific data from the distribution
utility.
B. Customer-specific data shall be protected in a manner compliant with,
collectively:
§ 13A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13A-6
1:67
§ 13A-7. Administration fee.
The municipality or CCA administrator may collect, or cause to be collected,
funds from customer payments to pay for administrative costs associated
with running the CCA program.
§ 13A-8. Reporting.
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual that apply with respect to the
municipality or its representative's processing of confidential utility
information;
(2) The utility's internal requirements and procedures relating to the
protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
an individual that apply with respect to the municipality or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The PSC CCA order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines
relating to confidential data.
C. For the purpose of protecting customer data, the municipality must
enter into an agreement with the distribution utility that obligates each
party to meet, collectively:
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual default consumer or
participating consumer with respect to the CCA administrator or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information;
(2) The distribution utility's internal requirements and procedures
relating to the protection of information that identifies or can be
used to identify individual default consumer or participating
consumer with respect to the CCA administrator or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The PSC CCA order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines
relating to confidential data.
A. Annual reports shall be filed with the Board of Trustees of the
municipality by March 31 of each year and cover the previous calendar
year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year (e.g., installation of DER or other clean energy
services); and administrative costs collected. The first report shall also
include the number of consumers who opted-out in response to the
initial opt-out letter or letters.
§ 13A-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 13A-8
1:68
Chapter 13B
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
[The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport adopted a Comprehensive
Plan 11-18-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019. Said plan is on file in the Village
offices.]
Chapter 14
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 14-1. Permit required.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall demolish or
cause to be demolished any building or other structure within the Village
of Brockport without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Building Inspector of the Village of Brockport.
§ 14-2. Certificate of insurance; permit fees.
C. If a CCA supply contract will expire less than one year following the
filing of the annual report, the report must identify current plans for
soliciting a new contract, negotiating an extension, or ending the CCA
program.
A. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, a certificate of insurance
for liability shall be given the Building Inspector of the Village of
Brockport. The limits of said liability for the demolition of buildings and
structures shall be in the amounts as follows:
(1) One hundred thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death
of any one person.
(2) Three hundred thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or
death of two or more persons.
(3) Fifty thousand dollars because of damage to or destruction of
property caused by any one accident resulting from said
demolition.
B. The fees for the issuing of a demolition permit shall be as follows:
§ 13A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2
1:69
§ 14-3. Demolition procedures and regulations; inspection.
(1) Ten dollars for the demolition of a building having a ground floor
area of 2,000 square feet, exclusive of porches.
(2) Twenty-five dollars for the demolition of a building having a ground
floor area exceeding 2,000 square feet, exclusive of porches.
A. In the demolition of a structure, the person making application for the
permit will obtain, prior to permit issuance, a letter of approval from
the Building Inspector regarding extermination. The applicant will be
issued a barricade permit, then he will erect an approved system of
barricades and have the electric, gas and telephone services
disconnected by the respective utility companies. The Superintendent
of Public Works of the Village of Brockport, or his designated
representative, shall supervise the disconnecting and the capping of the
water service at the main, as well as the plugging of the sewer laterals
at the structure foundation. If the above-mentioned items have been
completed in accordance with this chapter, a demolition permit will be
issued.
B. The contractor shall obtain appropriate approval for the water use on
the site from the Superintendent of Public Works for dust control and
have sufficient lengths of one-and-one-half-inch and/or two-and-onehalf-
inch hose for this purpose. The contractor shall provide a flagman
for traffic control when necessary and, should a street have to be
closed, he shall obtain permission from the Superintendent of Public
Works, the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
C. In cases of the demolition of an existing building which has a common
or party wall with one or more adjoining buildings, the owner of the
building to be demolished shall be responsible for and bear all costs in
relation to the safeguard of said adjacent wall.
D. Where beams, girders and joists are removed from party walls, these
pockets shall be cleaned out and filled with solid masonry. Necessary
repairs shall be made to put the party wall in a safe condition. This work
shall be done by the contractor at the expenses of the property owner
having said demolition performed.
E. Where such demolition work is to be made and no immediate new
construction is intended at the site, the adjacent wall, whether of the
party type or otherwise, shall be left in an acceptable condition as far as
appearance is concerned. In addition to the repair of all joists, pockets
and similar openings, the owner of the demolished building will be
required to remove all old plaster, wallpaper and other decorative
material in addition to any loose wood, trim or other unrequired
material, subject to the approval of the Building Inspector.
F. In the case of the demolition of an existing building in which the
removal of the building endangers the adjoining structure (and there is
§ 14-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 14-3
1:70
§ 14-4. Time limit for completion.
Final completion of the demolition process shall be within 30 days of the
commencement of the process.
§ 14-5. Notification of Village Clerk.
Immediately after said demolition, the Building Inspector shall notify the
Village Clerk, in writing, that said structure or building has been
demolished.
§ 14-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days or by a fine not exceeding $250, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a
separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Chapter 15
no party wall), it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the adjoining
building to protect his property.
G. During the demolition work, debris must be systematically removed
from the site and not allowed to pile up or cause any obstruction. Debris
removed from demolition work shall only be deposited at a site
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and Building
Inspector. In all cases, it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to
locate an approved site. Burning of debris within the Village limits is
prohibited.
H. When the buildings to be demolished contain a cellar or basement, the
contractor shall remove all debris and organic material from the cellar
or basement and then break up and/or perforate the cellar floor. The
bearing or foundation wall shall be removed to a depth of 24 inches
below the present grade or 24 inches below any future grade to be
established. The material resulting from the cellar or foundation wall
demolition may remain in the excavation, provided that the material is
crushed and compacted.
I. Where there is no cellar or basement, the bearing or foundation wall
shall be removed to a depth of 24 inches below present grade or 24
inches below any future grade to be established.
J. The Building Inspector of the Village of Brockport shall inspect the
demolition of any building or structure in the Village of Brockport daily
and shall be empowered to halt any such demolition that, in the
judgment of the Building Inspector, is not being performed in a safe and
sanitary manner.
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:71
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction code and
administration — See Chs. 10 and 11.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 15-1. Permit required.
No dwelling, house, barn, outbuilding or other like structures shall be
moved upon any street, highway or public place within the Village unless
a written permit shall first be obtained for such purpose from the Village
Clerk, as hereinafter provided. It shall be unlawful to move the same
without such permit or at any time or in any manner except as prescribed
in such permit.
§ 15-2. Issuance regulations.
A permit for such purpose shall be issued by the Village Clerk only upon
the Village Building Inspector approving the same and shall provide the
time, manner and streets through which the same shall be moved and shall
contain any other conditions deemed necessary to properly safeguard the
public safety or welfare.
§ 15-3. Fees; insurance.
Every application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of
$50 and by a certificate of insurance, in a form approved by the Village
Attorney and issued by an insurance company authorized to do business
in this state, running to the Village, guaranteeing that the applicant has
provided public liability coverage for bodily injury in the amount of not less
than $1,000,000/$2,000,000 and for property damage in the amount of not
less than $100,000/$300,000 to save the Village harmless from all claims,
actions and proceedings brought by any person for personal injury, property
damage or injury to property resulting from or occasioned by any default by
the Village, its employees or agents, or by the person to whom the permit is
issued or anyone acting thereunder. The policy shall also protect the Village
in the sum of $100,000 against any damage caused to any street or other
public property by reason of such house-moving.
§ 15-4. Denial of permit.
If, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the moving of the structure
seems likely to cause injury to property, trees, electric wires or otherwise
cause hardship or inconvenience, or seems to be not conducive to public
safety or welfare, such permit may be refused, the deposit fees returned
and the bonds canceled.
§ 14-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 15-5
1:72
§ 15-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $250 or be imprisoned for a term of not more than 30 days, or both,
such penalty to be in addition to any other remedy permitted by this chapter
and by statute and not exclusive thereof.
Chapter 16
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction code and
administration — See Chs. 10 and 11.
Land subdivision regulation — See Ch. 26.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 27.
Sidewalk Ordinance — See Ch. 45, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 16-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The Driveway Ordinance of the Village of
Brockport."
§ 16-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate the installation of driveway
entrances in and to Village streets, and the paving of driveways between
Village streets to and across sidewalks.
§ 16-3. Construction and alteration; permit required.
No new driveway shall be connected to a Village street, nor may an existing
driveway entrance be changed or enlarged, nor may a Village curb be
allowed or removed, without a permit therefor.
§ 16-4. Paving and grading; permits.
A. No driveway shall be paved between a Village street and the edge of the
sidewalk most distant from said street nor may the grade or paving of
existing driveways in such area be changed without a permit therefor.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, "paving" shall include the application
or installation of any concrete, cement, tar, bituminous, asphalt or
similar material.
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:73
§ 16-5. Public sidewalk regulations.
Public sidewalks on any street in the Village, or fronting on any street in the
Village or parallel to any street in the Village, shall continue to be regulated
by the Sidewalk Ordinance of the Village of Brockport, adopted May 4,
1908.11 A "Village street" shall be defined as any street, road or highway
maintained by the Village, county or state, lying in the Village of Brockport.
§ 16-6. Paving materials on public sidewalks.
No public sidewalk shall be covered or constructed of any paving material
other than cement or flagstone, and no driveway paved with other
substances shall be extended over such sidewalks so as to cover the cement
or flagstone sidewalk.
§ 16-7. Application for permits; conditions of construction.
Application for permits hereunder shall be made to the Village
Superintendent of Streets, who shall issue said permit after inspection or
review of the site. The Superintendent shall determine the grades and
sizes of driveways and may impose conditions of construction to ensure
compliance with ordinances, stormwater drainage and traffic safety. If the
Superintendent is absent or unavailable, the Village Clerk shall act in his
stead.
§ 16-8. Repair of nonconforming sidewalks.
In the event that any sidewalk is paved in a manner other than as prescribed
by the ordinances of this Village, such sidewalk shall be deemed in disrepair
and the sidewalk may be repaired in accordance with applicable Village law
at the expense of the owner of the adjoining lands.
§ 16-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall forfeit and
pay to the Village of Brockport a penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each and
every offense, to be recovered with costs of suit.
§ 16-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after publication.
11.Editor's Note: The ordinance referred to appears in this Code as Article I, Sidewalks, of
Ch. 45, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 16-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 16-10
1:74
Chapter 17
ELECTRICAL INSPECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction code and
administration — See Chs. 10 and 11.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 17-1. Electrical Inspector. [Amended 9-16-1985 by L.L. No.
10-1985]
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed Inspectors of any
electrical inspection agency duly appointed by the Board of Trustees as
agents of the Village of Brockport are hereby authorized to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and
hereafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event,
however, will the cost or expense of such inspections or reinspections be
a charge against the Village of Brockport. Anyone requiring an electrical
inspection shall use the same electrical inspection agency from the point of
application for said inspection to the completion of the same.
§ 17-2. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report in writing to the Chief
Building Inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of
this chapter, all violations or deviations from or omissions of the
electrical provisions of the Building Code applicable to the Village of
Brockport and of all local laws, ordinances and Building Code as
referred to in this chapter insofar as any of the same apply to electrical
wiring. The Inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of
electrical installations in and on properties in the Village of Brockport
upon the written request of an authorized official of the Village of
Brockport or as herein provided. The Inspector is authorized to make
inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring, installations, devices,
appliances and equipment in or on properties within the Village of
Brockport where he deems it necessary for the protection of life and
property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to
make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer
of the Village of Brockport.
B. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Village of Brockport and owners and/or lessees of
property where defective electrical installations and equipment are
found upon inspection. He shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with this chapter. He shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the Village of Brockport to the
attention of the Building Inspector.
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:75
§ 17-3. Violations.
§ 17-4. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect July 1, 1970.
Chapter 17A
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26. Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 27.
§ 17A-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 17A-2. Types of actions.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to install, or cause to be installed, or to alter electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties of the Village of Brockport until an
application for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of
Fire Underwriters.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters.
A. Word usage. Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms and
their derivatives used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
those defined in § 8-0105 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law and 6 NYCRR 617.
B. Definitions. The terms and their derivatives used in this chapter shall
have the following meanings:
AGENCY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Village of Brockport Planning
Board.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
A. The purpose of this section is to simplify the task of determining
whether or not a proposed action may have a significant effect on the
environment by identifying the types of actions which are likely to have
a significant effect and those which will not have a significant effect.
Due to the complex and varied nature of actions, the lists in this section
are not all-inclusive. Any omission from the Type I or Type II lists of
actions as set forth herein shall not be conclusive. In these instances or
§ 17-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 17A-2
1:76
if, in the opinion of the Planning Board, a proposed project or activity
may have a significant effect upon the environment, although it does
not meet the specific standards set forth under Type I actions, the
Planning Board may, at its discretion, require that an environmental
impact statement be prepared.
B. The following classification system is used in this section:
(1) Type I: actions or classes of actions which are likely to require
preparation of environmental impact statements because they will,
in almost every instance, have a significant effect on the
environment.
(2) Type II: actions or classes of actions which have been determined
as not to have a significant effect on the environment and which do
not require environmental impact statements under this chapter.
C. The following are Type I actions:
(1) Construction of new or expansion by more than 50% of the existing
size, square footage or usage of existing:
(a) Airports, including buildings, runways, parking areas or any
combination of these.
(b) Public institutions, such as hospitals, schools and institutions
of higher learning and correction facilities and major office
centers.
(c) Road or highway sections, including bridges, which require an
indirect source permit under 6 NYCRR 203.
(d) Parking facilities or other facilities with an associated parking
area for 250 or more cars, only if such facility would require an
indirect source permit under 6 NYCRR 203.
(e) Dams with a downstream hazard of C classification under the
Environmental Conservation Law (ECL), § 15-0503.
(f) Stationary combustion installations operating at a total heating
input exceeding 1,000,000,000 Btu's per hour.
(g) Chemical pulp mills.
(h) Portland cement plants.
(i) Iron and steel plants.
(j) Primary aluminum ore reduction plants.
(k) Incinerators operating at a refuse charging rate exceeding 250
tons of refuse per twenty-four-hour day.
(l) Sulfuric acid plants.
§ 17A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17A-2
1:77
(m) Petroleum refineries.
(n) Lime plants.
(o) By-product coke manufacturing plants.
(p) Storage facilities designed for or capable of storing 1,000,000
or more gallons of liquid natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or
other liquid fuels.
(q) Sulfur recovery plants.
(r) Fuel conversion plants.
(s) Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems emitting air
contaminants assigned an environmental rating of A under 6
NYCRR 212 and whose total emission rate of such A
contaminants exceeds one pound per hour.
(t) Process, exhaust and/or ventilation systems from which the
total emission rate of all air contaminants exceeds 50 tons a
day.
(u) Any facility, development or project which is to be directly
located in one of the following critical areas:
[1] Tidal wetlands as defined in Article 25 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
[2] Freshwater wetlands as defined in Article 24 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
[3] Floodplains as defined in Article 36 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
[4] Wild, scenic and recreational river areas designated in
Title 27 of Article 15 of the Environmental Conservation
Law.
(v) Any facility, development or project having an adverse impact
on any historic or prehistoric building, structure or site listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or in the Statewide
Inventory of Historical and Cultural Resources.
(w) Any development, project or permanent facility of a
nonagricultural use in an agricultural district which requires a
permit, except those listed as Type II actions.
(x) Any facility, development or project which would generate
more than 5,000 vehicle trips per any hour or more than
25,000 vehicle trips per any eight-hour period.
§ 17A-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 17A-2
1:78
(y) Any facility, development or project which would use
groundwater or surface water in excess of 2,000,000 gallons in
any day.
(z) Any industrial facility which has a yearly average discharge
flow, based on days of discharge, of greater than 0.5 million
gallons a day.
(aa) Any publicly or privately owned sewage treatment works which
has an average daily design flow of more than 0.5 million
gallons a day.
(bb) Lakes or other bodies of water with a water surface in excess
of 200 acres.
(cc) Any sanitary landfill.
(dd) Solid waste transfer stations.
(2) Construction, reconstruction or expansion of any Village roads,
highways or bridges which would:
(a) Increase the number of travel lanes by two or more lanes.
(b) Involve significant changes to existing drainage patterns.
(c) Result in a projected increase in average daily traffic (ADT) of
2,500 or more vehicles within 10 years after completion of the
project.
(d) Have a present traffic volume of 10,000 or more vehicles or be
projected to have such a traffic volume within 10 years after
the date of completion of the project.
(3) Acquisition or sale by the Village of more than 100 contiguous
acres of land.
(4) Construction of any residential subdivisions which cumulatively
result, for a given parcel owner, in:
(a) A residential lot in an area where slopes exceed a fifteenpercent
grade.
(b) A residential lot in an area designated as an agricultural
district or a one-hundred-year floodplain.
(c) At least five residential lots in any other unsewered area of the
county.
(d) At least 15 residential lots in a sewered area of the county
outside of the areas defined in Subsection C(4)(a) and (b)
above.
(5) Construction or expansion by more than 50% of commercial or
industrial facilities whose total gross floor area, whether in a single
§ 17A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17A-2
1:79
structure or in more than one structure, exceeds 500,000 square
feet, unless the facilities are to be located at least in part within
a designated agricultural district or within a one-hundred-year
floodplain. In these latter instances, all proposed new commercial
or industrial constructions and all proposed expansions of greater
than 25% are included.
(6) Any funding, licensing or planning activities in respect to any of the
types of construction listed in Subsection C(1) and (2) above.
(7) Application of pesticides or herbicides over more than 1,500
contiguous acres.
(8) Clear-cutting of forest cover.
(9) The proposed adoption of comprehensive land use plans, zoning
laws, building codes, comprehensive solid waste plans, state and
regional transportation plans, water resource basin plans,
comprehensive water quality studies, areawide wastewater
treatment plans, state environmental plans, local floodplain control
plans and the like.
(10) Commercial burial of radioactive materials requiring a permit
under 6 NYCRR 380.
(11) Any action which will result in excessive or unusual noise or
vibration, taking into consideration the volume, intensity, pitch,
time duration and the appropriate land uses for both the source
and the recipient of such noise or vibration.
(12) Acquisition or sale by a public agency of more than 100 contiguous
acres of land.
(13) Channelization of any stream.
D. The following are Type II actions:
(1) Construction or alteration of a single- or two-family residence and
accessory appurtenant uses or structures, but not if such
construction or alteration:
(a) Is in conjunction with the construction or alteration of two or
more residences.
(b) Is in a critical area as described in this section for Type I
actions.
(c) May cause significant water supply, sewage disposal, drainage,
fire protection, traffic or noise problems.
(2) The extension of utility facilities to serve new or altered single- or
two-family residential structures or to render service in approved
subdivisions.
§ 17A-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 17A-2
1:80
(3) Construction or alteration of a store, office or restaurant designed
for an occupant load of 20 persons or less, if not in conjunction with
the construction or alteration of two or more stores, offices or
restaurants and if not in one of the critical areas as for Type I
actions, and the construction of utility facilities to serve such
establishments.
(4) Actions involving individual setback and lot line variances and the
like.
(5) Agricultural farm management practices, including construction,
maintenance and repair of farm buildings and structures and land
use changes consistent with generally accepted principles of
farming.
(6) Operation, repair, maintenance or minor alteration of existing
structures, land uses and equipment.
(7) Restoration or reconstruction of a structure, in whole or in part,
being increased or expanded by less than 50% of its existing size,
square footage or usage, unless in a critical area as set forth in this
chapter.
(8) Repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of new
travel lanes.
(9) Street openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance of
existing utility facilities.
(10) Installation of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and
highways other than multiple fixtures on long stretches.
(11) Mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, uses, ownership
patterns and the like.
(12) Regulatory activities not involving construction or changed land
use relating to one individual, business, institution or facility, such
as inspections, testing, operating certification or licensing and the
like.
(13) Sales of surplus government property other than land, radioactive
material, pesticides, herbicides or other hazardous materials.
(14) Collective bargaining activities.
(15) Operating, expense or executive budget planning, preparation and
adoption not involving new programs or major reordering of
priorities.
(16) Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement
systems.
(17) Actions which are immediately necessary for the protection or
preservation of life, health, property or natural resources.
§ 17A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17A-2
1:81
§ 17A-3. Processing of applications.
(18) Routine administration and management of agency functions not
including new programs or major reordering of priorities.
(19) Routine license and permit renewals where there is no significant
change in preexisting conditions.
(20) Routine activities of education institutions which do not include
capital construction.
A. Immediately upon receipt of an application for a permit or approval,
each department, agency, board or commission of the Village shall
determine whether or not such type of permit or approval is contained
on the list which has heretofore been approved by the Village. In the
event that such type of permit or approval is on such list, the
department, agency, board or commission may proceed to process same
without further regard to this chapter.
B. If the type of permit or approval being sought hereunder is not
contained on the approved list of the Village, such department, agency,
board or commission shall be required to determine whether such type
of permit or approval should be an exempt action or a Type II action, in
accordance with § 17A-2D herein.
(1) If the appropriate department, agency, board or commission
determines that the proposed permit or approval is an exempt
action or a Type II action as set forth in § 17A-2D herein, the
department, agency, board or commission may proceed to process
same without further regard to this chapter.
(2) If the appropriate department, agency, board or commission
determines that the proposed permit or approval is not an exempt
action or a Type II action as set forth in § 17A-2D herein, the
applicant shall be so notified and directed to complete an
environmental assessment application, to include the following:
(a) A complete environmental assessment form (EAF) as
prescribed by the Village Planning Board. A complete EAF
shall contain the name of the applicant or the name of the
county agency initiating the action, the location of the property
affected, a description of the action to be taken and such other
information as shall be deemed necessary by the Planning
Board.
(b) Drawings, sketches, maps and such other explanatory material
as may be deemed necessary.
(c) In the discretion of the applicant or the agency, a statement of
the reason why the proposed action may or may not have a
significant effect in the opinion of the applicant or agency.
§ 17A-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 17A-4
1:82
§ 17A-4. Evaluation of application.
§ 17A-5. Procedure for draft environmental impact statement.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application, the agency having jurisdiction
shall cause notice thereof to be posted on a bulletin board maintained
by the Village and may also cause such notice to be published in the
official newspaper of the Village describing the nature of the proposed
action and stating that the written views thereon of any persons shall be
received by the agency no later than a date specified in such notice but,
in no event, no less than 10 days after the posting of said notice.
B. The agency having jurisdiction shall render a written determination on
such application within 15 days following receipt of a completed
application, stating whether such proposed action may or may not have
a significant effect on the environment.
C. If the agency having jurisdiction determines that the proposed action
will not have a significant effect on the environment, the agency shall
prepare, file and circulate such determination as provided in 6 NYCRR
617.7(b), and thereafter the proposed action may be processed without
further regard to this chapter. If the agency having jurisdiction
determines that the proposed action may have a significant effect on
the environment, it shall inform the applicant or the agency initiating
the action of the determination and shall prepare, file and circulate
such determination as provided in 6 NYCRR 617.7(b). Thereafter, the
proposed action shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and 6 NYCRR 617.
A. Following a determination that a proposed action may have a significant
effect on the environment, the agency shall also direct the applicant or
agency initiating the action to prepare and submit an environmental
impact report in the form of a draft environmental impact statement.
B. Upon receipt of a draft environmental impact statement prepared by
the applicant or agency initiating the action, a notice of completion will
be prepared, filed and circulated by the agency having jurisdiction, as
provided in 6 NYCRR 617.7(e) and (f). The agency having jurisdiction
may also cause the notice of completion of the draft environmental
impact statement to be published in the official newspaper of the
Village.
C. If the agency determines to hold a public hearing on a draft
environmental impact statement, notice thereof shall be filed,
circulated and sent in the same manner as the notice of completion and
shall be published in the Village official newspaper at least 10 days
prior to such public hearing. Such notice shall also state the place
where substantive written comments on the draft environmental impact
statement may be sent and the date before which such comments shall
be received. The hearing shall commence within no less than 15 nor
more than 60 days of the filing of the draft environmental impact
§ 17A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17A-5
1:83
§ 17A-6. Procedure for final environmental impact statement.
§ 17A-7. Maintenance of files; severability.
statement, except where the county lead agency determines that
additional time is necessary for the public or other agency review of the
draft environmental impact statement or where a different hearing date
is required under other applicable laws.
D. Where, on the basis of a draft environmental impact statement or a
public hearing, the agency determines that an action will not have a
significant effect on the environment, the proposed action may be
processed without further regard to this chapter. The determination of
significant effect shall be made within 15 days of the submission of a
complete draft environmental impact statement or the completion of a
public hearing thereon.
A. The agency having jurisdiction shall cause an environmental impact
statement in accordance with the provisions of 6 NYCRR 617 to be
prepared by the applicant for any permit or by the agency initiating the
action.
B. Such environmental impact statement shall be prepared within 45 days
after the close of any hearing or within 60 days after the filing of the
draft environmental impact statement, whichever last occurs; provided,
however, that the agency having jurisdiction may extend this time.
C. Within 10 days of the submission of a complete environmental impact
statement, the agency having jurisdiction shall prepare and file a notice
of completion in the same manner as provided in § 17A-5 of this chapter
and shall send notice to all persons to whom the notice of completion of
the draft environmental impact statement was sent.
D. No decision to carry out or approve an action which has been made the
subject of an environmental impact statement shall be made until after
the filing and consideration of the environmental impact statement. A
decision on whether or not to approve the action shall be made by the
agency having jurisdiction within 30 days of the filing of the
environmental impact statement. If the applicant for a permit shall fail
to prepare an environmental impact statement, the processing of the
application shall cease and no approval shall be used.
A. The Village shall maintain files open for the public inspection of all
notices of completion, draft and final environmental impact statements.
B. If any section of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to
the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any provision of any section or the
application of any part thereof to any person or circumstances, and to
§ 17A-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 17A-7
1:84
§ 17A-8. Application fees.
Every application for determination under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee as determined by the Village Planning Board. Such
fee will be to cover the costs incurred by the Village Planning Board
in making the determination and in publishing notice, if any, of said
determination.
Chapter 18
FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
§ 18-1. Selling or discharging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell or discharge firearms,
fireworks or other explosives, including the explosion of gunpowder and
gun cotton, within the corporate limits of the Village of Brockport.
§ 18-2. Exception for organizations.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation, society, organization, association
or any other group of persons to discharge firearms, fireworks or other
explosives, including the explosion of gunpowder and gun cotton, within
the corporate limits of the Village of Brockport, unless such corporation,
society, organization or other group of persons shall obtain the consent of
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport.
§ 18-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 11-16-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment
not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 18-4. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed.
this end the provisions of each section of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
§ 17A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:85
§ 18-5. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the commercial sale
of firearms, shells and so forth by business concerns in the ordinary course
of business.
Chapter 19
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code and administration — See Chs.
10 and 11.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 14.
Fire alarm systems — See Ch. 19A.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 19-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall provide the basic method for administration and
enforcement of the State Fire Prevention Code12 in the Village of Brockport
and shall establish powers, duties and responsibilities in connection
therewith.
§ 19-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its being duly filed in the office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 19-3. Administration and enforcement.
There is hereby designated the Building-Zoning Officer to administer and
enforce the State Fire Prevention Code within the Village of Brockport.
§ 19-4. Severability.
If any section of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof.
§ 19-5. Rules and regulations.
A. The Building-Zoning Officer may adopt rules and regulations for the
administration and enforcement of the State Fire Prevention Code.
Such rules and regulations shall not conflict with the State Fire
Prevention Code, this chapter or any other provision of law.
12.Editor's Note: Local Law No. 5-1978, adopted 9-5-1978, accepted the applicability of the
State Fire Prevention Code for the Village of Brockport.
§ 18-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 19-5
1:86
§ 19-6. Permits.
B. The Building-Zoning Officer shall publish all rules and regulations at
least 10 days prior to the effective date thereof in the Village's official
newspaper.
A. Upon payment of a fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees adopted by
the Board of Trustees, permits shall be issued by and bear the name and
signature of the Building-Zoning Officer and shall specify:
(1) The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
(2) The address or location where the activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(3) The name and address of the permittee.
(4) The permit number and date of issuance.
(5) The period of validity of the permit.
B. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation,
location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
C. Permits shall continue until revoked or for a period of time designated
at the time of issuance. An extension of the permit time period may be
granted, provided that a satisfactory reason can be shown for failure to
start or complete the work or activity authorized within the required
time period.
D. Permits shall be obtained for the following.
(1) Acetylene generators: to operate an acetylene generator having a
calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
(2) Automobile tire rebuilding plants: to operate an automobile tire
rebuilding plant.
(3) Automobile wrecking yards: to operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
(4) Bowling establishments: for bowling pin refinishing and bowling
lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
(5) Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film: to store, keep or have on
hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
(6) Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin):
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6
1:87
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin)
which shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(7) Combustible fibers: to store, handle or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products
on a farm.
(8) Combustible materials: to store combustible materials, including
but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels
or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or
other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
(9) Compressed gases.
(a) To store, handle or use at normal temperatures and pressures
more than:
[1] Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or
[2] Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of liquefied natural or
hydrogen gas.
(10) Cryogenics: to store, handle or use cryogenic fluids, except
cryogenics used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks,
as follows:
(a) For the production, sale or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) For the storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic
oxidizers or liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(11) Dry-cleaning plants: to use in excess of four gallons of solvents or
cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(12) Dust-producing plants: to operate any grain elevator; flour, starch
or feed mill; woodworking plant; or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other
materials producing potentially explosive dust.
(13) Explosive ammunition and blasting agents:
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
(14) Flammable and combustible liquids:
§ 19-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 19-6
1:88
(a) To store, handle or use flammable liquids in excess of 6 1/2
gallons inside dwellings or in excess of 10 gallons inside any
other building or other occupancy or in excess of 60 gallons
outside of any building. This provision shall not apply to liquids
in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, portable or
stationary engine, boat or portable heating plant or to paints,
oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids
are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes.
(b) To store, handle or use combustible liquids in excess of 25
gallons inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside a
building. This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.
(c) A permit shall be obtained for the initial installation of an oil
burner and a fuel-oil tank used in connection therewith. A
permit shall be required for the replacement of a fuel oil tank
connected to an oil burner.
(d) For processing, blending or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(15) Flammable finishing: for spraying, coating or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
(16) Fruit-ripening process: to conduct a fruit-ripening process using
ethylene gas.
(17) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging: to conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
(18) Hazardous chemicals.
(a) To store, handle or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive
liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more
than 10 pounds of organic peroxides; or more than 50 pounds
of nitromethane; or 1,000 pounds or more of ammonium
nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures
containing 60% or more ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of air-reactive, waterreactive
or unstable materials.
(19) Junkyards: to operate a junkyard.
(20) Liquefied petroleum gas.
(a) For each installation of liquefied petroleum gas employing a
container or an aggregate of interconnected containers of over
2,000 gallons' water capacity and for each permanent
installation, irrespective of size of containers, made at
buildings in which 20 or more persons congregate for civic,
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6
1:89
political, educational, religious, social or recreational
purposes.
(b) Installers shall maintain a record of all installations and any
replacement of portable cylinders and have it available for
inspection.
(21) Lumberyards: to operate a lumberyard.
(22) Magnesium: for melting, casting, heat treating, machining or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(23) Matches.
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (Note: One case equals
one matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(24) Organic coatings: to perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(25) Ovens and furnaces: to operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F., which are heated with oil or
gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
(26) Places of assembly: to maintain, operate or use a place of assembly.
(27) Service stations and repair garages: to operate a service station or
repair garage.
(28)Welding and cutting.
(a) To operate a welding and cutting business.
(b) A record of all locations where welding or cutting operations
are performed shall be maintained and kept available for
inspection by the permit holder.
E. Consolidated permits. When more than one permit is required for the
same property or premises, a single permit may be issued listing all
materials or operations covered. Revocation of a portion or portions of
such consolidated permit for specific hazardous materials or operations
shall not invalidate the remainder.
F. Location of permits. Permits shall be kept on the property or premises
covered by the permit or carried by the permit holder.
G. Revocation of permits. Permits may be suspended or revoked when it is
determined that there is a violation of a condition under which the
permit was issued or when there has been misrepresentation or
§ 19-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 19-6
1:90
§ 19-7. Inspections.
§ 19-8. Compliance required; violation orders.
§ 19-9. Penalties for offenses.
falsification of material facts in connection with the permit application
or a condition of the permit.
A. The Building-Zoning Officer of the Village of Brockport shall conduct
periodic inspections for compliance with the provisions of the State Fire
Prevention Code. Such inspections may be made at any reasonable
time.
B. If entrance to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained, the
Building-Zoning Officer may apply for a warrant to make an inspection
to any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. A person owning, operating, occupying or maintaining property or
premises within the scope of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code or this chapter shall comply with all the provisions of the
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter and all
orders, notices, rules, regulations or determinations issued in
connection therewith.
B. Whenever the Building-Zoning Officer finds that there has been a
violation of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, a
violation order shall be issued to the person or persons responsible.
C. Violation orders shall be in writing, shall identify the property or
premises, shall specify the violation and remedial action to be taken,
shall provide a reasonable time limit for compliance and shall state the
time within which an appeal may be taken.
D. Violation orders may be served by personal service, by mailing by
registered or certified mail, or by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the premises and by mailing a copy thereof to the
premises on the same day as posted enclosed in a postpaid wrapper
addressed to the person responsible.
E. In case the owner, lessor, occupant or the agent or any of them shall fail,
neglect or refuse to remove, eliminate or abate the violation within the
time specified in the violation order, a request to take the appropriate
legal action shall be made to the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Brockport.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of the State of New York Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter, rules or regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter or a violation order shall be deemed a
violation, and the violator shall be liable for a fine not less than $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, and each day such
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9
1:91
§ 19-10. Records.
The Building-Zoning Officer shall keep official records of all permits,
inspection reports, recommendations, complaints and violation orders.
§ 19-11. Dangerous buildings or structures.
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended
3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Brockport may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision
of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter,
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter or a violation order;
or to vacate the occupancy or building in the case of imminent danger
to life or property. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties
otherwise prescribed by law.
A. A building or structure, or part thereof, which is an imminent danger to
life and the safety of the public as a result of a fire or explosion is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Whenever the Building-Zoning Officer finds a building or structure, or
part thereof, to be an imminent danger to life and the safety of the
public as a result of a fire or explosion, the Building-Zoning Officer may
cause it to be demolished and removed or may cause work to be done in
and about the building or structure as may be necessary to remove the
danger.
C. The Building-Zoning Officer may require the occupants of any such
building or structure, or part thereof, to vacate the premises forthwith.
No person shall use or occupy such building or structure, or part
thereof, until it is made safe. Except for the owner, no person shall enter
premises which have been ordered vacated unless authorized to
perform inspections, repairs or to demolish and remove such building
or structure, or part thereof.
D. All costs and expenses incurred by the Village of Brockport in
connection with any work done to remove the danger or in connection
with the demolition and removal of any such building or structure shall
be assessed against the land on which such building or structure is
located, and a bill for such expenses shall be presented to the owner of
the property or, if the owner's identity cannot be ascertained, then such
bill shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such
assessment shall be and constitute a lien upon such land. If the owner
shall fail to pay for such expenses within 10 days after the bill is
presented or posted, a legal action may be brought to collect such
assessment or to foreclose such lien. As an alternative to the
maintenance of any such action, the Building-Zoning Officer may file a
certificate of the actual expenses incurred as aforesaid, together with a
§ 19-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 19-11
1:92
§ 19-12. Review Board.
Chapter 19A
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 19A-1. Requirements.
All existing multiple dwellings shall have a fire alarm system which meets
the requirements of this section:
statement identifying the property in connection with which the
expenses were incurred and the owner thereof, with the Assessor, who
shall in the preparation of the next assessment roll assess such amount
upon such property. Such amount shall be included in the levy against
such property, shall constitute a lien and shall be collected and enforced
in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time and
under the same penalties as is provided by law for the collection and
enforcement of real property taxes in the Village of Brockport.
A. Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships may result from
enforcement of the strict letter of any provision of the State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, applications for variances
consistent with the spirit of the code and not inconsistent with the
requirements of Subdivision 2 of § 391 of Article 18-A of the Executive
Law may be made to and acted upon by Board of Review established in
accordance with the provisions of § 395 of the Executive Law.13
B. The Building-Zoning Officer shall obtain a copy of the Review Board's
decision for its record.
A. Smoke detectors shall be installed in all common corridors and
stairways.
B. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each dwelling unit with a
minimum of one detector for each habitable level of the dwelling unit.
Installation shall comply with Standard 72E of the National Fire
Protection Association.
13.Editor's Note: Sections 391 to 399 of Article 18-A of the Executive Law were repealed by L.
1981, c. 707, § 12, eff. Jan. 1, 1984; see Article 18, § 370 et seq., of the Executive Law for
the statute which enabled the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
Act.
§ 19-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19A-1
1:93
§ 19A-2. Schedule for compliance.
All existing multiple dwellings shall be in total compliance with this chapter
within 12 months of its adoption.
§ 19A-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any and all persons who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply therewith shall, for each offense, forfeit and pay to and for the use
of the Village of Brockport a penalty in the sum of $500.
Chapter 20
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 17A.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 27.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Sewers — See Ch. 42.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 51.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
C. Smoke detectors shall be installed in all basement levels that are used
for storage, laundry facilities, etc., or where furnace equipment is
located.
D. Battery power is permitted if the detection device is equipped with an
audible alarm to indicate low voltage in the battery.
§ 19A-1 BROCKPORT CODE § 19A-3
1:94
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 20-1. Introduction.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Brockport and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 20-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 20-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:95
§ 20-4. Definitions and word usage.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with base flood depths
from one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport as certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of the
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 20-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-4
1:96
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator, or any
combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all inspectors employed by the Village of Brockport, as certified
by the State of New York, either in the capacity of code enforcement officer,
building inspector and fire marshal, and/or titled as the assistant code
enforcement officer, building inspector and fire marshal, or any combination
thereof.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or material located within the areas of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
Structures or facilities that produce, use or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
A.
Hospitals, nursing homes and housing likely to contain occupants who
may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood;
B.
Police stations, fire stations, public works vehicle and equipment
storage facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed
for flood response activities before, during and after a flood; and
C.
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during and after a
flood.
D.
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a
building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(1)
A.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:97
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of floodrelated
erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no water surface elevation data is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
B.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, elevated building also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that
meet the federal standards.
C.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
B.
§ 20-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-4
1:98
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood or
flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the
basement, i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or the top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — An officer employed by the Village of Brockport
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event, which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:99
the building inspector, code enforcement officer, and/or the municipal
engineer.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement or cellar, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the Village of Brockport, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
vehicle; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 20-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-4
1:100
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 20-6 and/or 20-13 of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement
of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STOP-WORK ORDER — A public notice placed on a building, structure,
premises, dwelling unit, equipment and/or land pursuant to § 20-18.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. "Substantial improvement" also means
cumulative substantial improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Officer and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:101
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
§ 20-5. Applicability; effect on other provisions; Code Enforcement
Officer.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Brockport.
A. Every portion of a building or premises used or equipment shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter, irrespective of when such building
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as hereinafter
provided.
B. Application of New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code. This chapter shall apply to residential property, one- and twofamily
dwellings, multiple dwellings, tourist homes, apartment houses
and/or any other type of residential property. In addition, it shall apply
to any commercial occupancies, such as but not limited to stores and
shops for retail purposes, bars and restaurants, private or public
business uses, industrial manufacturing and processes, storage and
warehousing. Hotels and motels serving transient guests and rest
homes, convalescent homes and nursing homes whereby sleeping
accommodations are provided, hospitals, religious facilities and private
schools, day cares and municipal buildings, equipment therein and
critical facilities as defined in § 20-4, as a part of or in respect to any
alterations to buildings or changes of use therein which may be caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter, shall be done
in accordance with applicable sections of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code) and local law(s)
of the Village of Brockport.
C. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code(s) of this municipality,
the County of Monroe, the State of New York or federal regulation(s),
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and the protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In
any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any other ordinance of the Code of the Village of
Brockport existing on the effective date of this chapter which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the
safety and health of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail, and such other ordinances or codes and articles are hereby
declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict
with this chapter.
§ 20-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-5
1:102
D. Partial invalidity. If any section of this chapter shall be held
unconstitutional, illegal, invalid, or otherwise unenforceable as
violative of county, state, federal or local laws, the remainder of the
chapter shall remain in full force and effect and be enforceable as such.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
F. Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of flood damage
prevention as herein provided. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
administer and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform Code and this
chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers
and duties:
(1) To receive, review and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, floodplain development permits and plans,
specifications, construction documents and matters required as
submitted with all such applications.
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, and floodplain
development permits, and to include on building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, and floodplain
development permits such terms and conditions as the Code
Enforcement Officer may determine to be appropriate.
(3) To conduct inspections, including, without limitations, for
construction, housing, building(s), structures, verification of use,
property maintenance, any and all inspections to be made prior to
the issuance of building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, floodplain development permits and
property maintenance inspections incidental to the investigation of
complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under
any provisions of any local laws and/or other codes, rules and/or
regulations.
(4) To issue stop-work orders.
(5) To review and investigate complaints.
(6) To issue orders pursuant to Article IV, § 20-35, of this chapter.
(7) To maintain records.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:103
§ 20-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
(8) To collect fee(s) as determined by resolution adopted by the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport as contained in the Village of
Brockport Fee Schedule.
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings.
(10) In consultation with the Village of Brockport Attorney, to pursue
such legal actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and local laws or article/
articles listed further in Chapter 59, or to abate or correct
conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter.
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be employed by the Village of
Brockport. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction and fire prevention and
shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, inservice
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the
State of New York shall require for code enforcement personnel; and
the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State
Fire Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
H. One or more inspectors may be employed by the Village of Brockport to
act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel; and each inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Brockport, Monroe County, State of New
York. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Brockport,
Community Number 360411, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36055C0130G and
36055C0135G, whose effective date is August 28, 2008, and any
subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas
under our community's jurisdiction.
§ 20-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-6
1:104
§ 20-7. Effect on other provisions; interpretation.
§ 20-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Brockport, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 20-9. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector is hereby designated the
local administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 20-10. Floodplain development permit.
A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard
in this community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased
flood hazards and ensuring that new development is constructed in a
manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to
undertake any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 20-6, without a valid
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Monroe County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated August 28,
2008.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Village of Brockport Municipal Offices, 49 State Street, Brockport, New
York 14420.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 20-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:105
floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the local administrator and may include but not be
limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing.
§ 20-11. Application for permit; fees.
A. The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of
the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 20-27, Utilities.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 20-29, Nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 20-6, when notified by the
local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed
by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide
assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated
stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
§ 20-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-11
1:106
§ 20-12. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
B. Fee. A fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provisions
set forth as required by this chapter shall be deposited with the Village
of Brockport: application fee(s) as determined by resolution adopted by
the Board of Trustees as contained in the Village of Brockport Fee
Schedule. Payment of fee(s) shall be at the time of issuance of an
application for a permit, for an amended permit, or for renewal of a
permit, or thereafter. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
permit is issued.
A. Permit application review. Before issuing a floodplain development
permit, the local administrator shall:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 20-11, and for compliance with the provisions
and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article II, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 20-23, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article II, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
§ 20-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-13
1:107
§ 20-13. Use of other flood data.
§ 20-14. Alteration of watercourses.
The local administrator shall:
§ 20-15. Construction stage.
A. When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data
(these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a
floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to
§ 20-11A(7), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements
of this chapter.
B. The local administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations
when there appears to be a conflict between the limits of the federally
identified areas of special flood hazard and actual field conditions.
C. Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 20-6 and/or § 20-13,
when available, shall be used to accurately delineate the areas of
special flood hazard.
D. When base flood elevation data is not available, the local administrator
may use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as
historical data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special
flood hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
A. Provide notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
B. Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is not diminished.
A. In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the local
administrator shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the
as-built elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under
the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit
holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the
structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted
§ 20-13 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-15
1:108
§ 20-16. Inspections.
for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days
or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
B. Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator
shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
A. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect
shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the
period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit
conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of the floodplain
development permit and/or any variance provisions. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall make or cause to be made inspections in
order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the
provisions of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized
to enter any dwelling, building, premises and lands at any reasonable
time for the purpose of performing his duties under this chapter. The
owner, operator, occupant, permit holder or the person in charge
thereof shall give the Code Enforcement Officer free access thereto and
to all parts thereof at reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection(s), examination(s) and survey(s).
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, buildings,
structures, multiple dwellings, premises and lands in order to
safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the
provisions of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized
to enter any dwelling, building, structure, multiple dwelling, premises
and lands at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his
duties under this chapter. The owner, operator or occupant of every
dwelling, building, structure, multiple dwelling, premises and lands or
the person in charge thereof shall give the Code Enforcement Officer
free access thereto and to all parts thereof on which it is located at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance or impede an
inspector or officer authorized under this chapter in the performance of
his duties, and every such inspector or officer shall have the right to
enter, examine and survey all lands, structures, dwellings, buildings
and multiple dwellings, premises and every part thereof at all
reasonable times upon display of proper identification.
D. Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a premises, lands,
structures, dwellings, buildings and multiple dwellings shall give the
owner or operator thereof or his agent or employee access to any part
of such dwelling unit, rooming unit or its premises at reasonable times
§ 20-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-16
1:109
§ 20-17. Construction inspections.
for the purpose of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs or
alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
E. Application for search warrant. If in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer he or she has been unreasonably and unlawfully
refused entry into the premises for purposes of inspection, he/she shall
apply forthwith for an administrative search warrant, said application
to be brought before a Village Justice of the Village of Brockport or
other court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the issuance of said
warrant, the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct the inspection as
per the conduct and procedures provided for in this chapter.
[Amended 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
F. Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises and the issuing of
orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this chapter
shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Codes Office of the
municipality. Wherever, in the opinion of the codes official, it is
necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other
departments, he/she shall arrange for this to be done in such manner
that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits
by numerous inspectors or to multiple or conflicting orders. No order
for correction of any violation under this chapter shall be issued without
the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer, and it shall be the
responsibility of the inspector, before issuing any such order, to
determine that he or she has the concurrence of any other department
or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the
case in question.
G. Administrative liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by
statute, local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the
municipality charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may occur to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter. No person who institutes or assists in the
prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this chapter shall be liable
to damage hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without
reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted
was guilty of an unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any
Mayor, Trustee(s) of the Village of Brockport, officer, agent or employee
of the municipality as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the municipality at no cost to the Mayor, Trustee(s) of
the Village of Brockport, officer, agent or employee of the municipality,
until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
A. Construction work shall remain accessible and exposed until inspected
and accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer or by an inspector
authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer. The permit holder shall
§ 20-16 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-17
1:110
§ 20-18. Stop-work orders.
notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any element of work is ready
for inspection(s). Any further work undertaken prior to submission
and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
B. Construction inspection results. Either after inspection(s) or after
review of submitted certification document(s), the work or a portion
thereof or document(s) shall be noted as satisfactory as completed, or
the permit/applicant holder shall be notified as to where the work fails
to comply with the permit requirements. Work not in compliance with
any applicable provision of this chapter shall remain exposed until such
work shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable
provisions of the chapter, reinspected, and found satisfactory as
completed.
A. Authority to issue. The local administrator (Code Enforcement Officer)
is authorized to issue stop-work orders pursuant to this chapter. The
local administrator (Code Enforcement Officer) shall issue or cause to
be issued a stop-work order for any floodplain development found
noncompliant with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions
of the development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 20-35F of this chapter.
(1) Any work that is determined by the local administrator (Code
Enforcement Officer) to be contrary to any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or this chapter, without regard to whether such
work is or is not work for which a permit or approvals are required
and without regard to whether a permit or approval has or has not
been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
in the opinion of the local administrator (Code Enforcement
Officer), without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a permit or approval is required and without regard to
whether a permit or approval has or has not been issued for such
work; or
(3) Any work for which a permit or approval is required which is being
performed without the required permit or approval or under a
permit or approval that has become invalid, has expired, or has
been suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the local administrator (Code Enforcement
Officer);
§ 20-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-18
1:111
§ 20-19. Complaints.
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The local administrator (Code
Enforcement Officer) shall cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof,
to be served on the owner of the affected property (and, if the owner is
not the permit applicant holder, on the permit holder) personally or by
registered mail/certified mail. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work order or a copy
thereof to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work
order personally or by registered mail/certified mail; provided,
however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence
shall not affect the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under Article IV, § 20-35F, of this chapter or under any other
applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may
be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the
issuance of a stop-work order.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code or this chapter or any ordinance or
regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Code and this chapter. The process for responding to a complaint shall
include the following steps, as the Code Enforcement Officer, at his
discretion, may deem to be appropriate:
(1) Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged
to be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection;
(2) If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person(s) who may be responsible for the
violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the
manner described in § 20-35 of the chapter;
§ 20-18 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-19
1:112
§ 20-20. Certificates of compliance.
§ 20-21. Information to be retained.
The local administrator shall retain and make available for inspection copies
of the following:
(3) If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order; and
(4) If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been
abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting
such abatement or correction, and filing such report.
A. In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 20-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use
or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
B. A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator
upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
C. Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in §§ 20-16 and 20-17, regarding inspections,
and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been required
as a condition of the approved permit.
A. Floodplain development applications, plans and specifications, permit
inspection(s), all statements and reports issued and certificates of
compliance.
B. Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures required
pursuant to § 20-15A and B, and whether or not the structures contain a
basement.
C. Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 20-15, and whether or
not the structures contain a basement.
D. Variances issued pursuant to § 20-32, regarding variance procedures.
E. Notices required under § 20-14, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 20-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-21
1:113

ARTICLE II
Construction Standards
§ 20-22. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 20-6.
§ 20-23. Subdivision proposals.
The following standards apply to all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed development in areas of special flood hazard (including proposals
for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
§ 20-24. Encroachments.
A. Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
B. Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, shall be located and constructed so as to minimize flood
damage; and
C. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
A. Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway,
no new construction, substantial improvements or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location; or
(2) The Village of Brockport agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary
data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of
Brockport for all fees and other costs in relation to the application.
The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Brockport for all costs related to the final
map revision.
B. On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted
in § 20-6, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(1) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows
that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
§ 20-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-24
1:115
§ 20-25. Standards for all structures.
§ 20-26. Construction materials and methods.
(2) The Village of Brockport agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway
revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village
of Brockport for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and
mapping and reimburse the Village of Brockport for all costs
related to the final map revisions.
C. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for development, the
volume of space occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a
hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the
base flood elevation at or adjacent to the development site. All such
excavation shall be constructed to drain freely to the watercourse. No
area below the waterline of a pond or other body of water can be
credited as a compensating excavation.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
A. New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
B. New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zones
A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data is
available, new and substantially improved structures shall have fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided; and
§ 20-24 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-26
1:116
§ 20-27. Utilities.
§ 20-28. Residential structures.
(2) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
D. Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
A. New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, airconditioning,
plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall
be located at or above the base flood elevation or be designed to
prevent water from entering and accumulating within the components
during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and
panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation unless they
conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New York
State for location of such items in wet locations.
B. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
C. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and
storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below the
base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves
or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge
line passing through a building's exterior wall.
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in §§ 20-23, Subdivision proposals,
20-24, Encroachments, and 20-25, Standards for all structures.
B. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
§ 20-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-28
1:117
§ 20-29. Nonresidential structures.
D. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 20-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
E. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in
areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in
§§ 20-23, Subdivision proposals, 20-24, Encroachments, and 20-25,
Standards for all structures.
B. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two feet above the
base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the structure is
watertight below two feet above the base flood elevation with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.
C. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's
FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) or, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed
to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in § 20-29B.
D. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of § 20-29B,
including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the structure is to be floodproofed.
E. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
§ 20-28 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-29
1:118
§ 20-30. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
§ 20-31. Critical facilities.
In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain critical facilities that
would result in serious damage to life and health or widespread social or
economic dislocation, no new critical facilities shall be located within any
area of special flood hazard or within any five-hundred-year flood zone
shown as a B Zone or a shaded X Zone on the Community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
F. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 20-22,
General standards for flood hazard reduction, and § 20-25, Standards
for all structures, apply as indicated in areas of special flood hazard to
manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in
areas of special flood hazard.
B. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed
and ready for highway use, or meet the requirements for manufactured
homes in § 20-30C, D and E. A recreational vehicle pursuant to Chapter
51 is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions.
C. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
D. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that
the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
E. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 20-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 20-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-31
1:119

ARTICLE III
Variance Procedure
§ 20-32. Variance procedure; Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Brockport
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 20-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-32
1:121
§ 20-33. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 20-32D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 20-32D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
§ 20-32 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-33
1:122
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice,
over the signature of a community official, that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property.
H. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 20-21A of this chapter.
§ 20-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-33
1:123

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 20-34. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; other remedies;
notification of noncompliance.
A. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable
regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit,
shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined no more than $350 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or
both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Brockport
from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy
an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements
of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for
and received an approved variance under §§ 20-32 and 20-33 will be
declared noncompliant, and notification will be sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport and such
assistant CEOs (assistant code enforcement officers), collectively, the
"code enforcement officers" hereunder, is/are the official(s) authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter by notice, ticketing, etc., or
such other enforcement procedure means and methods set forth in the
Code or otherwise permitted by law.
C. No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall
be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $350 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of
noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Village of Brockport from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any
structure found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for
which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an
approved variance under § 20-32 will be declared noncompliant, and
notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 20-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-35
1:125
§ 20-35. Notice of violations; compliance orders; appearance
tickets; civil penalties.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village of Brockport determines that
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice
of violation/violations to the owner, owner's agent and/or resident, e.g.,
tenant/tenants.
B. Informal compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or
activity found to exist in, on or about any building, structure or
premises in violation(s) of this chapter. Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer can issue an
informal (voluntary compliance) order, either in writing or verbally.
C. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure or premises in violation of
this chapter. Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance order. The
compliance order shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates this chapter;
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity;
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(6) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of
time; and
(7) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may be
instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period
of time.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance order, or a
copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
personally or by registered mail/certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any property manager or
agent, builder, architect, tenant(s), contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent, or their agents, or any other person(s)
taking part or assisting in work or use being performed or occurring at
the affected property, personally or by registered mail/certified mail;
§ 20-35 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-35
1:126
provided, however, that failure to serve any person(s) mentioned in this
sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
E. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
under the provisions of the Codes Office are authorized to issue
appearance tickets for any violation of this chapter when, in the opinion
of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or each inspector, there have been
aggressive ongoing violation/violations of this chapter that materially
affect either life-safety or person/persons and/or the public, or the
property is unsanitary and/or made a hazardous/unsafe structure or
equipment condition. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or each
inspector can issue appearance tickets for the forgoing pursuant to
Chapter 36, § 36-27E, as per the authorization of Chapter 59, § 59-1.
[Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
F. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, this
chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, floodplain
development permit, stop-work order, or other notice or order issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter
shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $350 for each day or
part thereof during which such violation continues. Each day on which
any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter occurs shall
constitute one offense and each successive day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person, partnership or corporation shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $350 for each offense. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be required to bear the expense of such compliance. Any person
who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
or both, for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second
offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall
be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the Village of
Brockport.
§ 20-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-35
1:127
§ 20-36. Severability; effect on other provisions.
G. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of or to enforce
any provision of the Uniform Code, this chapter or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, floodplain
development permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this
chapter. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the
construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code or this chapter or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code or
this chapter an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of
the Village of Brockport, in the Supreme Court or in any other court
having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the
removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation(s) of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in
this subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate
authorization from the Board of Trustees of this Village of Brockport.
H. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section; in
§ 20-18 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter; in any other section of this
chapter; or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 20-18 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the
Executive Law.
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Saving clause. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall
§ 20-35 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-36
1:128
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 20-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-36
1:129
Chapter 21
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND OPEN BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
Local law hearings — See Ch. 28.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Streets and sidewalks — Chapter 45.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 20-36 BROCKPORT CODE § 20-36
1:130
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 21-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Garbage, Refuse and Open Burning
Ordinance of the Village of Brockport."
§ 21-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Village of Brockport by controlling
the storage, collection and disposal of garbage and refuse and the hazards
and environmental, health and fire issues associated with outdoor fires
within the Village of Brockport.
§ 21-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport, as certified by the State of New York, either in the capacity of the
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator, or any
combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Shall be deemed to include the
Code Enforcement Officer and all Inspectors employed by the Village of
Brockport, as certified by the State of New York State, either in the capacity
of code enforcement officer, building inspector or fire marshal, and/or titled
as the assistant code enforcement officer, assistant building inspector and
deputy fire marshal, or any combination thereof.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — A written order for the remedying of found
violation(s) of the code(s) pursuant to § 21-21D.
DUMPSTER — A larger receptacle that is transportable only by machinery.
For such receptacles, waste haulers drive directly to the dumpster for
emptying or for removing from the premises.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescent animal and vegetable waste resulting
from growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items, and
animal feces from household pets.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber (New York State Fire
Code, 2007, Section 302).
OWNER — The person or entity in whose name the premises affected by an
order issued in accordance with this chapter is recorded as the owner in the
Town of Sweden Assessor's office and/or the Monroe County Clerk.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3
1:131
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, road or highway, alley, lane, sidewalk,
crosswalk or other public way or any public resort, place of amusement,
park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, public
parking lot or any vacant lot, either owned by and/or in care of the Village
of Brockport and/or not limited to the State of New York or United States
federal entities.
RECEPTACLE — A container in which to temporarily hold garbage and
rubbish until picked up by a waste collector. Households and smaller
organizations typically have transportable receptacles, which occupants
move from an appropriate storage area to the curb for pickup. Properties
generating more garbage and rubbish may have dumpsters to hold their
waste.
RECYCLING BINS/BOXES — A container in which to temporarily hold
recycling materials until picked up by a waste collector.
REFUSE/RUBBISH — Includes all discarded or worthless nonputrescent
solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
including but not limited to paper and paper products, rags, wrappings,
cardboard, metal cans and jars, yard waste, wood, glass, metals, plastics,
bedding, cloth, crockery, furniture, appliances and similar items as defined.
ROLL-OFF — Same as "dumpster."
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
§ 21-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 21-3
1:132
ARTICLE II
Storage
§ 21-4. Accumulation on premises.
No household waste, institutional waste, commercial waste or building
waste shall be stored or accumulated on any premises within the Village of
Brockport, except as permitted by this chapter.
§ 21-5. Receptacles; specifications.
A. Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of
business within the Village shall provide or cause to be provided and at
all times keep suitable and sufficient receptacles for receiving and
containing offal, garbage, ashes, refuse, rubbish or noxious substances
that may accumulate from or be used upon said premises. No such
receptacles shall be kept near any public place longer than may be
necessary for the removal of the contents thereof. All receptacles used
for the reception of garbage and/or refuse or noxious substances shall
be provided with proper covers, and such receptacles shall at all times
be securely closed and watertight. Receptacles (including recycling
bins) and garbage of any type must be kept from public view, either
inside of structures or behind screening, from neighboring property or
public view until the day of trash pickup.
B. Within exclusively used residential property, no dumpsters shall be
used for the collection or storage of garbage or rubbish. However, any
proposed and/or existing trash dumpsters within residential
neighborhoods or residentially used property which are in existence
prior to the adoption of this chapter are permitted so long as the
property owner obtains a special residential dumpster use permit
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Temporary use dumpsters or roll-off trash containers within residential
neighborhoods and residentially used property, which are intended only
for use during any construction, building or remodeling project and/or
property cleanup, are permitted to remain on a property up to 14 days.
Any temporary dumpsters or roll-off trash containers in use longer than
14 days can be permitted but shall require a temporary use permit,
which is granted by the Building Inspector for a one-time-only thirtyday
time period within a calendar year. Any temporary dumpster or rolloff
trash container intended or needed for 45 or more consecutive days
per calendar year shall obtain a special residential dumpster use permit
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. At no time shall a temporary
use dumpster or roll-off trash container be permitted to store or hold
any putrescent waste. Dumpsters or roll-off trash containers are
additionally required to be tarpaulin covered when said containers are
not being actively loaded.
D. Temporary use dumpsters or roll-off trash containers within commercial
use districts which are intended only for use during any construction,
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5
1:133
§ 21-6. Collection restrictions.
No person shall allow accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes or
noxious substances upon the premises owned or occupied by him or her,
except for the purpose of being prepared for collection. The storage of or
accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes or noxious substances upon
the premises shall not amass either indoors or outside any longer than one
week or as accretion requires more frequent collection needs.
§ 21-7. Depositing waste material within Village limits.
building or remodeling project and/or property cleanup are permitted
to remain on a property up to 14 days. Any temporary dumpsters or
roll-off trash containers in use longer than 14 days can be permitted but
shall require a temporary use permit, which is granted by the Building
Inspector for a one-time-only thirty-day time period within a calendar
year. Any temporary dumpster or roll-off trash container intended or
needed for 45 or more consecutive days per calendar year shall obtain
a special dumpster use permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
At no time shall a temporary use dumpster or roll-off trash container be
permitted to store or hold any putrescent waste. Dumpsters or roll-off
trash containers are additionally required to be tarpaulin covered when
said containers are not being actively loaded.
E. No dumpsters or roll off trash containers within any districts which are
intended for trash or temporary use during any construction, building
or remodeling project and/or property cleanup, shall be located or
placed any closer than five feet from any combustible buildings or
structures, under the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code ("Fire Code").
F. No dumpster or roll-off trash container shall be placed on any street,
highway, road or public place without prior approval by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
A. No person shall deposit ashes, garbage, brush, leaves, rubbish, refuse,
filth or waste or recycling materials upon the streets or in public places
within the Village of Brockport, except during such periods of time as
may be designated by the Board of Trustees or the Superintendent of
Public Works during Village of Brockport special bulk trash removal
event/events, and further excepting the deposit of such materials for
immediate hauling away.
B. At no time shall any deposited ashes, garbage, brush, leaves, rubbish,
refuse, filth or waste or recycling materials, be placed curbside which
causes a hazard to passing motorists and/or pedestrian traffic. When
such a hazard has been declared by an official of the Village of
Brockport, the Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to abate
such hazard as deemed necessary at the expense of the property owner
and/or the person(s) who created such hazard.
§ 21-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 21-7
1:134
§ 21-8. Burning waste material within Village limits.
C. No freezers, refrigerators or air conditioners will be removed curbside
by the Village of Brockport except as part of a Village of Brockport
specially conducted bulk trash removal event. A fee as determined by
the Board of Trustees shall be required for any appliance containing
coolant and its removal unless the appropriate Village official has
received and approved the appropriate appliance coolant removal
certification before curbside removal of such appliances.
D. On any Village of Brockport special bulk trash removal event, the
Village of Brockport will remove up to two passenger car or light duty
truck tires per property. Such tires may be placed curbside for removal
by the Village of Brockport during a special bulk trash removal event.
Such tires shall be removed from their rims, and no heavy-duty truck or
tractor tires will be accepted.
E. No hazardous and/or environmentally detrimental substances shall be
deposited at any time for trash collection, including but not limited to
electronic devices, fuel tanks, propane and/or gas cylinders, paints and
oils, batteries, fluorescent bulbs, liquid or infectious waste, and/or any
other materials determined as toxic, hazardous and/or environmentally
detrimental substances by the Superintendent of Public Works.
F. Residential properties receiving commercial waste hauler curbside
trash and recycling material pickups shall be performed on Tuesday
and Wednesday only, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
unless such days fall on a designated holiday, and/or during such
periods of time as may be designated by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
G. The property owner, lessee or occupant shall transport his or her refuse
and refuse receptacles to his property line, but said trash and trash
receptacles and recycling bins shall not be placed curbside any earlier
than 24 hours before collection day, with said empty receptacles being
removed from curbside no later than 12 hours after trash collection.
H. Commercial/industrial properties receiving commercial waste hauler
trash and recycling materials picked up may be on any day except
Sundays and designated holidays, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., except during such periods of time as may be designated by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. No person shall burn garbage, brush, leaves, rubbish, refuse, filth,
waste, wood, paper or any other material outdoors within the Village of
Brockport, except that open burning is permitted within any types of
manufactured appliances, such as grills, which contain and use gas,
charcoal or burnable wood materials, as permitted only between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. The location and use of food cooking
grills and appliances burning solid fuel materials shall be conducted in
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-8
1:135
§ 21-9. Any fire which is offensive or objectionable.
§ 21-10. The owner of property is deemed responsible.
The owner of a property is the party deemed responsible for compliance
with the legal requirements of this chapter (see § 21-3, Definitions).
a manner acceptable under the provisions of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code ("Fire Code").
A. Any fire which is offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor
emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fires hazardous shall be prohibited.
B. Burning shall be supervised by a responsible adult, which is defined
herein as an individual 18 years or older who is not under the influence
of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which would
impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire, in close proximate
attendance until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a
garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire-extinguishing
equipment or materials readily available for use.
§ 21-8 BROCKPORT CODE § 21-10
1:136
ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 21-11. License required for collectors; fee.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting garbage, offal, ashes,
refuse, rubbish or noxious substances and recycling materials within the
Village of Brockport without first obtaining a license from the Village Clerk.
An annual fee as established by the Board of Trustees shall be charged for
any such license. Any license that is renewed prior to the effective date of
any change in the fee shall pay the increased fee on a pro rata basis for the
balance of the license year for which it is issued.
§ 21-12. Subject to conditions.
Every license issued by the Village Clerk pursuant to this article shall be
subject to the following conditions and to such other reasonable conditions
as may be imposed by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. Vehicles used by licensed waste collectors in the collection and
transportation of garbage, mixed refuse or any other kind of waste
within the area of the Village of Brockport shall have watertight
enclosed bodies equipped with a compaction or loading unit.
B. Any firm having two or more such vehicles shall be allowed to use an
open-service truck, limited to the carrying of refuse of such size and
nature as cannot be carried in the enclosed trucks.
C. All vehicles used by the licensed waste collectors shall be available for
inspection by the Village Clerk or any other person or persons he/she
may designate as his/her agent prior to the issuance of any license
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
D. All vehicles used by licensed waste collectors shall carry a copy of their
license to collect waste in the Village.
E. Renewal licenses shall be issued in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as original licenses and also subject to any additional
requirements for renewal of the license applied for. All renewal of
licenses or issuance of new licenses to engage in the business of
collecting garbage, offal, ashes, refuse, rubbish or noxious substances
shall be paid no later than 30 days after the date renewal is required.
F. No license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable.
G. The Village Board shall have the power to suspend or revoke a license
granted or renewed pursuant to this chapter for any of the reasons as
may be hereinafter set out in this chapter.
H. All waste collection vehicles must have a minimum of $1,000,000
coverage for automobile insurance and a minimum of $1,000,000
§ 21-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-12
1:137
coverage for general liability. On the certificates of insurance, the
Village of Brockport shall be included as an additional insured.
I. Any regulated waste hauler shall be in compliance with any other
required New York State or federal licenses or permits in the conduct of
regulated waste hauling requirements.
§ 21-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 21-12
1:138
ARTICLE IV
Further Regulations in Regard to Vehicles
§ 21-13. On private property.
No vehicle used by the licensed waste collector shall travel into private
property for the purpose of collection of garbage or refuse without the
consent of the owner.
§ 21-14. Standing of collection vehicles.
No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage, refuse or
waste matter shall stand longer than 24 hours with said matter in or on it
within the Village of Brockport.
§ 21-15. Parking in residential districts.
No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage, refuse or
waste matter shall be parked or stored in a residential district when not
being used in the actual collection or transportation of said matter.
§ 21-16. Vehicles equipped to prevent leakage and spillage.
Vehicles used in the transportation of garbage, mixed refuse or any kind
of waste within the area of the Village of Brockport, regardless of place of
origin, shall be so equipped as to prevent the leakage or spillage of their
contents.
§ 21-17. Watertight requirement.
All vehicles and conveyances used by residents and property owners in
the transportation of garbage, refuse and any other waste matter shall be
watertight and so covered so that no part of the load shall blow, leak or spill.
§ 21-18. Waste collector duties.
Licensed waste collectors shall by all reasonable means return emptied
trash dumpsters or containers to their proper and prior locations, including
into any dumpster enclosure compound areas. Gates and/or screening that
are part of a dumpster enclosure shall be closed or shut.
§ 21-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-18
1:139

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 21-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as
indicated in § 21-21G. In addition, any property owner shall be assessed a
fee and any cost to the Village of Brockport in expending money on account
of the property owner's failure to comply with this chapter. The fees for
picking up garbage or other compliance needs with the chapter shall be
established from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees as contained
in the Village of Brockport Fee Schedule.
§ 21-20. Revocation of license for repeated violations.
After two successive violations of any of the provisions of this chapter by
a licensed waste collector, it shall be discretionary in the judgment of the
Village Board to revoke the license of said violating collector.
§ 21-21. Notice of violations; penalties for offenses.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport (and such
assistant code enforcement officers, collectively, the "code enforcement
officers" hereunder) is/are the official(s) authorized to enforce the
provisions of these articles by notice, ticketing, etc., or such other
enforcement procedure means and methods set forth in the Code, or
otherwise permitted by law.
B. Notice of violation. When the Village of Brockport determines that
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized, in his or her
discretion, to issue a written notice of violation/violations to the owner,
owner's agent and/or resident or occupants, e.g., tenant/tenants.
C. Informal compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) is authorized, in his or her discretion, to order in
writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on
or about any building, structure, or premises in violation(s) of the
Uniform Code, or of this chapter. Upon finding that any such condition
or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue an informal (voluntary) compliance order either in
writing or verbally.
D. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) is authorized, in his or her discretion, to order in writing the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about any
building, structure, or premises in violation of this chapter or local
law(s).
E. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) under the provisions of the Codes Office is authorized to
§ 21-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-21
1:141
issue appearance tickets for any violation(s) of the Uniform Code, or
this chapter or local law(s). The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized Inspector) can issue appearance tickets foregoing § 21-21B
and C, as per the authorization of Chapter 59, § 59-1. In no event shall
the issuance of a compliance order or an informal compliance order be
a prerequisite to issuance of an appearance ticket or to prosecution for
a violation of this chapter.
F. Each day a separate offense. Each day on which any violation of this
chapter occurs shall constitute one offense, and each successive day of
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
G. Civil penalties. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to
exceed $250 or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 11-16-2015
by L.L. No. 1-2015]
H. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of or to enforce
any provision of this chapter.
I. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of the other remedies or penalties specified in this section or
in § 36-15, Structures unfit for human habitation, of Chapter 36, Code
Enforcement, or any other article of the Code, or in any other state or
local law, as applicable. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section
or § 36-15, Structures unfit for human habitation, in any other section of
local law(s) or in any other applicable law. In particular, but not by way
of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in this section shall be
in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the penalties
specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law, and any
remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any
penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law.
§ 21-21 BROCKPORT CODE § 21-21
1:142
Chapter 22
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 58. Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 22-1. Intent.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale,
moving sale, yard sale, household sale or auction in the Village of Brockport
without first complying with the regulations as set forth in § 22-2 of this
chapter.
§ 22-2. Regulations; fees.
Garage sales, yard sales, moving sales, household sales and auctions shall
be regulated in the following manner:
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GARAGE SALE, YARD SALE AND HOUSEHOLD SALE — Any public
sale of personal property in a residential area of the Village by the
resident of the property at which the sale is taking place.
B. Hours of sale. Sales shall not begin before 10:00 a.m. and must
terminate by 8:00 p.m.
C. Number of sales. No person shall conduct more than two sales on his or
her premises in any one calendar year. A person may have two threeday
sales or one six-day sale.
D. Merchandise. Sales shall offer only used, unwanted items of personal
property owned by the resident of the property where the sale is held.
No new merchandise shall be offered for sale, nor may new or used
merchandise from other sources be brought in and offered for sale.
E. Signs.
(1) Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or other
news media. A sign no larger in size than three feet by three feet
may be displayed on the property where the sale is being
conducted.
(2) No signs shall be attached to any public signs, light posts or utility
poles, except that signs attached to sticks or posts driven into the
ground are permissible. Only signs advertising those sales within
the limits of the Village of Brockport are permissible. No lighted
signs may be used.
§ 21-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:143
§ 22-3. Penalties for offenses.
Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed an offender and shall be fined not more than $250,
and each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 23
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 23-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the licensing of hawkers, peddlers
and solicitors operating within the Village in order to protect the residents
of the Village from the fraudulent and criminal practices of unscrupulous
persons posing as hawkers, peddlers or solicitors engaged in lawful
business.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
HAWKER or PEDDLER — One who goes from place to place or from house
to house or from street to street or who stands in a street or upon a sidewalk
selling, bartering or offering for sale or barter any items whatsoever,
including but not limited to the following: goods, wares, merchandise,
magazines, food products and farm products.
SOLICITOR — One who goes from place to place or from house to house
or from street to street or who stands in a street or upon a sidewalk taking
orders for any items whatsoever, including but not limited to the following:
goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, food products and farm produce,
(3) The signs shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be
immediately removed after the sale.
F. Zoning. It is not the intention of this chapter to change or amend the
zoning regulations of the Village of Brockport.
G. Any household sales or auctions conducted by persons under contract
by the resident of the property shall be exempt from the requirements
of this chapter, except as follows:
(1) No more than four professional signs shall be allowed outside the
property, and such signs shall be removed upon the close of each
sale day.
(2) There shall be no more than one two-day sale at any one property
per calendar year.
(3) Sales shall be held between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ 22-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 23-2
1:144
which items are to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed
in the future, or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing
to be delivered in the future.
§ 23-3. License required.
No person shall act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined
within the Village limits without first having obtained a license from the
Village Mayor or his or her designated representative. Any exempt
organization under § 23-5 still must obtain a yearly license.
§ 23-4. Application for license.
§ 23-5. License fees; exemptions; entry on private premises.
A. No license shall be issued by the Mayor or his or her designated
representative unless the following information is furnished by the
applicant for the license:
(1) The name of the applicant, his permanent address and temporary
address.
(2) The applicant's phone number and social security number.
(3) The applicant's age and a brief physical description, including
height, weight and color of eyes and hair.
(4) The applicant's driver's license number and car license number.
(5) The company represented and the address of the company.
(6) A description of the items hawked, peddled or for which orders are
being solicited.
B. The applicant shall also furnish the names of two persons as character
references and also a passport-size photograph taken within two
months preceding the application.
A. The fees for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. Exemption to fee requirements.
(1) No charge shall be made for the licensing of a veteran, provided
that such veteran or his widow shall be residents of Monroe County
and shall have in effect and shall exhibit to the Mayor or his or her
designated representative a Monroe County license issued
pursuant to § 32 of the General Business Law of the state.
(2) No person shall be required to pay a license fee under this chapter
who has a valid license issued by the New York State Department of
Social Welfare or soliciting or collecting for any bona fide
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-5
1:145
§ 23-6. Revocation of license; notice.
The Mayor or his or her designated representative shall revoke the license
of any person who has made a false statement on his license application or
who has been convicted of a crime while having in effect a license issued
under this chapter. Notice of revocation shall be sent immediately to such
person at the permanent address listed on the license application.
§ 23-7. Display of license; conduct.
§ 23-8. Records.
The Mayor or his or her designated representative shall file and retain each
application for a hawker's, peddler's or solicitor's license for a period of
10 days following the date of the application. He or she shall also keep a
record of all licenses issued under this chapter and shall note thereon all
revocations of licenses.
§ 23-9. Penalties for offenses.
charitable organization or on behalf of any class of any Brockport
school.
(3) Business premises. No person who calls at business places
exclusively or at only those places where he has been requested by
telephone or by letter to call shall be required to pay a license fee
under this chapter.
(4) No person who deals exclusively in milk, milk products,
newspapers or farm products produced by him or his employer
shall be required to pay a license fee under this chapter.
C. Private residential premises. No one shall enter onto private residential
premises for the purpose of selling or offering to sell any goods, wares,
merchandise or other things or services, nor solicit information for the
purpose of selling or making offers to sell in the future such aforesaid
goods, wares, merchandise or other things or services, to persons
residing therein without the prior consent of the owner or person in
possession of said private residential premises.
A. Each licensee under this chapter, when acting as a hawker, peddler or
solicitor, shall display his license provided by the Village.
B. Any licensee shall not conduct activities in such a manner as will
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular use of the public street and
places.
A. Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
B. Civil penalties; construal.
§ 23-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 23-9
1:146
Chapter 26
LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code and
administration — See Chs. 10 and 11.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 27.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
(1) Obedience to the provisions set forth herein may be enforced by
criminal information for the penalties herein prescribed, as well as
by prosecution of the offender as provided in Subsection A of this
section, or by civil action for a penalty, or by civil remedy at law or
equity by way of injunction or otherwise to abate or prevent a
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any violation shall
automatically result in the revocation of the permit.
(2) Neither a judgment in nor the pendency of a criminal prosecution
for an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter nor a
judgment in or the pendency of a civil action of law or in equity
shall be a bar to the other form of proceeding.
(3) The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the remedies
herein provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin or abate a
violation shall be cumulative.
§ 23-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-9
1:147

ARTICLE I
Policy
§ 26-1. Declaration of policy.
By authority of resolution adopted by the Village of Brockport, pursuant to
the provisions of Article 6-A of the Village Law, the Planning Board has the
power and authority to approve plats for subdivisions within the Village of
Brockport.14
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Brockport Planning
Board to consider land subdivisions as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient
and economical development of the Village. Land to be subdivided shall be
of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger
to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. Proper provision shall
be made for drainage, water, sewerage and other needed improvements.
The proposed streets and development shall compose a convenient street
system and shall be properly related to the Official Map and/or the Master
Plan of the Village of Brockport, as either may be adopted or accepted as
guides for the future development of the Village. Streets shall be of such
widths, grade and location as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to
afford adequate light and air, and to facilitate fire protection. In proper
cases, park areas of suitable location, size and character for playground or
other recreational purposes shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
Should any of this chapter conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of
the Village Law, such provision of the Village Law shall apply.
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with this policy, those
regulations are hereby adopted.
14.Editor's Note: See Village Law Article 7, § 7-728, Subdivision review; approval of plats;
development of filed plats, for authority.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-1
1:149

ARTICLE II
Procedure for Filing Subdivision Applications
§ 26-2. Procedures to be followed. [Amended 5-6-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract for
the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a
structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing
owner or his authorized agent shall apply for the secure approval of such
proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures, which
may include up to three steps:
§ 26-3. Preliminary layout.
A. Conceptual review.
B. Preliminary layout.
C. Subdivision plat.
A. Discussion or requirements. Before preparing the preliminary layout,
the applicant may discuss with the Planning Board or its representative
the requirements for reservations of land, street improvements,
drainage, sewerage, water, fire protection and similar aspects, as well
as the availability of existing services. The applicant should also discuss
the preliminary layout with the State Health Department or other
pertinent health agencies whose approval is required by this chapter
and which must eventually approve any subdivision plat coming within
its jurisdiction.
B. Application procedure. Prior to filing an application for the approval of
a subdivision plat, the applicant shall file an application for the approval
of a preliminary layout and shall retain competent engineering and
legal counsel for technical matters and provide the necessary detailed
information. The application shall: [Amended 12-7-1970]
(1) Be made on forms available at the office of the Village
Administrator.
(2) Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide.
(3) Be accompanied by three copies of the preliminary layout, as
described in § 26-16 of this chapter, a copy of which shall be
submitted to the Village Engineer at least two weeks prior to the
regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting for its review.
[Amended 12-7-1970]
§ 26-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:151
(4) Comply in all respects with Article III of this chapter and with the
provisions of §§ 178 and 179 of the Village Law,15 except where a
modification may be specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
(5) Be presented to the Chairman of the Planning Board.
(6) Be accompanied by a minimum fee of $100, plus $50 for each
additional lot. [Amended 1-19-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987;
10-19-1987 by L.L. No. 6-1987; 5-6-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
(a) Unscheduled Planning Board meeting by special request: $50.
(b) For subdivision plat housing developments of more than 70
units in size, the fee structure is calculated as in § 26-3B(6) but
may be paid in three installments, each consisting of 1/3 of the
total amount due on the application. The schedule of payments
shall coincide with the three phases of plan development, and
each payment shall be due prior to the meeting that begins
each phase of the Planning Board plan approval process:
[1] Phase I: Conceptual review;
[2] Phase II: Preliminary layout; and
[3] Phase III: Subdivision plat.
C. Applicant to attend Planning Board meeting. The applicant should then
be prepared to attend the next regular meeting of the Planning Board to
discuss the preliminary layout.
D. Study of preliminary layout. The Planning Board will carefully study the
practicability of the preliminary layout, taking into consideration the
requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement,
location and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the
land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the
requirements of the Village of Brockport Master Plan and the Official
Map.
E. Required changes for tentative approval. After discussion of the
preliminary layout, the Planning Board will advise the applicant, in
writing, of the specific changes it will require in the layout, and the
character and extent of required improvements and reservations which
it will require as a prerequisite to the approval of the subdivision plat.
This shall constitute tentative approval of the preliminary layout.
F. Where an application has been received for a new one-lot subdivision
on existing public services, or for a lot resubdivision, the Planning
Board authorizes the Building Inspector for the Village of Brockport to
take such application and, if he is satisfied that appropriate zoning
15.Editor's Note: See now §§ 7-706 and 7-708 of Village Law.
§ 26-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-3
1:152
§ 26-4. Subdivision plat.
regulations are met and that all public services, i.e., water, sewer and
road, do service this property, he may grant tentative approval of the
preliminary layout on behalf of the Planning Board. With such approval,
the applicant may then file directly with the Planning Board for final
approval after the mandatory public hearing. [Added 3-1-1976 by L.L.
No. 3-1976]
G. The purpose of the above new subsection is to simplify the subdivision
process when the property has already been subdivided or when the
property exists in an improved section of the Village. [Added 3-1-1976
by L.L. No. 3-1976]
A. Application procedure. Within six months of the tentative approval of
the preliminary layout, the applicant may file with the Planning Board
an application for approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall:
(1) Be made on forms provided by the Planning Board at the time of
tentative approval of the preliminary layout.
(2) Include the entire subdivision, or a section thereof, which derives
access from a street on the Official Map (as it may be adopted),
which street is improved to Village standards or for which street a
bond covering such improvements is held by the Village.
(3) Be accompanied by three copies of the subdivision plat and the
construction detail sheets, as described in § 26-17 of this chapter.
(4) Comply in all respects with the preliminary layout as tentatively
approved.
(5) Be presented to the Chairman of the Planning Board at least two
weeks prior to a regular meeting of the Board in order that a public
hearing may be scheduled and the required five days' notice given.
B. Official submittal date. The subdivision plat shall be considered
officially submitted only at the regular meeting of the Planning Board
following completion of the application procedure outlined above.
C. Endorsement of State Health Department. The proposed subdivision
plat shall be properly endorsed by the State Health Department, or
other pertinent health agency, as meeting the standards of the State
Sanitary Code or other applicable health code before any public hearing
is scheduled. The plat should be in final form before State Health
Department or other health agency approval.
D. County Official Map notification. The Planning Board shall also, when
and if Monroe County establishes a County Official Map, notify the
County Planning Board or Commission, if any, and the County
Superintendent of Highways if the subdivision plat proposes structures
or new streets having frontage on, access to or is otherwise directly
§ 26-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:153
related to any county road, existing or proposed, as shown on the
County Official Map, when and if established. The County Planning
Board or Commission shall report to the Village Planning Board within
30 days on its approval or disapproval, or on its approval subject to
stated conditions, of the subdivision plat. The plat may be approved
by the Village Planning Board subject to stated conditions,
notwithstanding such report, when the application of such report will
act so as to deprive the owner of the reasonable use of his land.
E. Public hearing. Before the Planning Board acts on any subdivision plat,
it shall hold a public hearing thereon, in accordance with Village Law
§ 7-728. [Amended 11-19-1973]
F. Action on proposed subdivision plat. After careful study, the Planning
Board may, within 45 days from the official submittal date of the
subdivision plat, approve, modify or disapprove such plat. The grounds
for disapproval of any plat shall be stated on the records of the Planning
Board. A subdivision plat shall not be signed by the authorized officers
of the Planning Board until the applicant has met all the conditions of
the action granting approval of such plat.
G. Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has
been given by the Board and endorsed, in writing, on the plat. In the
event that any subdivision plat when recorded contains any such
changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall
institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of the
County Clerk.
H. Signing of plat. [Amended 12-7-1970]
(1) Every subdivision plat submitted to the Board for its approval shall
carry the following endorsement:
Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of the Village of
Brockport, New York, on the __________ day of __________, _____,
subject to all requirements and conditions of said Resolution. Any
change, erasure modification or revision of this plat, as approved,
shall void this approval.
Signed this _____ day of ____________, ____, by
Chairman
Secretary
Monroe County Health
Department
Village Engineer
Superintendent of Public Works
(water mains, sanitary sewers
and roads)
§ 26-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-4
1:154
§ 26-5. Required improvements and agreements.
(2) In the absence of the Chairman or Secretary, the Acting Chairman
or Acting Secretary, respectively, may sign in his place.
A. Prior to any action by the Planning Board approving a subdivision plat,
the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond (backed up
with a letter of credit or surety bond or certified check) which is
available to the Village in sufficient amount to assure such completion
of all required improvements. This bond shall be for a period of one
year, to be renewed at the end of that time if improvements are not
completed. After the improvements are in and approved by the Village,
the applicant shall be required to post a maintenance bond for two
years in the amount of 10% of the cost of such improvements. Such
performance bond shall comply with the requirements of Village Law
§ 7-730, and shall be satisfactory to the Village Board as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution. All required improvements shall
be made by the applicant at his expense without reimbursement by the
Village. [Amended 12-7-1970; 11-19-1973]
B. Inspection of improvements. The Village shall employ an inspector to
act as agent of the Planning Board for the purpose of assuring the
satisfactory completion of improvements required by the Planning
Board and shall determine an amount sufficient to defray costs of
inspection. The applicant shall pay the Village costs of inspection before
the subdivision plat is signed for filing. If the Planning Board or its
agent finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with the approved
construction detail sheets, the applicant and the bonding company will
be severally and jointly liable for the costs of completing said
improvements according to specifications.
C. Utilities. As to utilities required by the Planning Board, the Board may
accept assurance from each public utility company whose facilities are
proposed to be installed. Such assurance shall be in writing, addressed
to the Board, stating that such public utility company will make the
installation necessary for the furnishing of its services within a
specified time, in accordance with the approved construction detail
sheets.
D. Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at
intervals of approximately 500 feet, or such other distance as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate, and their location shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes shall not be considered
permanent monuments for the purpose of this chapter.
E. Offers of cession and releases. The plat shall be endorsed with the
necessary agreements in connection with required easements or
releases. Offers of cession to the Village shall be presented prior to plat
approval. Formal offers of cession to the Village of all streets and parks
not marked on the plat, with a notation to the effect that such cession
§ 26-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5
1:155
§ 26-6. Filing of approved subdivision plat.
Upon completion of all requirements set forth in the action approving the
subdivision plat, the plat shall be properly signed by the appropriate officers
of the Planning Board and shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the
County Clerk. Any subdivision plat not so filed within 90 days of the date of
Planning Board signature shall become null and void.
§ 26-7. Resubdivision.
For a resubdivision, the same procedure, rules and regulations apply as for
a subdivision.
§ 26-8. Public streets, parks and playground areas.
Public acceptance of streets and reservations. The approval by the Planning
Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the
acceptance by the Village of any street, park, playground or other open
space shown on said plat. The Planning Board may require said plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board may
also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and
the Village Board covering future title, dedication and provision for the
cost of grading, development, equipment and maintenance of any park or
playground area.
will not be offered, shall be filed with the Planning Board prior to plat
approval.
§ 26-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-8
1:156
ARTICLE III
General Requirements for Subdivision of Land
§ 26-9. Considerations and standards to be followed.
The Planning Board, in considering an application for the subdivision of
land, shall be guided by the following considerations and standards.
§ 26-10. General.
§ 26-11. Streets.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and Village Plan. Subdivisions shall conform
to the streets and parks shown on the Official Map of the Village as it is
developed and adopted by the Village Board, and they shall be properly
related to the Village Master Plan as it is developed and accepted as a
guide or adopted by the Planning Board.
C. Provisions for application under § 7-738 of the Village Law of the State
of New York and/or any successor or amendment thereto. [Added
1-16-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
(1) The Planning Board is empowered to modify applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance16 in accordance with the provisions of
§ 7-738 of the Village Law for the purpose of enabling and
encouraging flexibility of design and development of land in such a
manner as to promote the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate
the adequate and economic use of streets and utilities and to
preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open lands.
(2) A subdivider or the Planning Board may request the use of § 7-738,
in which case the subdivider shall present along with the proposal,
in accordance with the provisions of § 7-738, a conventional sketch
plat which is consistent with all the criteria established by this
chapter.
(3) Upon determination of the Planning Board that such proposal is
suitable for application under § 7-738 of the Village Law, the
applicant may proceed with his application for subdivision review.
(4) Permitted use. The permitted uses within a cluster development
shall be the same as those otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which it is located.
A. Location, width and improvement of streets. Streets shall be suitably
located, of sufficient width, and adequately improved to accommodate
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 26-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-11
1:157
the prospective traffic and to afford satisfactory access to police,
firefighting, snow-removal or other road-maintenance equipment, and
shall be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system. The
arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no undue hardship to
adjoining properties.
B. Widths of right-of-way. Streets shall have the following widths, unless
otherwise indicated on the Village Plan:
(1) Local streets, 60 feet. [Amended 12-7-1970]
(2) Collector streets, 60 feet.
(3) Business streets, 65 feet.
Standards for Street Design
Street
Classification Local Collector Business
Minimum width
right-of-way
60 feet [Amended
12-7-1970]
60 feet 65 feet
Minimum width
of pavement
21 feet [Amended
12-7-1970]
36 feet 40 feet
Minimum
radius of
horizontal
curves
150 feet except for
street-intersection
corners
400 feet 400 feet
Minimum
length of
vertical curves
100 feet but not
less than 20 feet
for each 1%
algebraic
difference of grade
200 feet but
not less than
30 feet for
each 1%
algebraic
difference of
grade
200 feet
Minimum
length of
tangents
between
reverse curves
100 feet except
where excessive
grades may be
reduced to
reasonable grades
by shortening
tangent
200 feet 200 feet
Maximum
grade
10% [Amended
12-7-1970]
8% 6%
Minimum grade 1% 1% 1%
Minimum sight
distance
150 feet 250 feet 250 feet
§ 26-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-11
1:158
Standards for Street Design
Street
Classification Local Collector Business
Minimum curb
radii [Added
12-7-1970]
30 feet 30 feet 35 feet
NOTE: Street classification as indicated on the Village Master Plan
or the Official Map, as it may be adopted, or as determined by the
Planning Board. Standards are not shown for arterial streets, as
they would be built by the state or county in all probability.
C. Relation to topography. Streets shall be logically related to the
topography, and all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as
possible of the building sites at or above the grades of the streets.
Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. A combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be
avoided.
D. Block size. Within any zoning district, block dimensions shall be at least
twice the minimum lot depth and generally not more than 12 times the
minimum lot width. In long blocks, the Planning Board may require the
renovation through the block of a twenty-foot-wide easement to
accommodate utilities or pedestrian traffic. See § 26-14.
E. Intersections. Intersections of arterial streets by other streets shall be
at least 800 feet apart, if possible. Cross-street (four-cornered)
intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible, except at important
traffic intersections. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained
between offset intersections. Within 40 feet of an intersection, streets
shall be approximately at right angles and grades shall be limited to
1 1/2%. All street-intersection corners shall be rounded by curves of at
least 30 feet in radius at the property line. Within triangular areas
formed by the intersecting street lines, for a distance of 75 feet from
their intersection and the diagonals connecting the end points of those
lines, visibility for traffic safety shall be provided by excavating, if
necessary. Nothing in the way of fences, walls, hedges or other
landscaping shall be permitted to obstruct such visibility. [Amended
12-7-1970]
F. Continuation of streets into adjacent property. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between
adjacent properties where such continuation is necessary for
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient
provision of utilities and particularly where such continuation is in
accordance with the Village Plan. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the
right-of-way and improvements shall be extended to the property line. A
temporary circular turnaround of a minimum of 60 feet in radius shall
be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the
§ 26-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-11
1:159
§ 26-12. Improvements. [Amended 12-7-1970; 1-19-1987 by L.L. No.
1-1987]
Street improvements. Streets shall be graded and improved with pavement,
street signs, streetlighting standards, curbs, gutters, street trees, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants and sidewalks, except
that waivers may be requested and the Planning Board may waive, subject
to appropriate conditions, such improvements as it considers are not
requisite in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. If
placed in the street right-of-way, underground utilities required by the
Planning Board shall be placed between the paved roadway and the street
line to simplify the location and repair of the lines. The subdivider shall
install underground service connections to the property line of each lot
before the street is paved. Such grading and improvements shall conform
to the Village minimum road specifications and shall be approved as to
design and specifications by the Village Engineer. The developer, before the
approval of the final subdivision plat, shall complete all improvements to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer and post a performance bond sufficient
to insure the satisfactory completion of such improvements.
§ 26-13. Lots.
plat that land outside the street right-of-way shall revert to abutters
whenever the street is continued. The Planning Board may limit
temporary dead-end streets to a length not more than double the
permitted length of permanent dead-end streets. [Amended
12-7-1970]
G. Permanent dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not needed for
access to adjoining property, it shall be separated from such boundary
by a distance not less than the average lot depth of the proposed lots on
the street. Reserve strips of land shall not be left between the end of a
proposed street and an adjacent piece of property. However, the
Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide
easement to accommodate pedestrian traffic or utilities. A circular
turnaround of a minimum right-of-way radius of 65 feet shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street. For greater
convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection,
permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length to six
times the minimum lot width for the zoning district.
H. Street names. All streets shall be named, and such names shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other street names in
the Village so as not to cause confusion. A street which is a continuation
of an existing street shall bear the same name.
A. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
§ 26-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-13
1:160
§ 26-14. Reservations and easements.
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance,17 and in providing access to
buildings on such lots from an approved street.
B. Access across a watercourse. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provision
shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of design
approved by the Village Engineer. [Amended 12-7-1970]
C. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall at the least comply with the
minimum standards of the Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than
double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning
Board may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further
subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be
necessary to serve such potential lots.
D. Side lot lines. Side lot lines may be at right angles to street lines or at an
angle no smaller than 55° as measured from the street line.
E. Access from major streets. Lots shall not, in general, derive access
exclusively from a major street. Where driveway access from a major
street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Planning Board
may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in
order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street.
A. Parks and playgrounds. The Planning Board may require adequate,
convenient and suitable areas for parks and playgrounds, or other
recreational purposes, to be reserved on the plat, but in no case more
than 10% of the gross area of any subdivision. The area shall be shown
and marked on the plat "Reserved for Park or Playground Purposes."
B. Widening or realignment of existing streets. Where the subdivision
borders an existing street, and the Official Map or Master Plan
indicates plans for realignment or widening of the street that would
require reservation of some land of the subdivision, the Planning Board
may require that such areas be shown and marked on the plat
"Reserved for Street Realignment (or Widening) Purposes."
C. Utility and drainage easements. Where topography or other conditions
are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities or drainage
facilities within street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements
at least 20 feet in width for such utilities shall be provided across
property outside the street lines and with satisfactory access to the
street. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
D. Easements for pedestrian access. The Planning Board, where it deems
necessary, may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from
streets to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets,
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 26-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-14
1:161
§ 26-15. Miscellaneous.
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
E. Responsibility for ownership of reservations. Ownership shall be clearly
indicated on all reservations for parks and playground purposes.
A. Preservation of existing features. Existing features which would add
value to residential development, such as large trees, watercourses and
falls, beaches, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, should be
preserved, insofar as possible, through the harmonious design of the
subdivision.
B. Self-imposed restrictions. The owner may place restrictions on the
development greater than those required by the Zoning Ordinance.18
Such restrictions, if any, shall be indicated on the final plat.
C. Modification of standards. The Planning Board may modify the specified
requirements in any individual case where, in the Board's judgment,
such modification is in the public interest or will avoid the imposition of
unnecessary individual hardship.
D. All development of property is further controlled by the Design Criteria
and Construction Specifications for Land Development adopted by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport June 10, 1985.19 [Added
12-7-1970; amended 12-16-1985 by L.L. No. 11-1985]
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
19.Editor's Note: Design Criteria and Construction Specifications for Land Development are
on file in the Village's office.
§ 26-14 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-15
1:162
ARTICLE IV
Specifications for Preliminary Layouts and Subdivision Plats
§ 26-16. Preliminary layout. [Amended 12-7-1970]
Preliminary layouts submitted to the Planning Board shall be drawn to a
convenient scale, not less than one inch equals 50 feet, and shall show the
following information:
A. The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and
streets. There shall also be included an area map at a scale of one inch
equals 400 feet, showing all streets and property within 1,000 feet of
the applicant's property. All property held by the applicant in the area
should be identified.
B. The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines,
including the entire area proposed to be subdivided and remainder of
the tract owned by the subdividing owner.
C. All pertinent features, such as existing structures, streets, railroads,
water bodies, streams, swamps, large trees and all existing utilities,
that may influence the design of the subdivision and topography at a
contour interval of not more than five feet for both actual and proposed
contours, unless waived by the Planning Board.
D. The location, width and approximate grade of all proposed streets.
Approximate elevations shall be shown at the beginning and end of
each street, at street intersections and at all points where there is a
decided change in the slope or direction.
E. The approximate location, dimensions and area of all proposed or
existing lots.
F. The approximate location, dimensions and area of all property proposed
to be set aside for playground or park use.
G. The names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of
adjoining developments.
H. The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided,
the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner, and the
name of the landscape architect and/or licensed professional engineer
and licensed land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the sketch
layout and preliminary information.
I. The date, approximate true North point and scale.
J. Proposed provision of water supply, fire protection, disposal of sanitary
waste, stormwater drainage, street trees, streetlighting fixtures, street
signs and sidewalks, data on which must be available for consideration
at this stage.
§ 26-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-17
1:163
§ 26-17. Subdivision plat.
Subdivision plats shall be accompanied by separate construction detail
sheets, and both shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval, as
follows:
A. Drawing, scale and size of plat and construction detail sheets. The
subdivision plat and construction detail sheets shall be clearly and
legibly drawn on transparent linen tracing cloth with black waterproof
ink. The plans and profiles shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than
one inch equals 60 feet. Maps shall be on uniform-size sheets, not
larger than 36 by 48 inches. Whenever any project is of such size that
more than one sheet is required, then an index map on the same size
sheet shall accompany these sheets. [Amended 12-7-1970]
B. Information to be shown on plat. Plat shall show the following
information:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate that of any other development
in the Village.
(2) Date, approximate true North point and scale.
(3) Name, address and signature of owner, subdivider, licensed
professional engineer and a licensed land surveyor. [Amended
12-7-1970]
(4) Names of owners of record of abutting properties or developments.
(5) Locations, names and widths of existing streets, highways and
easements, building lines, parks and other public properties.
(6) Locations and widths of all streets and sidewalks, together with
names of streets and location, dimensions and status of all
easements proposed by the subdivider.
(7) Lot areas in square feet.
(8) Lot lines with accurate dimensions and bearings of angles.
(9) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(10)Radii of all curves and lengths of arcs.
(11) Location, material and approximate size of all monuments.
(12) The accurate outline of all property which is offered or to be
offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated
thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be reserved by deed
covenant for the common use of the property owners of the
subdivision.
§ 26-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-17
1:164
C. Construction detail sheets. Construction detail sheets shall show the
following information, except that, where requirements have been
waived, applicable specifications may be omitted.
(1) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center
lines of all streets, where a proposed street intersects an existing
street or streets, the elevation along the center line of the existing
street or streets within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown.
All elevations must be referred to established United States
government or approved local bench marks, where they exist
within 1/2 mile of the boundary of the subdivision.
(2) The Planning Board may require, where steep slopes exist, that
present elevation of all proposed streets shall be shown every 100
feet at five points on a line at right angles to the center line of the
street, and said elevation points shall be at (a) the center line of the
street; (b) each property line; and (c) points 30 feet inside each
property line.
(3) Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of
street pavements, including curbs and gutters, manholes and catch
basins; the location of street trees, streetlighting standards and
street signs; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and
proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants;
and the exact location and size of all water, gas or other
underground utilities or structures.
§ 26-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-17
1:165

ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 26-18. Words and phrases defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows:
APPLICANT — The owner of the property, the contract vendee or his
authorized representative.
BUSINESS STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve as an
access to abutting business properties.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve as a
route connecting different parts of the Village.
DEAD-END STREET — A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular outlet.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specific purpose, of any designated part of his property.
LOCAL STREET — A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
abutting residential properties.
MASTER PLAN — See "Village Development Plan."
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Village Board under § 179,
Article 6-A, of the Village Law20 showing the streets, highways and parks
heretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments
thereto adopted by the Village Board, or additions thereto resulting from
the approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the subsequent
filing of such approved plats. (Such be the case when and if adopted.)
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawing or drawings indicating
the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Board for its consideration.
PLANNING BOARD — The Village of Brockport Planning Board.
STREET — Includes streets, roads, avenues, lanes or other ways.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between property lines.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out, for the purpose of sale or development, any subdivision or
part thereof, as defined herein, either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and shall include
resubdivision.
20.Editor's Note: See now § 7-724 of Village Code for provisions related to the Official Map.
§ 26-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-18
1:167
SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final map or drawing on which the subdivider's
plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for approval and
which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT PLAN or VILLAGE PLAN or MASTER PLAN —
A comprehensive plan for development of the Village prepared by the
Planning Board, pursuant to § 179, Article 6-A, of the Village Law,21 which
indicates the general locations recommended for various public works and
reservations, and for the general physical development of the Village, and
includes any part of such plan separately accepted as a guide or adopted,
and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer employed by the
Village or a licensed consulting engineer hired by the Village.[Added
12-7-1970]
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Brockport, together with any and all amendments thereto.22
21.Editor's Note: See § 7-722 of Village Code for provisions related to village comprehensive
plan.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 26-18 BROCKPORT CODE § 26-18
1:168
Chapter 27
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Berms, fences, hedges and screen
plantings — See Ch. 6.
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 15.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 17A.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Sewers — See Ch. 42.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 26-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-18
1:169

ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 27-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control Law."
§ 27-2. Introduction; purpose.
A. Land-disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and non-point-source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitats for
fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of
waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitats and to provide a healthy
living environment for citizens of the Village of Brockport. Improper
design and construction of stormwater management practices can
increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less water
to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge
and stream baseflow. Regulation of land-disturbance activities by
means of performance standards governing stormwater management
and site design will produce development compatible with the natural
functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby
mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from
development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard public
health, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and
promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the
design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or
other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the
movement of earth on land in the Village of Brockport. It seeks to meet
those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of Minimum Measures 4 and 5 of the
SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02,
or as amended or revised.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-2
1:171
§ 27-3. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land-disturbance activity.
BUILDING — Any roofed walled structure, either temporary, permanent
and/or vacant, as per the definitions stated in Chapter 58, § 58-2, of the
Code of the Village of Brockport.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse, with a definite bed and
banks, that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Protection Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereof.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all inspectors employed by the Village of Brockport, as certified
by the State of New York either in the capacity of code enforcement officer,
building inspector and fire marshal, and/or titled as the assistant code
(2) Require land-disturbance activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities, or as amended
or revised.
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land-disturbance
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion, and maintain the integrity
of stream channels.
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land-disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality.
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable.
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint-
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices, and ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.
§ 27-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-3
1:172
enforcement officer, assistant building inspector and deputy fire marshal, or
any combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport as certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of the
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator or any
combination thereof.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — A written order for the remedying of found
violation(s) of the code(s), pursuant to Article I, § 27-15B.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activity requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit Stormwater Discharge from Construction Activity, GP-02-02,
as amended or revised. Currently, these activities include but are not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Village of Brockport
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
DWELLING — Includes one-family and two-family dwellings, multiple-family
dwellings, boardinghouses, rooming houses, and apartment houses, as per
the definitions stated in Chapter 58, § 58-2, of the Code of the Village
of Brockport. The actual use and occupancy of a dwelling at the time of
any application for certificates or permits hereunder, registrations, their
renewal, or any compliance or complaint inspection(s) required to be made
by the Code Enforcement Officer, regardless of any other classification
of the property (whether for tax purposes or otherwise), shall determine
whether and to what extent the dwelling is subject to the provisions of this
article.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or
more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that result in land
disturbance.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A set of plans prepared
by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating
the specific measures and sequencing to be used controlling sediment and
erosion on a development site before, during and after construction.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80%
has been established or equivalent measures, such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles, have been employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures.
FOIL (FREEDOM OF INFORMATION LAW) — A legislative act to assist
persons seeking public records to identify records sought.
§ 27-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:173
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Surface improvements and structures that cannot
effectively be infiltrated by rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet, or
activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land-disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A document which provides for the longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices. It is anticipated
that this document will be recorded in the Monroe County Clerk's office and
will act as a property deed restriction or encumbrance.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication, which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent
version, including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, and shall include
but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
OWNER — The person or entity in whose name the premises affected by an
order issued in accordance with this article is recorded as the owner in the
office of the Monroe County Clerk.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
§ 27-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-3
1:174
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include but not be limited to paints, varnishes and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid waste and
yard waste; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from construction of a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediments (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or silt)
and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment
of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development
activity.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel or land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROJECT — Any construction, removal of building and/or surface materials,
or development activity upon real property.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control, such as a licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional
in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization
to proceed with a project based upon a drawing, prepared to specifications
and containing necessary elements, which shows the arrangement, layout
and design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said
plan.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
§ 27-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:175
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land-disturbance activity
associated with a development, including land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STOP-WORK ORDER — A public notice placed on a building, structure,
premises, dwelling unit, equipment and/or land pursuant to Article I,
§ 27-15B, that work and/or a use is in noncompliance and shall cease.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The Code Enforcement
Officer, the Municipal Engineer or other public official(s) designated by the
Trustees of the Village of Brockport to enforce this article. The SMO may
also be designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to applicable municipal boards
and the Municipal Engineer as well, or designate the inspection of
stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
waters or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or
bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste
treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet
§ 27-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-3
1:176
the criteria of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion
applies only to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally
created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor
resulted from impoundment of waters of the state.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water, including but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, canals, wetlands or drainage ditches, which have
been delineated by the Village of Brockport or any other local, state or
federal regulatory authority.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 27-4. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land-disturbance activities that will
disturb greater than or equal to 2,000 square feet of land, unless exempted
under § 27-10C of this article. This article also applies to land-disturbance
activities that are less than 25,000 square feet of disturbance if such
activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will
disturb greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet, even though multiple
separate and distinct land-disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
§ 27-5. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
A. Compliance with this article does not relieve the applicant of the
obligation and responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the
NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities, if required.
For projects also applying for coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement, including the date, demonstrating submission to the
NYSDEC, a letter of permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to
disturb five acres or greater of land at one time (if applicable) and any
related documents to the Village of Brockport for review and approval.
B. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements; and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other federal, state, or
local ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the
provisions that are more restrictive or impose more-stringent
requirements shall take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
ordinances, such as Article II of this chapter, Design and Management
of Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Measures.
§ 27-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-6
1:177
§ 27-6. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 21 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, Article 3 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York
and Chapter 28 of the Code of the Village of Brockport, the Board of
Trustees has the authority to enact laws for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety or general welfare of the Village of Brockport, including the
protection and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the same
authority, the Board of Trustees may include in any such law provisions for
the authorizing of any municipal employees and/or agent of the Village of
Brockport to effectuate and administer such law.
§ 27-7. Responsibility for administration.
The Board of Trustees, pursuant to Chapter 42, § 42-14, shall designate a
Stormwater Management Officer, who shall accept and review all SWPPPs
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. A consultant
cannot be appointed as Stormwater Management Officer. The Stormwater
Management Officer may review the plans; upon approval by the Board of
Trustees, engage the services of a New York State licensed professional
engineer to review the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost
not to exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board; or accept
the certification of a licensed/certified professional that the plans conform
to the requirements of this article. The Stormwater Management Officer
(SMO) shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Village of Brockport may
be delegated, in writing, by the Village of Brockport to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 27-8. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 27-9. Standards for construction activities.
A. The Village of Brockport requires the use of technical standards for
erosion and sediment control. These are detailed in the Village of
Brockport Design Criteria and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation's Standards and Specifications for Erosion
and Sediment Control. For the design of water quality and water
quantity controls (post-construction stormwater runoff control
practices), the NYSDEC's technical standards are detailed in the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual.
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
the aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer
must demonstrate equivalence to these technical standards, and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
§ 27-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-10
1:178
§ 27-10. Land-disturbance activity approval process.
A. Requirements of application.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for landdisturbance
activity which would require the disturbance of
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land shall also
include with the submission a SWPPP that shall be reviewed and
approved by the Village of Brockport prior to issuance of the final
site plan approval or a permit.
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which
would require the disturbance of greater than or equal to 25,000
square feet of land without the review and approval of a SWPPP by
the Village of Brockport.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan
approval, all projects that would result in the disturbance of
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land will be required
to comply with all applicable provisions of Article II of this chapter,
Design and Management of Post-Construction Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Measures. As part of the SWPPP, the applicant
shall include a signed statement that all applicable requirements of
Article II of this chapter, Design and Management of Post-
Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Measures, have
been met to the satisfaction of the Village of Brockport.
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as set forth in § 27-16.
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete
SWPPP that shall be prepared in accordance with § 27-12 of this
article.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction or development involving the movement of land shall
be in accordance with the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land-disturbance activities, as defined in § 27-4 of this article,
which are not subject to site plan or permit approval shall be
required to submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater Management
Officer designated by the Village of Brockport, who shall approve
the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this article.
B. Review and approval of application.
(1) Upon receipt of a construction application, the Stormwater
Management Officer shall determine if the provisions of this article
are applicable to the proposal.
§ 27-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-10
1:179
§ 27-11. Financial guaranties.
The Village of Brockport may, at its discretion, require the applicant to
submit a financial guaranty in a form acceptable to the Board of Trustees
prior to issuance of site plan approval or a permit in order to insure
that the stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control
practices are implemented and maintained by the applicant as required by
the approved SWPPP. The amount of the financial guaranty shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency. The
financial guaranty shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete
work specified in the SWPPP. The financial guaranty shall be released in full
only upon satisfaction of the requirements listed in § 27-14 of this article. At
its discretion, the Board of Trustees may allow for a partial release of the
financial guaranty based on the completion of various development stages.
§ 27-12. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(2) If the provisions of this article are not applicable, the Stormwater
Management Officer shall file a written memorandum in the file
stating the reason(s) why this article is not applicable.
(3) If the provisions of this article are applicable, the Stormwater
Management Officer shall transmit the application to the Planning
Board.
(4) The Planning Board shall review said application in conjunction
with any subdivision and site plan review pursuant to Chapter 26,
Land Subdivision Regulations.
(5) In situations where application is made after approval (for example
an approved site plan or subdivision approved prior to the
enactment of this article), the application shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board as a change or modification to the approved plan.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from review under this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity, as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Village of Brockport.
§ 27-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-12
1:180
A. Prior to final approval of a land-disturbance activity, a SWPPP shall be
prepared by the applicant, in accordance with the specifications
outlined by the Village of Brockport, and submitted to the Stormwater
Management Officer designated by the Village of Brockport for review
by the appropriate board. This plan must be prepared in accordance
with sound engineering practices by a qualified professional as defined
in § 27-9 of this article. The final plan must be signed by a New York
State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will certify that the
design of all stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control practices meet the requirements outlined in the Village of
Brockport Design Criteria and the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control and shall be adequate
to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of
Village of Brockport.
B. The requirements to have a SWPPP prepared by a qualified professional
and to have the final plan signed and certified by a New York State
licensed professional engineer (PE) are not applicable to landdisturbance
activities that meet technical standards and are five acres
or less, occurring on a single-family residence which is not part of a
larger common plan of development or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land-disturbance activities must not discharge directly
to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
C. Minimum requirements. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of the project, and contact information that
includes the name, address and telephone number of all persons
having a legal interest in the property, and the tax reference
number and parcel number of the subject property or properties.
(2) A site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map and a one-inch-equals-fifty-feet topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development. At a minimum, the site map
should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of
disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation;
on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s), including receiving
waters (name of the water), streams, ponds, culverts, ditches and
wetlands, as well as drainage patterns that could be affected by the
construction activity; existing and final slopes; locations of utilities,
roads, soil types, forest cover, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown; locations of off-site material,
waste, borrow or equipment storage areas, proposed concrete
clean out basin(s) and construction entrance; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s); and resources protected under other
chapters of this Code or by easements.
§ 27-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12
1:181
(3) A description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) A construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation, final grading
and landscaping, and any other activity at the site that results in
soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin and the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas. Consistent with the New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP and a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(5) A description of the pollution-prevention measures that will be
used to control litter and prevent construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in the
stormwater discharges; a description of construction and waste
materials expected to be stored on site, with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented to
reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater; and a
description of spill prevention and response measures.
(6) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and
vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control
and sediment control for each stage of the project, from initial land
disturbance to project closeout, including who will be responsible
for the maintenance and implementation of said features at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is established and preserved. For temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, the seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, depth of
topsoil, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching shall be provided.
(7) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(8) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control
measures, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins, and provide the dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each throughout all
phases of construction and completion of development of the site.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of
intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
(9) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted to
permanent control measures.
(10) An implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
§ 27-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-12
1:182
(11) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that require
maintenance. Furthermore, it shall also provide a schedule of
required maintenance and identify the party responsible for such
work.
(12) A description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(13) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(14) Assurance that all other applicable environmental permits have
been acquired for the site prior to initial land disturbance. Copies
of the applicable environmental permits shall be provided to the
Village of Brockport.
(15) Assurance that the applicant or his/her "responsible individual"
shall be on site at all times when earthwork takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices.
(16) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
and maintenance shall be identified in the SWPPP. All such
contractors and subcontractors shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land-disturbance
activity at the site. The certification must include the name and title
of the person providing the signature, address and contact number
of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying
description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. The
certification statement must be included in the SWPPP.
"I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree to
comply with the terms and conditions of the SWPPP. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or
contribute to a violation of the water quality standards."
D. Modifications to the plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Village
of Brockport and shall be approved or disapproved.
(2) The applicant shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction, operation
or maintenance which may have a significant effect on the
potential for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the
United States, and which has not otherwise been addressed in
the SWPPP; or
§ 27-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-12
1:183
§ 27-13. Inspections.
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control as required by this article.
(3) Amendments to the SWPPP may be reviewed by the Village of
Brockport. A copy of the newly amended SWPPP must be provided
to the Village of Brockport within five business days.
(4) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor or subcontractor that will implement any measure of the
SWPPP. The Village of Brockport may request copies of signed
contractor certification statements from new contractors/
subcontractors working on the site.
(5) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Village of Brockport by written authorization to the applicant.
A. The Village of Brockport or its designated agent, as defined in § 27-3,
shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve
that portion of the work completed or shall notify the applicant that the
work fails to comply with the SWPPP. In addition, the Village of
Brockport reserves the right to enter the work site at any reasonable
time for purposes of inspection per Chapter 42, § 42-16. The SWPPP
and the records of any inspections completed by the owner or his/her
agent shall be maintained at the site in the site logbook from the date of
initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Village of Brockport at
least 48 hours before the following activities occur:
(1) Start of construction.
(2) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed and
stabilized.
(3) Site clearing has been completed.
(4) Rough grading has been completed.
(5) Final grading has been completed.
(6) Close of the construction season.
(7) Final landscaping.
(8) Closeout inspection.
B. The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the
obligation under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct
regular inspections as set forth in said permit and/or regulation. If any
violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified, in
writing, of the nature of the violation and the required corrective
§ 27-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-13
1:184
§ 27-14. Duration, maintenance and closeout.
actions. No further earthwork shall be conducted on the site, except for
site stabilization, until the violations are corrected and approved by the
Village of Brockport. Should a permit applicant or owner (and/or agent,
employee, authorized representative or operator) decline consent to an
inspection(s) believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer
(or his authorized inspector) or to proper enforcement of this provision,
the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be
authorized to apply for an administrative search warrant pursuant to
§ 36-10A(2) and such other legal requirements as may apply to permit
such inspection(s). Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
C. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a "responsible individual," as defined in
§ 27-3 of this article, who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The responsible individual shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The applicant shall also employ the
services of a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control,
who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site
logbook. Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and
within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied
to the site logbook and delivered to the Village of Brockport within
five days after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices is not applicable to land-disturbance activities of five
acres or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not
part of a larger common plan of development or on an agricultural
property. In addition, these land-disturbance activities must not
discharge directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be
located in a total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
A. For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES permit, the SWPPP
approved by the Village of Brockport shall be in effect until the site has
been finally stabilized, a notice of termination (N.O.T.) is submitted to
the NYSDEC in accordance with the general permit, and a final
inspection has been completed by the Village of Brockport.
B. For projects that do not require a NYSDEC N.O.T., the SWPPP is in
effect until a final inspection is conducted and the Village of Brockport
has issued the applicant written approval.
C. Maintenance.
§ 27-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-14
1:185
§ 27-15. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment
control measures which are installed or used by the applicant to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment
shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever
their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The landdisturbance
activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season when soil disturbance
activities will be finalized or suspended until the following spring, it
may be desirable to reduce the frequency of the required weekly
site inspections to monthly inspections. In order to reduce
inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete stabilization
activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method,
seeding, planting and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall
frosts and to allow for proper germination/establishment.
Installations and maintenance must be done according to the New
York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control.
D. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout
requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities.
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation asbuilts
to the Village of Brockport.
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100%
of the site.
(4) Removal of all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control
practices.
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/
certified professional that the site has undergone final stabilization
and that all temporary erosion and sediment controls not needed
for long-term erosion control have been removed.
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Village of Brockport to stabilize the project site.
A. Violation. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain
any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any terms of this article and/or any local law.
Violations of any provision or requirement of this article and/or local
law or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit or
§ 27-14 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-15
1:186
certification approved under the provisions of this article and/or local
law shall be considered an offense, punishable by a fine and/or
imprisonment, as provided by the Village of Brockport.
B. Stop-work order. The Village of Brockport may issue a stop-work order
pursuant to Chapter 36, § 36-14, for violations of this article. Persons
receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all landdisturbance
activities, except those activities that address the
violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be
in effect until the Village of Brockport confirms that the landdisturbance
activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
C. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of, or to enforce,
any provision of this article, or any term or condition of any building
permit, site plan, stop-work order or compliance order, or other notice
or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any
provision of this article. In particular, but not by way of limitation,
where the construction or use of a building or land is in violation of any
provision of this article, or any stop-work order, compliance order or
other order obtained under of this article, an action or proceeding may
be commenced in the name of this Village of Brockport in the Supreme
Court or in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction to obtain an
order directing the removal of the building or structure or an
abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or
proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced without
the appropriate authorization from the Board of Trustees of this Village
of Brockport.
D. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section of
this article, in any other section of this article, or in any other applicable
law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at
any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of
any other remedy or penalty specified in this section of this article, in
any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
§ 27-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-15
1:187
§ 27-16. Fees.
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the
Executive Law.
E. Withholding of a certificate of occupancy may be promulgated until
corrections to all stormwater management practices have been made
and accepted by the Village of Brockport.
A. Application fee. An applicant for a site plan and/or permit requiring
construction site stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and
sediment control as required by this article shall deposit with the
Village of Brockport an application fee(s) as determined by resolution
adopted by the Board of Trustees as contained in the Village of
Brockport Fee Schedule. The application fee is to be utilized by the
Village of Brockport, as needed, to pay for all fees, costs and
disbursements incurred by the Village of Brockport in processing the
application, including but not limited to independent legal, engineering
and technical consultant fees, stenographic charges, post-construction
site inspections and any other fees, costs and disbursements incurred
by the Village of Brockport in the application process, including SEQRA
review and post-construction site inspections. In the event that the
application fee is insufficient to cover the fees, costs and disbursements
incurred by the Village of Brockport in processing the application, the
Village of Brockport shall provide the applicant with an invoice of the
fees, costs and disbursements, and the applicant shall be obligated to
pay the Village of Brockport such additional costs and disbursements
within 30 days from receipt of that invoice from the Village of
Brockport.
B. Fees applicable for on-site compliance inspections of construction site
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control as
provided by the Village of Brockport Stormwater Management Officer
during the course of site land work(s) shall be borne upon the applicant
based on a fee per approved site plan lot or land area. The perinspection
fee(s) shall be determined by resolution and adopted by the
Board of Trustees as contained in the Village of Brockport Fee
Schedule, as needed, to pay for all inspection(s), costs and
disbursements incurred by the Village of Brockport for construction site
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control
compliance. The site inspection fee shall be maintained in a separate
Village of Brockport fund, which funds may be appropriated by the
Village of Brockport in accordance with the terms of this article. In the
event that the application fee is insufficient to cover the costs and
disbursements incurred by the Village of Brockport for compliance
inspections as needed, the Village of Brockport shall provide the
applicant with an invoice of the costs and disbursements, and the
applicant shall be obligated to pay the Village of Brockport such
additional costs and disbursements within 30 days from receipt of that
invoice from the Village of Brockport.
§ 27-15 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-16
1:188
§ 27-17. Severability.
§ 27-18. When effective.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and immediately after all
proper proceedings are had under the Village Law of the State of New York.
C. Failure to pay fees. In the event that the applicant fails or refuses to pay
such additional fees, costs and disbursements for any reason within 30
days of the receipt of an invoice, the Village of Brockport may suspend
either review of an application or construction activity. Failure or
refusal to reimburse the Village of Brockport for expenses incurred may
be a basis for refusal of a pending application or a revocation of an
existing approval or permit. The applicant shall be responsible for all
additional fees, costs and disbursements, including reasonable Village
of Brockport Attorney's fees, incurred in the collection of any invoice
items.
D. Performance bond/security. The Village of Brockport may, at its
discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond
prior to approval in order to insure that the stormwater practices are
installed as required by the approved stormwater pollution prevention
plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the
total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management
practices approved by the Village of Brockport, plus 25%. The
performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the stormwater pollution prevention plan.
The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of as-built plans and written certification by a New York
State licensed professional engineer that the stormwater practice has
been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other
applicable provisions of this article. The Village of Brockport will make
a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in
compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article.
Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance security
based on the completion of various development stages can be done at
the discretion of the Village of Brockport.
A. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall continue in full force and effect; and to this end, the provisions of
this article are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Saving clause. This article shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof; and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 27-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-18
1:189

ARTICLE II
Design and Management of Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Measures
§ 27-19. Introduction; purpose.
§ 27-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a stormwater management permit.
BUILDING — Any roofed walled structure, either temporary, permanent
and/or vacant, as per the definitions stated in Chapter 58, § 58-2, of the
Code of the Village of Brockport.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and non-point-source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety and welfare of the public residing in the
watersheds within the Village of Brockport. Therefore, the Village of
Brockport establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to
provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff
and to, in addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property,
prevent damage to the environment in the Village of Brockport, and
comply with the NYSDEC State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer systems (MS4s), for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the
regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
projects and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil
erosion, stream channel erosion, and non-point-source pollution
associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will
prevent threats to public health and safety.
§ 27-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-20
1:191
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse, with a definite bed and
banks, that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all inspectors employed by the Village of Brockport, as certified
by the State of New York either in the capacity of code enforcement officer,
building inspector and fire marshal, and/or titled as the assistant code
enforcement officer, assistant building inspector and deputy fire marshal, or
any combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport as certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of the
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator or any
combination thereof.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — A written order for the remedying of found
violation(s) of the code(s), pursuant to Article I, § 27-15B.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activity requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit Stormwater Discharge From Construction Activity, GP-02-02,
as amended or revised. Currently these activities include but are not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Village of Brockport
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
DWELLING — To include one-family and two-family dwellings, multiplefamily
and/or mixed use dwellings, boardinghouses/rooming houses and
apartment houses, as per the definitions stated in Chapter 58, § 58-2, of
the Code of the Village of Brockport. The actual use and occupancy of a
dwelling at the time of any application for a certificate or permit hereunder,
registration, their renewal, or any compliance or complaint inspection(s)
required to be made by the Code Enforcement Officer, regardless of any
other classification of the property (whether for tax purposes, or otherwise),
shall determine whether and to what extent the dwelling is subject to the
provisions of this article.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FEE-IN-LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this article.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
§ 27-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-20
1:192
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet,
or activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land-disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document, issued by a bank, which guarantees the
payment of a customer's drafts for a specified period and up to a specified
amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Brockport.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication, which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The most recent version of the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual, including applicable updates, that serves as the official
guide for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary.
§ 27-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-20
1:193
OWNER — The person or entity in whose name the premises affected by an
order issued in accordance with this article is recorded as the owner in the
office of the Monroe County Clerk.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract
amount to guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work
according to the contract specifications.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control, such as a New York State
licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing,
previously developed land, such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or road/highway, which involves soil disturbance.
Redevelopment is distinguished from development or new development
in that new development refers to construction on land where there had
not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically applies to
construction areas with impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) — A
nationally approved program with permits issued in accordance with the
Environmental Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges
from certain construction activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — A public notice placed on a building, structure,
premises, dwelling, equipment and/or land pursuant to Article II, § 27-32J.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
§ 27-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-20
1:194
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point-source or non-point-source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 27-21. Applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to land-disturbance activities, as defined
in § 27-20 of this article, and those activities meeting Condition A, B, C
or D below shall include water quantity and water quality controls
(post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 27-26 as
applicable, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the
Village of Brockport in accordance with § 27-25 of this article.
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land-disturbance activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land-disturbance activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land-disturbance activity
disturbing between greater than or equal to 2,000 square feet and
five acres of land during the course of the project, exclusive of the
construction of single-family residences and construction activities
at agricultural properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land-disturbance activity that
is smaller than 25,000 square feet of disturbance if such activities
are part of a larger common plan of development, even though
multiple separate and distinct land-disturbance activities may take
place at different times on different schedules.
B. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be
reviewed by the Village of Brockport to ensure that established water
§ 27-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-21
1:195
§ 27-22. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
quality standards will be maintained during and after development of
the site and that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any
local and regional watershed plans.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project, as defined in § 27-20 of this article, decisions on
permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by
special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual. Final authorization of all
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the Village
of Brockport. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are greater
than or equal to 25,000 square feet.
D. The following activities may be exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity, as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Village of Brockport.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law.
The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule
or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and/
or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
local laws, including but not limited to Chapter 20, Flood Damage
Prevention; Chapter 26, Land Subdivision Regulations; Chapter 36,
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code; Chapter 42, Sewers; Chapter
58, Zoning; and New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control. For the design of water quality and water quantity controls
(post-construction stormwater runoff control practices), the NYSDEC's
§ 27-21 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-22
1:196
§ 27-23. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 21 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, Article 3 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York
and Chapter 28 of the Code of the Village of Brockport, the Board of
Trustees has the authority to enact laws for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety or general welfare of the Village of Brockport, including the
protection and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the same
authority, the Board of Trustees may include in any such law provisions for
the authorizing of any municipal employees and/or agent of the Village of
Brockport to effectuate and administer such law.
§ 27-24. Compliance; required submissions.
technical standards are detailed in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
A. No person(s) shall receive any building, grading or other landdisturbance
approvals or permits required for land-disturbance
activities without first meeting the requirements of this article to the
satisfaction of the Village of Brockport. Unless specifically excluded by
this article, any landowner or operator desiring approval or a permit for
a land-disturbance activity shall comply with all applicable provisions of
this article and shall submit all required plans, documentation and
information as required under this article to the Village of Brockport for
review and approval.
B. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, the following items shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval:
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) (§ 27-27).
(2) Maintenance easement(s) (see § 27-28A).
(3) Maintenance agreement(s) (see § 27-28B).
C. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 27-26
through 27-27 of this article. The maintenance agreement shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of § 27-27 of this article.
D. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be
reviewed by the Village of Brockport to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained after development of the site and
that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans. Information shall be submitted as a single,
logical package, with all information bound together.
E. The Planning Board shall review said application in conjunction with
any subdivision and site plan review pursuant to Chapter 26, Land
Subdivision Regulations.
§ 27-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-24
1:197
§ 27-25. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
F. In situations where application is made after approval (for example an
approved site plan or subdivision approved prior to the enactment of
this article), the application shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as
a change or modification to the approved plan.
A. All person(s) shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a
written request is filed to waive the requirements in part or whole for
land-disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land.
Requests to waive any requirements of this article shall be submitted to
the Village of Brockport for approval.
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this article.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that has been approved by the Village of
Brockport, and the implementation of the plan is required by local
law. These practices are encouraged in order to minimize the
reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in
the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned
through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the manual Better Site Design:
A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community.
Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and
remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices, and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
(4) The Village of Brockport finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
(a) The generation of stormwater from the site.
(b) The size and cost of stormwater storage.
§ 27-24 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-25
1:198
§ 27-26. General design and performance criteria for stormwater
management.
(c) The pollutants generated at the site.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Village of
Brockport may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these
stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village of
Brockport that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to
downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other
structures.
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitats.
(3) Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation.
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
D. No waivers or mitigation plans will be considered for land-disturbance
activity that disturbs one acre or greater of land.
A. Unless judged by the Village of Brockport to be exempted or granted a
waiver per § 27-25, the following performance criteria shall be
addressed for stormwater management at all sites. The applicant shall
consult the Design Criteria, New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual and the New York Standards and Specifications for
Erosion and Sediment Control for standards and specifications related
to stormwater management design criteria. Stormwater management
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these
technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed
by this article. If there is a conflict between any of the standards, the
more stringent standard shall apply. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in this § 27-26 and § 27-27 of this article, and the SWPPP shall
be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas
for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
§ 27-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-26
1:199
§ 27-27. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where
such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Village of Brockport. In no case shall the impact
on functional values be any greater than that allowed by the Army
Corps of Engineers (A.C.E.) or the NYSDEC responsible for natural
resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater
recharge rates by promoting infiltration through the use of
structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, an attempt
shall be made for annual recharge from the post-development site
to mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the
Design Criteria and/or the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
may be subject to additional performance criteria or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hot spots," may require the
use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices and
pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Village
of Brockport to determine if they are subject to additional
stormwater design requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv,) as found in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, shall be
used for sizing all stormwater management practices.
A. A SWPPP is required as part of compliance with this article. This plan
must be prepared by a qualified professional and must indicate whether
stormwater will be managed on site or off site, and if on site, the
general location and type of practices, and shall also include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts
of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the
water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the
measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project
site. The plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater
§ 27-26 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-27
1:200
management practices meets the submittal requirements outlined in
the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual. No
building or grading permit or site plan approval shall be issued until a
satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention plan, or a waiver thereof,
has undergone a review and been approved by the Village of Brockport
after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the
requirements of this article.
B. The applicant shall employ a "responsible individual," as defined in
§ 27-20 of this article, who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The applicant shall also employ the services of
a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. A
monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site logbook and
delivered to the Village of Brockport within five days after the month's
end.
C. All SWPPPs shall provide the following information:
(1) All information listed in § 27-26 of this article for construction site
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control.
(2) A description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management
practice. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses. A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, including calculations such as a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates and total
runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration rates, where
applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual; and
documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(5) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
post-construction stormwater management practice.
§ 27-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-27
1:201
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures,
including a schedule to ensure their continued function. These
plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater
management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment
and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program
and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures
shall be included in the plan.
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent
basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will
remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. See
§ 27-28A and B of this article for additional information.
(9) The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the on-site stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the specifications of this article. See § 27-28A and
B of this article for additional information.
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional, and the
final plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meet the requirements in this article.
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the
project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands and other native
vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(12) The Village of Brockport may also require a concept plan to
consider the maximum development potential of a site under
existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently
intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of
vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
qualified professional and in compliance with landscaping
specifications outlined in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
§ 27-27 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-27
1:202
§ 27-28. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
A. Maintenance easement. The applicant or owner of the site must execute
a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management
facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village of Brockport, or
its contractor or agent, to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this article and to, if necessary, implement
emergency repairs to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The easement dimensions shall be as directed by the Village of
Brockport, and the easement agreement shall be recorded in the office
of the County Clerk, with a copy provided to the Village of Brockport.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with § 27-20 of this article.
C. Maintenance agreements. The maintenance and proper operation of all
privately owned stormwater management facilities, including
nonstructural practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a
formal and enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved
by the Village of Brockport and recorded in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management practices
and will outline the procedures and schedule to be followed to perform
routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
stormwater management practice. In addition, the legally binding
agreement shall identify the parties responsible for the proper
maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices and include plans
for periodic inspections by the owners, or their designated agent, to
§ 27-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-28
1:203
§ 27-29. Inspection and right of entry.
ensure proper performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement
shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the stormwater
control facility maintenance agreement. The Village of Brockport, in
lieu of a maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing
or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided
that such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes
adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater
management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual
inspection to document maintenance and repair needs to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of
its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and other
debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting
and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape
vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be identified in writing,
along with the schedule and methods to be employed to complete the
maintenance. The maintenance repairs and restoration schedule are to
be approved by the Village of Brockport prior to commencing the work,
and the Village of Brockport shall inspect the facility upon completion
of the work. The inspection and maintenance requirement may be
increased by the Village of Brockport, as deemed necessary, to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management facility.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records
shall be made available to the Village of Brockport during inspection of
the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guaranties for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the applicant or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the applicant, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Village of Brockport with an irrevocable letter of credit from an
approved financial institution or surety to insure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities, both during and after construction, and until the Village of
Brockport acknowledges compliance with all details of approved site
plan. If the applicant or landowner fails to properly operate and
maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, the Village of Brockport may draw upon the account to cover
the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering
and inspection costs, until the Village of Brockport acknowledges
compliance with all details of the approved site plan.
§ 27-28 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-29
1:204
§ 27-30. As-built plans and project closeout.
A. The Village of Brockport or its designated agent shall make inspections
at any reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of
the stormwater management facilities. Inspections may include but are
not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge
to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality
standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with
other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include but are not limited to reviewing maintenance
and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage-control facilities and other stormwater
management practices. The applicant must notify the Village of
Brockport in advance before the commencement of construction. If any
violations are found, the property owner shall be notified of the nature
of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work
shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the Village of Brockport.
B. Furthermore, when any new drainage control facility is installed on
private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system or combined sewer, the
property owner shall grant to the Village of Brockport the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when
it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is
occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement
of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
A. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a New York State licensed professional engineer. A final
inspection by the Village of Brockport is required before the release of
any performance securities can occur.
B. In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be
submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization
and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is
completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized
after construction but who will be responsible for the maintenance of
vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure
that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be
§ 27-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-30
1:205
§ 27-31. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so
that it is consistent with the certified as-built plans. Any post-construction
alterations to the landscape shall receive prior approval from the Village
of Brockport. Temporary landscape alterations, such as those associated
with utility excavations and landscaping activities, must be restored to
conditions that are consistent with the certified as-built plans.
§ 27-32. Enforcement and penalties.
prepared by a qualified professional and must be approved by the
Village of Brockport.
A. Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to
meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the Village of
Brockport, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to
place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the
stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, the Village of Brockport shall notify the party responsible
for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing.
Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall immediately
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner.
After proper notice, the Village of Brockport may assess the owner(s) of
the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties, and the cost of
the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the
beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and
collected as ordinary taxes by the county.
B. Violation. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain
any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any terms of this article and/or any local law.
Violations of any provision or requirement of this article and/or local
law or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit or
certification approved under the provisions of this article and/or local
law shall be considered an offense, punishable by a fine and/or
imprisonment, as provided by the Village of Brockport.
C. Notice of violation. When the Village of Brockport determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
shall issue a written notice of violation/violations to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) Informal compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) is authorized to order, in writing, the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure, premises or land in violation/violations of
this article or local law. Upon finding that any such condition or
§ 27-30 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-32
1:206
activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer can issue informal
(voluntary compliance) orders either in writing or verbally.
(2) Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) is authorized to order, in writing, the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure, premises or land in violation of this article.
Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall issue a
compliance order.
D. The compliance order shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector);
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates this article;
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of this article which is/are
violated by the specified condition or activity;
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer (or
his authorized inspector) deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance;
(6) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of
time; and
(7) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may be
instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period
of time.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall cause
the compliance order to be mailed to the property owner or permit
applicant of the affected property by registered and/or certified mail,
and/or a copy thereof may be served on the owner or permit applicant
of the affected property personally as indicated below. The Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be permitted,
but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be
served on any property manager or agent, builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work or use being
performed or occurring at the affected property personally or by
registered and/or certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
F. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector), under the provisions of the Codes Office, are authorized to
issue appearance tickets for any violation(s) of this article. The Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) can issue appearance
§ 27-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-32
1:207
tickets foregoing § 27-15A and B, as per the authorization of Chapter
59, § 59-1.
G. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of this article, or any term or
condition of any building permit, site plans, stop-work order, or other
notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector), pursuant to any provision of this article, shall be
liable to a civil penalty. Each day on which any violation of any of the
provisions of this article occurs shall constitute one offense, and each
successive day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership
or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $350 for
each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section,
any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense of such
restoration. Any person who violates the provisions of the article shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
article shall be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall
be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the Village of
Brockport.
H. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of or to enforce
any provision of this article, or any term or condition of any building
permit, site plan, stop-work order or compliance order, or other notice
or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any
provision of this article. In particular, but not by way of limitation,
where the construction or use of a building or land is in violation of any
provision of this article, or any stop-work order, compliance order or
other order obtained under this article, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this Village of Brockport in the Supreme
Court or in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction to obtain an
order directing the removal of the building or structure or an
abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or
proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced without
§ 27-32 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-32
1:208
§ 27-33. Performance bond/security.
The Village of Brockport may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a
performance security or bond prior to approval in order to insure that the
stormwater practices are installed as required by the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The amount of the installation performance
security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater
management practices approved by the Village of Brockport, plus 25%.
The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure
to complete work specified in the stormwater pollution prevention plan.
The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of as-built plans and written certification by a New York State
licensed professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been
installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable
the appropriate authorization from the Board of Trustees of this Village
of Brockport.
I. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section of
this article, in any other section of this article, or in any other applicable
law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at
any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of
any other remedy or penalty specified in this section of this article, in
any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the
Executive Law.
J. Stop-work order. The Village of Brockport may issue a stop-work order
per Chapter 36, § 36-14, for violations of this article. Persons receiving
a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land-disturbance
activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to
the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
Village of Brockport confirms that the land-disturbance activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure
to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result in civil,
criminal or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this article. Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014]
K. Occupation permits may not be granted until corrections to all
stormwater management practices have been made and accepted by
the Village of Brockport.
§ 27-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-33
1:209
provisions of this article. The Village of Brockport will make a final
inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with
the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial
pro rata release of the performance security based on the completion of
various development stages can be done at the discretion of the Village of
Brockport.
§ 27-34. Severability.
§ 27-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and immediately after all
proper proceedings are had under the Village Law of the State of New York.
A. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this article are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Saving clause. This article shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 27-33 BROCKPORT CODE § 27-35
1:210
Chapter 28
LOCAL LAW HEARINGS
§ 28-1. Public hearing.
No local law shall be passed until a public hearing thereon has been held by
the Board of Trustees.
§ 28-2. Publication of notices.
The Village Clerk shall give notice of such hearing by the publication of a
notice in the official newspaper of the Village or by posting a notice in at
least four public places in the Village, specifying the time when and the
place where such hearing will be held and in general terms describing the
proposed local law. Such notice shall be published once or posted in at least
four public places at least seven days prior to the day specified for the
hearing.
Chapter 32
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS AND GASOLINE SERVICE
STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
§ 32-1. Short title.
(Reserved)
§ 32-2. Legislative finding.
The Board of Trustees, Village of Brockport, hereby recognizes that gasoline
stations in their operation can present special hazards to the public safety
and welfare of the Village of Brockport. Therefore, this chapter is enacted
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the
existing gas stations.
§ 32-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL GARAGE — Any building structure or lot which is used for
the repair, maintenance or equipping of automobiles, including body repair
garages.
§ 27-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:211
GASOLINE STATION — A building, structure or tract of land used for the
storage and sale of gasoline, motor fuels, lubricants, accessories, supplies
and any other materials related to the maintenance or equipment of
automobiles or in which repairs, adjustments, maintenance or equipping of
automobiles is conducted. The term shall include, without limitations, the
rendering of the following services: fueling; changing oil, water, batteries or
tires; replacing fan belts, air filters or oil filters; installing windshield wiper
blades or light bulbs. The term shall not include any such establishment
which renders such services or stores such materials for a single
commercial or industrial establishment rather than offering such services
and materials to the public.
MAJOR REPAIR WORK — Repair work which does not consist of fueling;
changing oil, water, batteries, tires; replacing fan belts, oil filters, air filters;
installing windshield wiper blades or light bulbs; or such other minor repair
and servicing functions as are prescribed by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles under the Motor Vehicle Repair Shop Registration Act, Article 12-A
of the State of New York Vehicle and Traffic Law, or any similar statute.
§ 32-4. Standards for maintenance of premises.
The following standards shall apply to all gasoline service stations and
commercial garages located within the Village of Brockport:
§ 32-5. Penalties for offenses; date for compliance. [Amended
3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Violations of any provisions of this chapter by any owner or lessee or other
person shall constitute an offense, and each day's violation shall be deemed
a separate offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 32A
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 13. Public officers — See Ch. 37.
A. No major repair work shall be conducted outside the structure.
B. All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within the
structure.
C. No more than four dismantled vehicles, vehicles under repair, vehicles
awaiting repair or repaired vehicles awaiting pickup shall be outside of
the structure for more than 24 hours.
D. The site shall be maintained so that vehicles using the station shall not
obstruct or become a hazard to users of the public sidewalks or
highways on which the station or garage fronts.
§ 32-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 32-5
1:212
ARTICLE I
Manager
[Adopted 6-20-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
§ 32A-1. Position established; purpose.
In order to provide the most economical and efficient overall direction,
coordination and control of the day-to-day activities and operations of the
Village of Brockport, to minimize the administrative details now handled by
the Board of Trustees, to provide centralized direction, coordination and
control of the administrative staff, and to formalize the staff and advisory
functions necessary to the foregoing, the position of employment of Village
Manager is hereby established.
§ 32A-2. Appointment; compensation; residency.
The Village Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees. The position shall be an unclassified
position. Compensation shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. The Village
Manager need not be a resident of the Village of Brockport but shall be
a resident of Monroe County or a contiguous county. The Village Manager
may simultaneously hold another position in and for the Village as an
officer or full-time employee thereof. The Village Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 32A-3. Supervision.
The Village Manager shall report to and be under the supervision of the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
§ 32A-4. Powers and duties.
Subject to the approval, direction and control of the Board of Trustees, or in
those instances where approval, direction and control is, by applicable law,
reserved to the Mayor, then under the approval, direction and control of the
Mayor the Village Manager shall:
A. Enforce the rules, regulations, ordinances, handbooks, labor contracts,
local laws and codes of the Village and make certain they are
administered effectively.
B. Direct, oversee and coordinate the activities and work of all Village
departments in accordance with the policies of the Board of Trustees.
C. When so designated by the Mayor, prepare as budget officer the annual
Village budget and submit it to the Mayor and Board of Trustees in
accordance with the requirements of the applicable laws of the State of
New York and be responsible for its proper administration after
adoption.
§ 32A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-4
1:213
§ 32A-5. Duty as budget officer.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth, the Village Manager shall
serve as budget officer if and when designated by the Mayor, in accordance
with § 5-500 of the Village Law.
§ 32A-6. Full-time status.
The position of the Village Manager shall be a full-time position.
§ 32A-7. Effect on powers and duties of other officers.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed as abolishing,
transferring or curtailing any powers or duties of the Board of Trustees,
other Village boards or commissions or the Mayor, Treasurer or Clerk as
prescribed by the Village Law or other applicable laws of the state.
D. Regularly report the financial condition of the Village to the Board of
Trustees.
E. Control expenditures within amounts appropriated in the budget by
enforcing administrative controls where applicable.
F. Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees appointments,
promotions or dismissals of Village employees in accordance with
applicable policies, orders, rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances
and local laws of the Village.
G. Keep Village residents and stakeholders informed of Village policies,
procedures and plans for the delivery of financial services.
H. Oversee the expeditious response to inquiries by Village residents and
other interested persons concerning Village government, operations
and services.
I. Coordinate all local, state and federal grant-seeking initiatives.
J. Conduct a continued study of all functions and activities of the Village
for the purpose of devising ways and means of attaining greater
efficiency and economy.
K. Maintain contacts with all Village Boards and provide any necessary
coordination to ensure appropriate administration of policies and
regulations.
L. Perform such additional duties as shall be assigned by the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees.
§ 32A-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 32A-7
1:214
Chapter 33
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 35.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 54.
§ 33-1. Permit required.
No procession or parade containing 10 or more vehicles or 20 or more
persons not riding in vehicles shall occupy, march or proceed along any
highway, at any time, unless a license to do so at that time has been
obtained from the Village Clerk. No person shall take part in, aid, form or
start any such procession or parade unless a license for said procession
or parade has been issued by the Village Clerk, and no person shall take
part in any procession or parade which is proceeding in a manner not in
accordance with the terms of such license.
§ 33-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 33-3. Issuance of licenses.
Upon application duly made not less than seven days (not counting holidays
or Sundays) prior to the proposed date of the procession or parade, in such
form as the Village Clerk shall require, and payment of the required fee,
a license for the procession or parade shall be issued by the Village Clerk
five days (not counting holidays or Sundays) after the application is made
unless:
A. Processions or parades when all persons taking part therein are
policemen, firemen, members of the armed forces of the United States
or of the State of New York, or veterans of such forces, or officials of
governmental units.
B. Processions or parades declared by resolution of the Board of Trustees
to be a part of official Village ceremonies.
C. Students going to and from school classes or participating in school
activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities.
A. The procession or parade for which a license is sought would conflict
with another procession or parade for which a license is to be or has
been issued, and for which application was made previous to the
application to be rejected.
§ 32A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:215
§ 33-4. Procedure of Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk shall promptly mail written notice to the Mayor and the
Chief of Police of any and all applications for licenses under this chapter.
If advised by either official that the procession or parade for which license
is sought would endanger public health or safety, or be detrimental to the
public welfare, the Village Clerk shall promptly notify the members of the
Board of Trustees that he has been so advised, and shall refrain from issuing
the license sought until directed to do so by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 33-5. Contents of license.
Each license issued under this chapter shall specify the names of the
organizations participating, the name of the person (or, if a committee
without chairman, the names of the members of the committee) chiefly
responsible for the marshaling and organization of the procession or
parade, the highways through which it may move, how much of these
highways in width it may occupy, and the hours during which it may
proceed.
§ 33-6. Public conduct during parades.
No person shall drive any vehicle between the vehicles or persons
comprising a procession or parade proceeding in accordance with the terms
of a license therefor duly issued by the Village Clerk when such vehicles or
persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a procession or
parade, nor shall any person unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or
interfere with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such a
procession or parade.
§ 33-7. Parking along route.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the
parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of
the route of a procession or parade, and to cause signs to such effect to
be posted, and it shall be unlawful and a violation of the chapter for any
person to park or leave unattended any vehicle upon any highway or portion
thereof in violation of prohibitions so posted along said highway or portion
thereof.
B. The procession or parade would conflict with a procession or parade to
which this chapter does not apply.
C. The Mayor or Chief of Police shall advise the Village Clerk that the
procession or parade for which a license is sought would endanger the
public health or safety, or would be detrimental to the public welfare.
D. The procession or parade is to be held for the purpose of advertising
any commercial product, goods or event, or is designated purely for
private profit.
§ 33-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 33-8
1:216
§ 33-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
§ 33-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect December 1, 1970.
Chapter 34
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and processions — See Chapter 33.
Streets and sidewalks — Chapter 45.
Trailers — Chapter 51.
Vehicle and traffic — Chapter 54.
Zoning — See Chapter 58.
Code Enforcement — See Chapter 59.
§ 33-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-9
1:217

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 34-1. Title; purpose.
§ 34-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, as set forth from the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, and if no specific definition is set forth therein, all words shall have
their usual meanings in the English language.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Every ambulance, police vehicle,
fire vehicle or any other authorized emergency vehicles.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport as certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator, or any
combination thereof.
EMERGENCY ACCESS ROADS — A road that provides passageway for
authorized emergency vehicles to a facility, building or portion thereof.
FIRE LANE — A road or other passageway developed to allow the passage
of authorized emergency vehicles. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for
vehicular traffic other than for authorized emergency vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes but is not limited to all vehicles propelled
by any power other than muscular power, except horse-drawn wagons or
carriages, which can include but are not limited to automobiles, trucks and
motorcycles.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Local law Parking Restrictions/
Emergency Parking Restrictions and Removal of Illegally Parked Cars
and Fines and Penalties" and is herein referred to as the "Parking Code
or "this chapter."
B. Purpose. Regulating the manner of parking or standing of motor
vehicles and trailers, this chapter establishes the policies, regulations
and standards pursuant to the parking on public and private lands
within the Village of Brockport. These provisions are enacted to
establish:
(1) Areas designated for motor vehicle parking within the Village of
Brockport.
(2) Manner of parking motor vehicles.
(3) Removal of illegally parked motor vehicles.
(4) Emergency parking restrictions.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-2
1:219
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading merchandise or passengers.
STANDING — The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers or goods.
STOPPING — When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police or fire-police officer
or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
TRAILER — Used in reference to vehicles other than house trailers, travel
trailers or recreational vehicles and shall include all vehicles coming within
the definition of "trailers" in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York and shall include trailers designed to carry boats, cargo, freight and
other items of personal or discarded property.
§ 34-3. Parking restrictions; areas designated.
A. No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle or trailer of any kind
within any of the following public streets, described spaces or zones
located in the Village of Brockport:
(1) Adams Street.
(a) North side.
(b) Both sides, west of Allen Street to property of State University
College at Brockport.
(c) South side, Main Street to Allen Street, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays.
(2) Allen Street.
(a) East side.
(b) West side.
(3) Anita's Lane.
(a) East side from East Avenue to eastern property line of 141
Anita's Lane.
(4) Barry Street.
(a) South side.
(5) Beach Street.
§ 34-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-3
1:220
(a) West side.
(b) East side, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays.
(6) Berry Street.
(a) Both sides.
(7) Beverly Drive.
(a) South side.
(8) Briar Rose Lane.
(a) East side.
(b) West side, from West Avenue to Cailyn Way.
(9) Brockway Place.
(a) North side.
(b) South side, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays.
(10) Brook Terrace. Both sides from South Avenue southerly to 50 feet
beyond and westerly past the curve of Brook Terrace.
(11) Burroughs Terrace.
(a) East side.
(12) Brookdale Road.
(a) South side.
(13) Carolin Drive.
(a) East side.
(14) Casey Place. Both sides.
(15) Centennial Avenue.
(a) South side.
(b) North side, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays.
(16) Chappell Street.
(a) East side.
(b) West side, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays.
(17) Cherry Drive.
(a) West side.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:221
(18) Clark Street.
(a) North side.
(b) South side, North Main Street to Carolin Drive.
(19) Clinton Street.
(a) South side.
(b) North side, from the east side of No. 70 west to Canal Bridge.
(c) North side, Main Street west to Merchant Street, two-hour
limit, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(d) North side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, 20 feet west
of Main Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(20) College Street.
(a) North side.
(21) Creekside Drive.
(a) East side.
(22) Erie Street.
(a) South side.
(b) North side, from Main Street to Utica Street.
(c) North side, Perry Street west to end, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays.
(d) Western end at the terminus of Erie Street.
(23) Evelyn Drive.
(a) South side.
(24) Evergreen Road.
(a) North side.
(b) West side.
(25) Fair Street.
(a) North side.
(26) Fayette Street.
(a) Both sides.
§ 34-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-3
1:222
(27) Frazier Street.
(a) North side.
(28) Gardener Alley.
(a) Both sides.
(29) Gordon Street.
(a) West side.
(30) Graves Street.
(a) West side.
(b) East side.
(31) Havenwood Drive.
(a) East side, from East Avenue south to Candlewick Drive.
(32) High Street.
(a) North side.
(33) Holley Street.
(a) South side.
(b) North side, Main Street to Perry Street, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays.
Exception: 60 Holley Street school bus loading and unloading
zone.
(c) North side, Monroe Avenue west to the Village line.
(d) North side, Perry Street west to Monroe Avenue.
(34) Idlewood Drive.
(a) East side.
(35)Kenyon Street.
(a) Both sides.
(36) Kimberlin Drive.
(a) West side.
(37) King Street.
(a) South side.
(b) North side from Queen Street to Utica Street.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:223
(c) North side, Main Street west to Queen Street, two-hour limit,
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(d) North side, five parking spaces from opposite the westernmost
corner of property 10 - 20 King Street to Queen Street,
Wednesdays 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., New York State motor
vehicle road test.
(38) Liberty Street.
(a) Both sides.
(39) Lincoln Street.
(a) East side
(40) Locust Street.
(a) West side.
(41) Lyman Street.
(a) North side.
(42) Main Street North.
(a) East side, Canal Bridge north to East Avenue.
(b) West side, 80 feet south of Clark Street north to West Avenue.
(43) Main Street.
(a) West side, 175 feet north of railroad bridge south to the Village
line.
(b) East side, 155 feet north of railroad bridge south to the Village
line.
(c) West side, 175 feet north of railroad bridge north to Monroe
Avenue and 250 feet north of Monroe Avenue to Canal Bridge,
two-hour limit, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(d) West side, from Monroe Avenue north 250 feet.
(e) East side, 155 feet north of railroad bridge north to Canal
Bridge, two-hour limit, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
(f) West side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, 165 feet north
of Erie Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(g) East side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, 150 feet north
of State Street.
§ 34-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-3
1:224
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(44) Market Street.
(a) North side, Main Street east to Water Street, two-hour limit,
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(b) South side, Main Street east to Water Street, two-hour limit,
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(c) North side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, 20 feet east
of Main Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(d) North side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, opposite 51
Market Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(45) McCormick Lane.
(a) East side, from East Avenue to Cyrus Way.
(b) West side, from East Avenue to easterly driveway edge of 8
McCormick Lane.
(46) Maxon Street.
(a) North side.
(b) South side, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays.
(47) Meadowview Drive.
(a) East side.
(48) Mercer Street.
(a) South side.23
(49) Merchants Street.
(a) South side.
(b) North side from 38 Merchants Street easterly to end.
(c) West side, handicapped-accessible parking slot.
23.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(34)(b), dealing with parking restrictions on the north
side of Mercer Street, was deleted 11-7-1994 by L.L. No. 3, 1994.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:225
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(50) Monroe Avenue.
(a) North side.
(51) Oxford Street.
(a) East side
(52) Park Avenue.
(a) East side, between Main Street and Spring Street.
(b) East side, between State Street and the Canal Bridge.
(c) West side, between Main Street and railroad tracks, 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays.
(d) West side, between Union Street and South Street.
(53) Perry Street.
(a) East side.
(b) West side, north of Erie Street.
(c) West side, Erie Street south to Monroe Avenue, 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays.
(54) Quaker Maid Street.
(a) Both sides.
(55) Quarry Street.
(a) Both sides.
(56) Queen Street.
(a) Both sides.
(57) Smith Street.
(a) Both sides.
(58) State Street.
(a) North side, between Park Avenue and the west boundary line
of 15 - 17 State Street.
(b) North side, Main Street east to rear property line of 89/93
Main Street, two-hour limit, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
§ 34-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-3
1:226
(c) North side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, 20 feet east
of Main Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(d) North side, opposite Municipal Building, 133 State Street, no
parking between posted signs.
(e) South side, Main Street east to entrance of parking lot at side
of Municipal Building, two-hour limit, Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(f) South side, Municipal Building, 18 State Street, 15-minute
limit, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(g) South side, handicapped-accessible parking slot, Municipal
Building, 18 State Street.
Exception: When said vehicle is clearly displaying a valid and
legible handicapped parking permit or license plate.
(h) South side, opposite 30 State Street.
(i) South side, from opposite 134 State Street to Oxford Street.
(This area includes the curve of State Street.)
(59) South Avenue.
(a) Both sides east of Quaker Maid Street.
(b) North side between Main Street and Quaker Maid Street.
(60) South Street.
(a) North side.
(61) Spring Street.
(a) North side.
(b) South side, from opposite 34 Spring Street to opposite 44
Spring Street.
(c) South side from opposite 60 Spring Street East to end, 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except Sundays
and holidays.
(62) Union Street.
(a) Both sides.
(63) Utica Street.
(a) West side.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:227
(b) East side, Adams Street to College Street; Erie Street to
Clinton Street.
(c) East side, College Street to Erie Street, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays.
(64)Water Street.
(a) Both sides.
Exception: south side fifteen-minute designated parking space
as posted
(65)West Avenue.
(a) South side, from Smith Street to Carolin Drive.
(66)Willowbrooke Drive.
(a) East and south.
(b) On the west side from 394 Willowbrooke Drive to the rear
driveway west of 396 Willowbrooke Drive. (This area includes
the curve on Willowbrooke Drive.)
(67)On either side of any public alley, driveway or as otherwise posted.
B. No person shall park a motor vehicle or trailers of any kind within any
of the following public lots, described spaces or zones located in the
Village of Brockport:
(1) Parking lots at the following locations between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday:
(a) Parking lot between King Street and Erie Street.
(b) North side of Water Street, west lot.
(c) Harvester Park Welcome Center, 11 Water Street.
Exception: Parking can be prohibited when either posted or
given notice of any Village of Brockport authorized or
sanctioned event.
(2) Parking lots at the following locations between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Tuesday and Thursday:
(a) South side of Erie Street.
(b) South side of Water Street.
(c) South side of Market Street.
(d) North side of Water Street, east lot.
§ 34-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-3
1:228
§ 34-4. Establishment of fire lanes or emergency access roads.
§ 34-5. Established fire lanes or emergency access roads.
Exception: parking spaces adjacent to 38 Market Street for
Brockport Fire Department members.
(e) South side of Clinton Street.
Exception: parking spaces in front of 1 Clinton Street for
employees and vehicles conducting business with the
Brockport Police Department.
(f) Merchant Street, west side from Clinton Street to 38
Merchants Street.
(3) Village of Brockport Municipal Office, 49 State Street, between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day.
Exception: vehicles parked for conducting business with the
Village of Brockport.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require the
establishment of fire lanes or emergency access roads and their
required postings on public and private property within the Village of
Brockport.
B. Where required by the Code Enforcement Officer, fire lanes or
emergency access roads shall be posted with signs or other notices
identifying such fire lanes or emergency access roads and the
instructions to prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signs or notices shall
be maintained in a clear and legible condition at all times and shall be
replaced or repaired when necessary.
C. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to §§ 34-9
and 34-10 of this chapter.
A. Alleyway running behind Main Street buildings from Clinton Street to
King Street, known as Decker Alley.
B. Alleyway running from behind 73 Main Street south to State Street.
C. Alleyway running behind 21-25 Main Street from Water Street North,
known as Warehouse Street.
D. 40 Allen Street, A.D. Oliver Middle School.
E. 36 Colman Creek Road, Christ Community Church, Allen Street
entrance.
F. Holley Street, Student Lane Apartments access driveways.
G. 152 Main Street, Nativity Church.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-5
1:229
§ 34-6. Parking in public parks.
§ 34-7. Standing and parking of commercial vehicles.
No person shall stop, stand or park any commercial vehicle designed or
rated by its manufacturer to carry cargo of more than one ton, with or
without a trailer, upon any public street, public parking lot or residentially
used premises except for a period of loading or unloading.
§ 34-8. Manner of parking vehicles.
H. 204 Main Street access driveway to the rear.
I. 222 Main Street, Village Center Apartments access driveway.
J. 4 Owens Road, emergency access road, north and west sides.
K. South Avenue, Winston Woods Townhomes access driveway.
L. 300 State Street access driveways.
M. 18 North Main Street, Villager Apartment access driveways.
N. 71 West Ave, Presidents Village access driveways.
O. 45-57 North Main Street access driveway to the rear.
P. 63 North Main Street access driveway to the rear.
Q. 156 West Avenue medical campus access driveways.
R. Or any fire lanes or emergency access roads required by the Code
Enforcement Officer hereafter.
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle or trailer in any public parks
owned and so designated by the Village of Brockport, including parking
lots appurtenant thereto, between sunset and sunrise.
B. No person shall park any motor vehicle or trailer unless such person is
at that time using the park facilities during permitted times.
C. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to §§ 34-9
and 34-10 of this chapter.
A. No motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked on any street within the
corporate limits of the Village of Brockport between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No vehicle or trailer shall stand or park in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway and with the curb side of the vehicle
within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, and such vehicles shall be
headed in the direction of traffic; nor shall any vehicle be parked so as
to interfere with, block or otherwise obstruct the free and unhindered
use of any public sidewalks and crosswalk areas or any Village
§ 34-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-8
1:230
§ 34-9. Violations and penalties.
easements, rights-of-way, private and/or public driveways, alleys and
entrances.
C. No vehicle shall be parked between any sidewalk area and the adjacent
street.
D. No vehicle shall be parked or operated on any part of any property that
has not been paved or otherwise surfaced with an all-weather material.
All alterations and/or expansions of off-street parking and driveways
are subject to review and approval by the Planning Board upon
application set forth by § 58-8A(1) of Chapter 58, Zoning.
E. No vehicle or trailer shall be parked in any designated handicapped
accessible parking space unless said vehicle is displaying clearly a valid
and legible handicapped parking permit or license plate, but in no case
shall a vehicle occupy any adjacent access aisle.
F. No vehicle or trailer parked on any roadway or in any municipal parking
lot may occupy more than one lined parking space at any one time and
shall be parked entirely within any such lines as clearly painted on such
roadway or parking lot owned and maintained by the Village of
Brockport.
G. No vehicle or trailer shall be parked within, stop, stand or block any fire
lane or emergency access roads.
H. No motor vehicle or trailer shall stop, stand or park within three feet of
any municipally or privately owned fire department fire protection
control system, inlet, connection, valve or exit access or path of travel
to a building's doors or doorways.
A. Vehicles or trailers violating the parking lot regulations from November
15 through April 1 each year can be towed at the owner's expense and
shall be subject to parking violation fines as established by the Board of
Trustees, as listed on the Simplified Parking Information (Parking
Ticket).
B. Vehicles or trailers violating the parking lot regulations from April 2
through November 14 each year shall be subject to parking violation
fines as established by the Board of Trustees, as listed on the Simplified
Parking Information (Parking Ticket).
C. Any person who violates any section of this chapter, unless otherwise
stated, shall pay to the Village of Brockport a penalty in an amount as
established by the Board of Trustees for each and every offense. In the
event that said penalty is not paid within 10 days, the amount shall
increase as established by the Board of Trustees, as listed on the
Simplified Parking Information (Parking Ticket). Sundays and holidays
are not exempted from the respective time periods involved.
[Amended 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
§ 34-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-10
1:231
§ 34-10. Removal of illegally parked motor vehicles.
A. No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle or trailer registered
in his/her name to stand or park in the Village of Brockport in violation
of any of the local laws regulating the parking and standing of vehicles,
nor shall any vehicle be so parked or placed by any person.
B. Any vehicle or trailer found standing or parked in violation of any such
local law in a public place or street may be removed, towed or conveyed
by or at the direction of a member of the Brockport Police Department
to a vehicle impoundment facility to be designated by the Board of
Trustees of the Village, and such removal shall be deemed the
abatement of a nuisance and at the risk and expense of the owner or
person entitled to possession of such vehicle or trailer. Said removed
vehicle or trailer may be stored in a designated vehicle impoundment
facility at the risk and expense of the owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle or trailer. The owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle or trailer so removed or stored may redeem the
same by paying to the vehicle impoundment facility or to such person as
may be designated by the Board of Trustees the amount of all expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, together
with the charges for storage.
C. In the event of the removal of a motor vehicle or trailer and the payment
for such removal and storage as described above, any further
prosecution for a violation of a parking ordinance arising out of the
same violation shall be barred. However, in lieu of such removal, a
police officer may serve upon the owner a summons, in which event the
penalties otherwise provided shall apply, or he may affix a ticket as
provided by law.
D. In the event the owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle or
trailer so removed shall claim there is a dispute as to ownership or right
to possession of such vehicle or trailer, upon written notice to the
person in charge of said vehicle or trailer in storage, the vehicle or
trailer shall remain in storage pending determination of ownership.
§ 34-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-10
1:232
ARTICLE II
Winter Parking
§ 34-11. Declaration of emergency parking restrictions.
Whenever road conditions in the Village of Brockport have become
hazardous or such that the free movement of fire or EMS apparatus, police
vehicles, any emergency vehicles or municipal vehicular traffic may have
become impeded by reasons of snow, freezing rain, ice, smoke, fire or any
other natural or man-made hazardous cause, the Mayor or Deputy Mayor or
his or her designee is hereby authorized to declare the existence of parking
restrictions and/or emergency parking restrictions based upon the advice
of the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Superintendent of Public Works, or their
designees.
§ 34-12. Declaration of emergency parking restrictions.
During an emergency parking restriction crisis, the Mayor or Deputy Mayor
of the Village of Brockport or his or her designee shall have the authority
to declare that a parking emergency exists, which bans any parking from
all streets or parts thereof in the Village of Brockport and/or all Village
parking lots. This emergency shall be declared by whatever reasonable
means are available. In addition to the sanctions prescribed in §§ 34-9,
34-10 and 34-13, owners of vehicles shall be responsible for any and all
costs of removing their parked vehicles and shall be subject to parking
violation fines as established by the Board of Trustees.
§ 34-13. Duration of emergency parking restrictions.
Emergency parking restrictions shall exist as long as the emergency or
similar crisis exists. The Mayor or Deputy Mayor of the Village of Brockport
or his or her designee shall, from time to time, issue public announcements
regarding the duration or termination of emergency parking restrictions by
whatever reasonable means are available.
§ 34-14. Declaration by Superintendent of Department of Public
Works.
A. Whenever road conditions in the Village of Brockport necessitate
closure for the operations of the Department of Public Works, the
Superintendent of Public Works or his/her designee can authorize the
closure which bans any parking from streets or parts thereof in the
Village of Brockport and/or all Village parking lots. This parking
restriction shall be declared by whatever reasonable means are
available. In addition to the sanctions prescribed in §§ 34-9, 34-10 and
34-13, owners of vehicles shall be responsible for any and all costs of
removing their parked vehicles and shall be subject to parking violation
fines as established by the Board of Trustees.
B. The Village Board of Trustees can authorize the closure of Villageowned
streets for publicly authorized events, such as but not limited to
§ 34-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-14
1:233
parades, walks and festivals. This may include banning parking from
Village streets or parts thereof or from Village parking lots. This
parking restriction shall be declared by whatever reasonable means are
available. In addition to the sanctions prescribed in §§ 34-9, 34-10 and
34-13, owners of vehicles shall be responsible for any and all costs of
removing their parked vehicles and shall be subject to parking violation
fines as established by the Board of Trustees.
§ 34-14 BROCKPORT CODE § 34-14
1:234
Chapter 34A
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 4.
Dogs — See Ch. 5, Art. II.
Berms, fences, hedges and screen plantings —
See Ch. 6.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 35.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Noise — See Ch. 55.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
§ 34A-1. Title.
This code shall be known and may be cited as the "Parks Law of the Village
of Brockport."
§ 34A-2. Purpose.
This chapter shall apply to all parks owned, operated, licensed, used or
otherwise under the control or supervision of the Village of Brockport at the
time of enactment or in the future. These provisions are enacted to:
§ 34A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — An area owned or used by the Village of Brockport devoted to active
or passive recreation such as a playfield, playground, tot lot, multipurpose
area, ball field, tennis court, basketball area and all other open space area
in the Village devoted to active or passive leisure. This includes the grounds,
buildings thereon, waters therein and any other property necessary for
the operation thereof and constituting a part thereof which is now or
may hereafter be maintained, operated and controlled by the Village of
Brockport for public recreation purposes.
A. Establish the policies, regulations and standards on public parks within
the Village of Brockport.
B. Maintain, protect and preserve the parks through safe practices of
removal and replacement of equipment.
C. Establish and maintain appropriate parks for various ages and
diversified activities.
§ 34-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34A-4
1:235
§ 34A-4. Village Parks.
There are nine parks within the Village:
§ 34A-5. Parks Committee.
A. Barry Street Park: between the residences of 56 and 74 Barry Street
and Lyman Street.
B. Corbett Park: Southwest corner of Clark and Smith Streets; borders the
Erie Canal on the south.
C. Evergreen Park: between the residences of 207 and 215 Evergreen
Road; the Erie Canal on the south.
D. Harvester Park: between Water Street and Park Avenue; the Erie Canal
and Market Street.
E. Havenwood Park: between the residences of 47 and 51 Havenwood
Drive.
F. Monika Andrews Children's Playground: corner of Holley and Utica
Streets.
G. Remembrance Park: triangle area near the intersection of Park Avenue
and High Street.
H. Sagawa Park: corner of Main and Erie Streets.
I. South Avenue Park: between 52 South Avenue and Winston Woods
Apartments' driveway.
A. Membership. The Parks Committee shall consist of not fewer than five
and no more than nine members appointed by the mayor subject to the
approval of the Village Board. All members shall be residents of the
Village. Members shall serve for staggered terms of four years and
without compensation. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of a
member, his or her successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Village Board, to complete the unexpired portion
of the term in which the vacancy occurred. The Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Village Board, shall also have the power to remove any
member of the Parks Committee.
B. Organization. Members of the Parks Committee shall annually select a
Chair, a Vice Chair and a Recording Secretary, each to serve a one-year
term. This action will coincide with the Village Board's organizational
meeting in early July. The board shall adopt rules and regulations
concerning its governance and operation. A quorum is necessary for
conducting business.
C. Meetings and surveys. The Parks Committee will:
(1) Meet as needed.
§ 34A-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 34A-5
1:236
§ 34A-6. Park operating policy; general regulations.
(2) The parks' playgrounds and furnishings will be inspected by
certified safety personnel and checked by parks members. A
summary report will be sent to the Village Board and the
Superintendent of Public Works of the findings identifying needs,
unsafe conditions including necessary replacements, repairs, and
maintenance concerns in our parks.
D. Authorization and duties. The Parks Committee is an advisory
committee to the Village Board and shall be authorized to fulfill the
following duties:
(1) Coordinate, recommend and implement the care, maintenance and
oversight of all the Village's public parks and playgrounds;
regularly communicating with the DPW on all matters regarding
Village parks, including development of new parks;
(2) Inform and educate the public about the Village parks.
(3) Make budget recommendations to the Village Board for park
needs, expenses and purchase of equipment and play structures.
(4) Together with the Village, apply for grants related to the
maintenance, operation, and purchase of equipment.
(5) Submit an annual report to the Village Board detailing the Parks
Committee's accomplishments for the year, educational outreach,
activities coordinated with other committees and boards, etc.
(6) Review Village policies, resolutions and local laws impacting parks.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year. The hours of operation for
parks shall be from sunrise to sunset.
B. Closed areas. Any section or any part of any park may be declared
closed to the public at any time and for any interval of lime. either
temporarily or at regular and slated intervals, daily or otherwise and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Trustees, the Mayor or
the DPW Supervisor shall find reasonably necessary.
C. Tobacco use. The Village Board of Trustees has designated all parks to
be tobacco free.
D. Fees for use. There is no charge to residents for use of Village parks.
but the Trustees may charge nonresidents for the use of special
recreational facilities such as tennis courts or pavilions.
E. Park signage. Signs should be located where they can easily be seen by
park users. The text should be limited to what is necessary and should
be supplemented by graphics that are universally understood. Signs
should include the name of the park, rules and regulations and be
§ 34A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34A-6
1:237
effectively designed in a clear legible manner on material that is
durable and resistant to the elements and graffiti.
F. Parking in public parks.
(1) No person shall park a motor vehicle or trailer in any public park,
including parking lots appurtenant thereto, between sunset and
sunrise.
(2) No person shall park any motor vehicle or trailer in a public park
unless such person is at that time using the park facilities during
permitted times.
(3) Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to the
penalties described in § 34-9 & 34-10 of this code.
G. Prohibited acts. The following acts are prohibited and no person shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving
or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or part or
appurtenances thereto, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes or posts.
(2) Damage, transplant or remove any shrub or tree or cause damage
to plants or grass areas so as to impair the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area, except for performance of routine
maintenance.
(3) Leave or dump any material of any kind in a public park. All items
that are carried into a public park, such as food, containers or
cooking materials and all refuse, ashes and garbage must be
carried out of the park.
(4) Cause pollution of any waterway or stream or interfere with the
conservation of the natural resources of a park or endanger the
health of visitors to any park.
(5) Operate any bicycle, skateboard or other kind of personal
conveyance on any road, path, parking area, building, or equipment
within a park.
(6) Park or drive any motor vehicle or motorcycle within a park, except
in places designated for such purposes.
(a) No motorized vehicles may be operated off the roadway or
parking lots in any park.
(b) No person shall land any aircraft, including gliders, balloons or
engage in stunt flying or parachute landing or fly or land any
remote controlled aircraft or drone in any park.
(7) Engage in illegal gambling.
§ 34A-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 34A-6
1:238
§ 34A-7. Enforcement and penalties.
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $250 or imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or both such
fine and imprisonment. Any police agency of competent jurisdiction and the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 34A-8. Complaints.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall review and
investigate complaints which allege or assert the existence of conditions
or activities that fail to comply with this chapter or any other chapter or
ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of the
parks' codes. The process for responding to a complaint shall include the
following steps as the Superintendent at his discretion may deem to be
appropriate:
§ 34A-9. Validity.
(8) Bring into or keep in a park any animal that is destructive of
wildlife, or bring into a park any animal that is not leashed or
otherwise restrained in accordance with local law.
(9) No person in custody or control of an animal shall allow said animal
to discharge any fecal matter on any park property unless the
person in custody or control of said animal immediately and fully
removes and disposes of the feces.
(10) Possess or carry any firecrackers or fireworks without a permit
from the Village Clerk.
(11) Except for police officers, possess any firearms, illicit drugs or
other dangerous instruments.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. Utilizing the Village of Brockport Police and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer to carry out enforcement proceedings as deemed appropriate in
violation of this chapter or law(s) of the Village of Brockport.
A. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this
code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any law of this
municipality, the County of Monroe or the State of New York, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
the protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance of the code of this municipality
existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower
§ 34A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34A-9
1:239
§ 34A-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
New York State Secretary of State in accordance with Section 27 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 35
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Berms, fences, hedges and screen
plantings — See Ch. 6.
Firearms, fireworks and explosives — See Ch.
18.
Garbage, refuse and open burning — See Ch.
21.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 33.
Noise — See Ch. 55.
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of
the people, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
B. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
parks and playgrounds when existing conditions are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unhealthy.
C. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this code, which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this code are hereby declared to be severable.
D. Saving clause. This code shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 34A-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 34A-10
1:240
ARTICLE I
Loitering
[Adopted 2-21-1994 by L.L. No. 1-199424]
§ 35-1. Legislative intent; findings.
§ 35-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITER — To stand, lounge, congregate or remain parked in a motor
vehicle at a public place or place open to the public and to engage in any
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport makes the following
findings:
(1) There have been numerous citizen complaints directed to the
Mayor and Trustees and other local officials concerning the
incidence of persons gathering in the public area of the Village
without a legitimate reason for being there. Investigations of these
complaints have resulted in the findings that, in the places
complained of, extremely large quantities of refuse, empty
beverage containers and other litter have accumulated. In addition,
it has been recognized and reported that such illegitimate
gatherings have discouraged citizens from legitimate utilization of
these areas.
(2) The complaints received and the investigations show that such
illegitimate gatherings very often are participated in by very large
groups of people and are associated with noise, yelling, often of an
obscene nature, fighting and rowdiness, in addition to the litter.
(3) It is also found that, where this kind of illegitimate gathering
occurs, acts of vandalism have been found to occur and damage to
public and private property has been sustained. It is also found that
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community
requires action in the public interest to regulate such behavior.
(4) It is the desire of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport
to encourage and stimulate the use of the downtown area for
everyone. Our beautiful buildings and dedicated merchants will
attract people from all walks of life, and this we support. However,
when the sidewalks and areas in front of stores are used as a
gathering area or playground, and customers and strollers are
deterred, it must be addressed.
B. In order to allow free and unobstructed access to store entrances and
permit all who desire to stroll our wide tree-lined sidewalks without
worry or concern for their safety, we propose the following article.
24.Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. I, Curfew, adopted 5-1-1899.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-2
1:241
conduct prohibited under this article. "Loiter" also means to collect, gather,
congregate or be a member of a group or of a crowd of people who are
gathered together in any public place or place open to the public and to
engage in any conduct prohibited under this article.
PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — Any place open to the public or any place
to which the public is invited and in, on or around any privately owned place
of business, private parking lot or private institution, including places of
worship or any place of amusement and entertainment, whether or not a
charge of admission or entry thereto is made. It includes the elevator, lobby,
hall, corridors and area open to the public of any store, office or apartment
building, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property not owned
by or under the control of the person charged with violating this article or,
in the case of a minor, not owned by or under the control of his parent or
guardian.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, road or highway, alley, lane, sidewalk,
crosswalk or other public way or any public resort, place of amusement,
park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, school
building or school grounds, public parking lot or any vacant lot.
§ 35-3. Prohibited conduct.
§ 35-4. Exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to loiter at, on or
in a public place or a place open to the public in such manner:
(1) As to interfere with, impede or hinder the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(2) As to interfere with, obstruct, harass, curse or threaten or do
physical harm to another member or members of the public.
(3) As to engage in noisy, boisterous or unruly behavior so as to disturb
or disrupt the public peace and quiet or to otherwise cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or recklessly create a risk
thereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined herein, at a
public place or place open to the public and to fail to obey the direction
of a uniformed police officer or the direction of a properly identified
police officer not in uniform to move on when not to obey such direction
shall endanger the public peace and safety.
A. A gathering of persons shall not be considered to be guilty of loitering if
it has a legitimate purpose for being in the public place or shopping
center.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing or other
lawful assembly.
§ 35-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-5
1:242
§ 35-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-16-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment not
to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 35-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-5
1:243

ARTICLE II
Peace and Good Order Generally
[Adopted 5-4-1908]
§ 35-6. Disorderly houses; unlawful assemblages; unlawful
language and conduct.
No person shall, within the limits of said Village, keep or maintain any
disorderly or gambling house or house of ill fame; no person shall take
part or join or aid or abet in any riotous or tumultuous assemblage or
unnecessary crowds upon the streets or in the doorways or stairways
adjacent thereto or loiter about such places; no person shall use or engage
in any profane, vulgar or obscene language or conduct in or upon any street
or public place.
§ 35-7. Interference with lawful assemblages.
No person or persons shall, in any manner whatsoever, disturb, molest or
interrupt or aid in disturbing, molesting or interrupting any of the persons
composing or belonging to any lawful meeting, congregation or gathering
of persons, school, society or association while going to or returning from
the same.
§ 35-8. Unlawful noises.
No person shall, upon Sunday or upon any other day, between the setting
and rising of the sun, make or contribute to the making of any loud or
unusual noise or noises, or fire or discharge any gun or firearm, or be guilty
of any loud hallooing or yelling or of blowing any horn or trumpet, or of
beating any fence, board, box or building or rattling any sticks or bones.
§ 35-9. Congregating; restricted hours for saloons, poolrooms, etc.
No persons shall unnecessarily congregate upon the sidewalk or street
corners or in the vicinity of any church and shall immediately disperse upon
being ordered so to do by the president or any police officer of said Village;
no persons shall engage in ball playing or any other public game upon the
Sabbath day; no person or persons shall keep open for any purpose any
saloon, billiard room, poolroom or place where intoxicating liquors are sold,
in said Village on Sunday or before 5:00 a.m. on Monday or on any other
day between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 35-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-5-1984 by L.L. No.
6-1984; 11-16-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment not
to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 35-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-10
1:245

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted 5-4-190825]
§ 35-11. Swimming or bathing in public.
No person shall, in daylight, swim or bathe in open water exposed to the
public, within the boundary of the Village, unless properly clothed.
§ 35-12. Destruction of property; inciting dogs to fight.
No person shall willfully or maliciously break, tear, injure, remove or deface
any building, fence, awning, signboard, tree, shrubbery or ornamental thing
in said Village, or remove from or pile up before any door or any sidewalk
or tree boxes or casks or other things, or tear down any notice or handbill
lawfully posted, or incite or induce dogs to fight in any of the streets or
public places of said Village.
§ 35-13. Throwing garbage or waste material. [Amended
12-13-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
No person shall engage in such acts so as to cause the discarding of
any papers, cans, bottles, garbage, offensive matter, or waste material of
any type at any place within the Village, except as provided for and in
conformance with Chapter 21 of the Code of the Village of Brockport.
§ 35-14. Appropriation of public property.
No person shall take or use any of the property of said Village for his private
use without first obtaining the consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 35-15. Discharge of shotguns and air guns by minors; sales to
minors.
No person under the age of 16 shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any shotgun, air gun or other similar instrument within the limits of this
municipality, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to sell
any person under the age of 16 years any such air gun, shotgun or other
similar instrument.
§ 35-16. Minors using slingshots.
No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any slingshot, so-called,
within the limits of this Village.
25.Editor's Note: Sections 1 and 2 of the ordinance adopted on this date were superseded by
an ordinance dated 5-6-1918 concerning firearms, etc. See Ch. 18, Firearms, Fireworks
and Explosives.
§ 35-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-17
1:247
§ 35-17. Barbed wire fences.
No person shall construct or maintain a fence of barbed wire or of which
barbed wire is a part along the line of any public street or place, or use
barbed wire in the construction of any division fence, unless the person
desiring to use such material shall first obtain the written consent of the
owner of the adjoining property.
§ 35-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-13-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002; 11-16-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment not
to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 35-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-18
1:248
ARTICLE IV
Adult Entertainment
[Adopted 2-21-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 35-19. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Brockport and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Village of Brockport. The provisions of this article
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content of any communicative material, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
§ 35-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as "adult bookstore or adult
video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
B.
§ 35-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-20
1:249
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 35-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-20
1:250
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals or full female breast.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/
or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well
as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/
or license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
B.
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex.
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
B.
§ 35-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-20
1:251
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — Of a sexually oriented business, means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor areas exist on date of enactment.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Of a sexually oriented
business, means and includes any of the following:
§ 35-21. Uses permitted; restrictions.
The following uses as hereinbefore defined, "adult arcades," "adult
bookstores or adult video stores," "adult cabarets," "adult motels," "adult
motion-picture theaters," "adult theaters," "escort agencies," "nude model
studios" and "sexual encounter centers," shall be designated adult uses.
Adult uses shall be permitted uses in any Light Industrial District only,
provided that:
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. An adult use may not be operated within 500 feet of:
(1) A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school.
(3) A boundary of any residential district.
(4) A public park adjacent to any residential district.
B. An adult use may not be operated within 1,000 feet of another adult use
or the same lot or parcel of land.
C. An adult use may not be operated in the same building, structure or
portion thereof containing another adult use.
D. For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises
where an adult use is conducted to the nearest property line of the
premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary
school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential
district or residential lot.
§ 35-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-21
1:252
§ 35-22. Location in Industrial District; inspection required;
suspension of business.
E. For purposes of Subsection D of this section, the distance between any
two adult uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
F. All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building. Regardless of
location or distance, no one who is passing by an enclosed building
having a use governed by these provisions shall be able to visually see
any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by virtue
of any display which depicts or shows said area or activity. This
requirement shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, window or
other opening.
A. A person may operate an adult use business only within the Industrial
District of the Village of Brockport in accordance with the provisions of
this article. [Amended 8-7-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
B. Prior to the commencement of any adult use business or upon any
transfer of ownership or control, the premises must be inspected and
found to be in compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the
Health Department, Fire Department and Village Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal and other code enforcement
officials.
C. The Health Department, Fire Department and Village Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal and other code enforcement
officials shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of the inspection of the
premises by such officials. The certification shall be promptly presented
to the Village Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
D. The Village Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall suspend the
right to conduct such adult use for a period not to exceed 30 days if he
determines that the owner and/or operator or an employee of the owner
and/or operator has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article.
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult
use business premises.
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises
as authorized by this article.
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use
business premises.
(5) Knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances
on the premises.
§ 35-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-22
1:253
§ 35-23. Amortization of nonconforming adult use.
§ 35-24. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; severability.
(6) Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
(7) Knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur in or on
the permitted and/or licensed premises.
E. An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives
of the Village Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department,
Zoning and Building Department or other Village departments or
agencies to inspect the premises of an adult use business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
F. Prior to any suspension, the Village Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall provide the owner and/or operator a notice with the
grounds for the suspension. The notice stating the grounds shall be
provided to the owner and/or operator in writing. The owner and/or
operator has the right to present its response to this notice to the
Village Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer within 10 days of
receipt of said notice. The response may be made in person orally or in
writing. The Village Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may not
suspend the right to conduct such adult use until 15 days after the
notice is given to the owner and/or operator or until after receiving the
owner's and/or operator's response, whichever is sooner.
A. Any adult use business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
article that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration
requirements of this article shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to
exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two
or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult use business
which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use, and the later-established business(es) is
nonconforming.
B. An adult use business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
operation of the adult use business, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district or a
residential lot within 500 feet of the adult use business.
A. A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
§ 35-22 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-24
1:254
which is contrary to these regulations shall be subject to prosecution
under this section of the Code of the Village of Brockport, or in the
alternative, violation of this article may be enforced by injunction.
B. The continuation of a violation of the provisions of this article shall
constitute, for each day the violation is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
C. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of
this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or
both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 11-16-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
D. If any part or provision of this article, the application thereof to any
persons or circumstances, shall be judged invalid, such judgment shall
be confined to the part or application adjudged to be invalid. Such
decision shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid.
§ 35-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-24
1:255
Chapter 36
MINIMUM HOUSING AND BUILDINGS CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Electrical inspection — See Ch. 17.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 19.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 21.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 27.
Plumbing — See Ch. 41.
Sewers — See Ch. 42.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 51.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 35-24 BROCKPORT CODE § 35-24
1:256
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 36-1. Title; purpose; scope; definitions; applicability;
enforcement.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Housing and Buildings
Code," as applicable to dwellings, buildings, multiple dwellings,
dwelling units, premises, structures, land and equipment, and is herein
referred to as the "Housing and Buildings Code" or "this chapter."
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in buildings used for dwelling and human occupation purposes
as hereinafter provided and to prevent the existence of such conditions,
factors or characteristics that can adversely affect public safety, health
and welfare and lead to the continuation, extension and aggravation of
urban blight. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the
establishment and enforcement of these minimum housing and
buildings standards, as follows:
(1) Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment, facilities,
hazardous processes/activities and/or to eliminate issues that pose
a substantial potential hazard to public safety, including but not
limited to light, ventilation, space heating and electrical, for
sanitation, safety from fire, for occupancy and space, use and
location, exiting and means of egress, safe and sanitary
maintenance, cooking equipment, and plumbing provisions in all
dwellings, buildings, multiple dwellings, dwelling units, premises,
structures, land and equipment now in existence and planned.
(2) Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of
dwellings, buildings and multiple dwellings, dwelling units, rental
units, premises and structures.
(3) Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and
terms shall be defined as follows unless otherwise expressly provided:
BUILDING — Any roofed walled structure.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 36-2 of this
chapter. The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of
this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to §§ 36-5 through 36-8 of this chapter.
CODE — The local laws of the Village of Brockport.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all Inspectors employed by the Village of Brockport who
are certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of code
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:257
enforcement officer, building inspector or fire marshal, and/or titled as
assistant code enforcement officer, assistant building inspector, deputy
fire marshal, or any combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village
of Brockport who is certified by the State of New York either in the
capacity of code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal,
planning/zoning officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain
administrator, or any combination thereof.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — A written order for the remediation of found
violation(s), pursuant to Article III, § 36-27C, of this chapter.
DWELLING — To include one-family and two-family, multiple-family
and/or mixed-use housekeeping structures, boardinghouses/rooming
houses and apartment houses. The actual use and occupancy of a
dwelling at the time of any applications for certificates or permits
hereunder, registration, their renewal, or any compliance or complaint
inspection(s) required to be made by the Code Enforcement Officer,
regardless of any other classification of the property (whether for tax
purposes or otherwise), shall determine whether and to what extent the
dwelling is subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Types of dwellings
are defined in § 58-2.)
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for use of one or
more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
ENERGY CODE — The New York State Energy Conservation
Construction Code, which regulates design and construction of
residential and commercial buildings for the effective use of energy.
NYCRR — The New York Code of Rules and Regulations.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 36-3 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating
permit which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any
provision of this chapter.
OWNER — The person or entity in whose name the premises affected
by an order issued in accordance with this chapter is recorded as the
owner in the office of the local Assessor.
PLACARD/POSTING — A public notice placed on a building, structure,
premises, dwelling, dwelling unit, equipment and/or land pursuant to
Article I, § 36-15, of this chapter.
PROPERTY MANAGER — An adult, age 21 or older, who has been
appointed by the owner of a property to perform the owner's
responsibilities and respond to emergencies there. This person must
live within 50 miles of said property and must possess knowledge of
locations of gas and water valves, electrical panel boxes, furnaces, hot
water heaters, and other equipment on the property. This person must
possess keys or otherwise have access to all areas of the property.
§ 36-1 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-1
1:258
RED TAG — See "placard/posting."
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY —
STOP-WORK ORDER — A public notice placed on a building, structure,
premises, dwelling unit, equipment and/or land pursuant to Article I,
§ 36-14, of this chapter, that work and/or a use is in noncompliance and
shall cease.
SLEEPING SPACE — A room or part of a room that can be used, either
on an occasional or permanent basis, for sleeping.
TENANT/RENTER — Any nonowner occupying a residential rental
property.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
Shall mean:
Any dwelling occupied by nonowners under verbal contract or
written contract (lease) for agreed terms and monetary or inkind
payments and subject to agreed possessory conditions.
(a)
Single-family houses (one dwelling unit with living, kitchen,
sanitary and sleeping facilities), rented by absentee owners
and/or owners/occupants to tenants.
(b)
Multiples, so rented by absentee owners and/or owners/
occupants to tenants, with two or more dwelling units, each
with living, kitchen, sanitary and sleeping facilities, including
doubles, triples, fours or more.
(c)
Apartment houses, with each apartment being a dwelling unit
so rented by absentee owners to tenants, with living, kitchen,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
(d)
Boardinghouses and rooming houses with multiple sleeping
rooms (up to 30 in number) serviced by common sanitary
facilities.
(e)
(f) Mixed-use buildings containing one or more dwelling units.
(1)
For purposes of this chapter, each sleeping room in a
boardinghouse, furnished-room house, and rooming house is not
deemed a dwelling unit as defined above.
(2)
The definition of "residential rental property" supplements the
existing Code definitions for families, apartment house,
boardinghouse, furnished-room house, rooming house, dwelling
(multiple), dwelling (two-family), dwelling unit, and unit (singlefamily
dwelling).
(3)
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:259
D. Every portion of a building or premises used or intended to be used for
human habitation shall comply with the provisions of this chapter,
irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered
or repaired, except as hereinafter provided.
E. Application of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code. The Uniform
Code and the Energy Code shall apply to one- and two-family dwellings,
all residential rental property, multiple dwellings, boardinghouses,
furnished-room houses, rooming houses, tourist homes, apartment
houses or any other type of residential rental property, in addition to
any commercial occupancies, such as but not limited to stores and
shops for retail purposes, bars and restaurants, private or public
business uses, industrial manufacturing and processes, storage and
warehousing, and also to hotels and motels serving transient guests and
rest homes, convalescent homes and nursing homes whereby sleeping
accommodations are provided, hospitals, religious facilities and private
schools, day cares and municipal buildings and equipment therein. Any
alterations to buildings or changes of use therein which may be caused,
directly or indirectly, by the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in
accordance with applicable sections of the Uniform Code, Energy Code,
and any other local, regional, state and/or federal laws, rules or
regulations that may apply.
F. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code(s) of this municipality,
the County of Monroe or the State of New York, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and the protection of
the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a
provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
other ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective
date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the
promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other ordinances or
codes and articles are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
G. Partial invalidity. If any section of this chapter shall be held
unconstitutional, illegal, invalid, or otherwise unenforceable or in
violation of state or local laws, the remainder of the chapter shall
remain in full force and effect and be enforceable as such.
H. This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation and
does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or
facilities, except as provided in this chapter.
I. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
§ 36-1 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-1
1:260
removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
J. Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Enforcement
Officer to enforce the provisions of the Housing and Buildings Code
as herein provided. The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer
and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code and local law(s). The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
following powers and duties:
(a) To receive, review and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, operating permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, conditional certificates of
occupancy/certificates of compliance, residential rental
property registrations, construction plans, specifications,
construction documents and matters submitted as required
with all such applications.
(b) To submit for review and approval by the Historic Preservation
Board all building permit applications for structures
designated as historic landmarks by the Historic Preservation
Board or that are listed on the State or National Registry of
Historic Places.
(c) Upon approval of such application(s), to issue building permits,
operating permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, conditional certificates of occupancy/certificates
of compliance, residential rental registrations and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy/certificates of compliance, conditional certificates
of occupancy/certificates of compliance and residential rental
registrations such terms and conditions as the Code
Enforcement Officer may determine to be appropriate.
(d) To conduct inspections, including, without limitation, for
construction, fire, fire hazards or explosion, housing,
verification of use, property maintenance and any and all
inspections to be made prior to the issuance of building
permits, operating permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, conditional certificates of
occupancy, residential rental registrations, firesafety
inspections and property maintenance inspections incidental
to the investigation of complaints and all other inspections
required or permitted under any provisions of any local laws
and/or other codes, rules and/or regulations.
(e) To issue stop-work orders.
(f) To review and investigate complaints.
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:261
§ 36-2. Building permits.
(g) To placard unsafe buildings or structures.
(h) To issue orders pursuant to Article II, § 36-18, of this chapter.
(i) To maintain records.
(j) To collect fee(s) as determined from time to time by resolution
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport as
contained in the Village of Brockport Fee Schedule.
(k) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and
proceedings.
(l) In consultation with the Village of Brockport Attorney, to
pursue such legal actions and proceedings as may be
necessary to enforce the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and
local laws or article/articles listed and/or to abate or correct
conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter and local laws.
(m) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties
conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be employed by the Village of
Brockport. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess
background experience related to building construction and fire
prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such
basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and
other training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
obtain certification from the Secretary of State.
(3) One or more inspectors may be employed by the Village of
Brockport to act under the supervision and direction of the Code
Enforcement Officer to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, inservice
training, advanced in-service training and other training as
the State of New York shall require for code enforcement
personnel, and each inspector shall obtain certification from the
Secretary of State pursuant to the Executive Law § 381 (Part
120826) and the regulations promulgated hereunder.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and/or the Village
of Brockport code(s), including but not limited to the construction,
26.Editor's Note: See 19 NYCRR Part 1208.
§ 36-1 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-2
1:262
enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, relocation or
demolition of any building or structure, or any portion thereof, and the
installation of a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, gas appliances,
chimneys or flues. No person shall commence any work for which a
building permit is required without first having obtained a building
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. A specific list of building
permits required is listed in the Village of Brockport Fee Schedule.
Building permits shall be required for all exterior work on all properties
designated as historic landmarks by the Historic Preservation Board or
that are listed on the State or National Registry of Historic Places.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or townhouses which
are used for tool and storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses,
provided that the gross floor area does not exceed 144 square feet
(13.88 square meters).
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses).
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely aboveground.
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool or located in a front yard, per
Chapter 6 of the Code.
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound for Class I, II or IIIA liquids, as per the
Uniform Code.
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery.
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse.
(8) Installation of partitions or movable shelving or cases less than five
feet nine inches in height.
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting or other similar finish
work.
(10) Installation of generally accepted, tested or recognized and listed
portable electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or cooling
equipment or appliances.
§ 36-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-2
1:263
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided that the replacement
does not alter the equipment's generally accepted listing or render
it inconsistent with the equipment's original specifications.
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition or
portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire-protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed an authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code or the local law(s) of the Village of
Brockport.
D. Applications for building permits. Application for a building permit shall
be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the
Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the permit
applicant and the owner of the property where the work is to be
performed or by an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that the intended work complies with all applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and any local laws. The application
shall include or be accompanied by the following information and
documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work.
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed.
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure.
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections in accordance
with the provisions of the Uniform Code.
(5) At least two sets of construction documents, drawings and/or
specifications which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work.
§ 36-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-2
1:264
(b) Shall be prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer when cost exceeds $20,000
and/or involves work affecting the structural integrity or public
safety components of any portion of any buildings, as required
by the New York State Education Law.
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed.
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code, Energy Code and local laws.
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, easements,
rights-of-way, above-grade or below-grade utilities and
drainage swales, as well as the location of the intended work
and the distances between all other buildings and structures
and lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in § 36-2D(5) of this chapter. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer,
and the Code Enforcement Officer shall retain one set of the accepted
construction documents. Work shall not commence until and unless the
Village of Brockport has issued a building permit.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code, Energy Code
and local laws. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building
permit only if the proposed work is in compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Code, Energy Code and local laws.
G. Insurance/indemnification. The building permit application, and the
issuance and/or renewal thereafter of any building permit, may be
conditioned upon the provision by the owner of liability, fire and hazard
insurance in amounts and with additional insured coverage naming the
certificate holder as the Village and/or such indemnification as the
Village of Brockport may require and workers' compensation coverage
as applicable pursuant to General Municipal Law § 125. Permit holders
are required to maintain applicable insurances throughout the life of
the permit; the expense of such insurance and/or indemnification shall
be borne by the owner. Failure of the owner to comply with this
provision shall be a ground and/or basis for the denial, revocation or
suspension of any building permit.
H. Building permits shall be visibly displayed at the work site and shall
remain visible until the authorized work has been completed.
§ 36-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-2
1:265
I. Work to be in accordance with approved construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any proposed change occurring during the
course of the work. The building permit also shall contain such a
directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a proposed
change warrants a new or amended building permit, such change shall
not be made until and unless a new or amended building permit
reflecting such change is issued.
J. Time limits. A building permit or amended building permit shall become
invalid unless the authorized work is commenced within six months
following the date of issuance. Building permits or amended building
permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. Subject to
approval by the Code Enforcement Officer, a building permit or
amended building permit which, pursuant to this subsection, has
become invalid or which has expired may be renewed upon application
by the permit holder and payment of the applicable fee to the Village of
Brockport.
K. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code, Energy
Code or local laws, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the
building permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the
permit holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code and/or local laws, and all further work then proposed to be
performed shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the
Uniform Code, Energy Code and local laws.
L. Fee(s); building permits. Initial issuance and/or renewals shall require
fee payment specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth as required by this chapter and shall be deposited
with the Village of Brockport. Application fee(s) shall be determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees as contained in the Village
of Brockport Fee Schedule, which application fee(s) shall be equivalent
whether for the initial issuance of building permits or for renewals
thereof. Payment of fee(s) shall be required at the time of issuance of an
initial building permit or renewal building permit. Fee(s) shall be
determined, assessed, administered and enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport. All fees associated with
external plan review, special inspections, etc., shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and shall be paid for at the time the
building permit is issued.
M. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
§ 36-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-2
1:266
§ 36-3. Operating permits.
property by reason of the issuance of a building permit or inspections
made pursuant to a building permit or the failure to make inspections
pursuant to an application for a building permit or the issuance of or
the failure to issue a building permit.
A. Operating permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2),
2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of
New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR
1225.1.
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling.
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies or locations.
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more.
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined and
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport.
B. Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any
type of building listed in Subsection A of this section shall be required
to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing or continuing such
activity or operation. The eligibility of an owner for the issuance of an
operating permit shall be subject to the owner being in full compliance
with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code, local laws and
the codes of the Village of Brockport, specifically and without
limitation, the Village of Brockport local laws and codes concerning
certificates of occupancy, building permits and residential rental
registrations.
C. Insurance/indemnification. The classification of any property or use
hereunder as requiring an operating permit, and the issuance and/or
renewal thereafter of any operating permit, may be conditioned upon
the provision by the owner of liability, fire and hazard insurance in
amounts and with additional insured coverage naming the certificate
holder as the Village, and/or such indemnification as the Village of
Brockport may require, and workers' compensation coverage as
applicable pursuant to General Municipal Law § 125. Permit holders are
required to maintain applicable insurances throughout the life of the
permit; the expense of such insurance and/or indemnification shall be
borne by the owner. Failure of the owner to comply with this provision
§ 36-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-3
1:267
shall be a ground and/or basis for the denial, revocation or suspension
of any operating permit.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport shall
classify properties in the Village as being subject to the
requirements of this operating permit requirement. Each property
classification under this chapter shall become a part of and be
noted in any other permit or registration required for the property,
as for example, on certificates of occupancy, on building permits,
and on residential rental registrations. The applicant/owner shall
be responsible for the expense of any professional or expert testing
of the property for its anticipated use, occupancy or operation as
the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary (in his or her sole
discretion) to classify the property as being subject to or exempt
from the requirements of this chapter.
D. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include all information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code, Energy Code and/or local laws. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that tests or reports are necessary to
verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by, or who is/
are otherwise acceptable to, the Code Enforcement Officer, at the
expense of the applicant.
(1) In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in
Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit
for each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his
or her sole discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all
such activities.
(2) Duration of operating permits. Except as otherwise provided in the
Village of Brockport Fee Schedule, operating permits shall be
issued for one year in the case of any operating permit issued for a
permanent use or for such lesser time periods for the occupancy,
use or operation of a property deemed by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be of a temporary nature, consistent with local
conditions. The effective period of the operating permit shall be
specified in the operating permit. Operating permits are renewable
at the expiration of each permit period noted on the permit. It is the
obligation of the owner to order a compliance inspection for the
renewal of the operating permit at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of the operating permit. Failure of the owner to do so
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and may subject the
owner to the imposition of fines and penalties as are stated in this
chapter or elsewhere and to general jurisdiction fines and penalties
§ 36-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-3
1:268
§ 36-4. Registration of residential rental properties.
as are stated in the Code of the Village of Brockport. The failure
of an owner to comply with the operating permit requirements
of this chapter may subject the owner to the issuance by the
Code Enforcement Officer of a temporary or permanent cease-anddesist
order and/or a stop-work order or an order to vacate and
discontinue the use of the property unless or until it again comes
into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized inspector)
shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an
operating permit. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee,
authorized representative, or operator) decline consent to
inspection(s) believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer (or his authorized inspector) for proper enforcement of this
provision, the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector, as the case may be) shall be authorized to apply for a
search warrant pursuant to § 36-10A(2) of this chapter and such
other legal requirements as may apply to permit such inspection(s).
(4) Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for
which an operating permit was issued does not comply with any
applicable provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or any
other state or local law that may apply (including, without
limitation, certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance
requirements, building permit requirements, and residential rental
registration requirements), such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
E. Fee(s); operating permits. Initial issuance and/or renewals shall require
fee payment specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth as required by this chapter and shall be deposited
with the Village of Brockport. Application fee(s) shall be determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees as contained in the Village
of Brockport Fee Schedule, which application fee(s) shall be equivalent
whether for the initial issuance of operating permits or for renewals
thereof. Payment of fee(s) shall be required at the time of filing of an
application for an operating permit or for renewal of an operating
permit. Fee(s) shall be determined, assessed, administered and
enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport.
A. Owners are required to register with the Code Enforcement Officer
each rental building contained on each of their residential rental
properties, as defined in § 36-1C above, on an annual basis
B. For purposes of registration, including renewals, owners of residential
rental properties located within the Village shall complete and sign a
rental registration application provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer, which shall state and provide the following information:
§ 36-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-4
1:269
(1) The name, physical address, telephone number(s), and e-mail
address of each owner or principal of each owner. Post office boxes
shall not be accepted as physical addresses.
(2) The address of each residential rental property (including
boardinghouses and rooming houses), the number of dwelling units
contained within each residential rental property, the number of
tenants, and any other pertinent data sought by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(3) The name(s), physical address(es), telephone number(s) and e-mail
address(es) of any local property manager(s) or agent(s) on behalf
of the property owner(s), which shall be required in all cases where
no property owner physically resides within 50 miles of the Village.
Post office boxes shall not be accepted as physical addresses.
C. The rental registration application shall indicate an address for receipt
of notices by mailing for purposes of this chapter and any other
applicable laws or regulations.
D. In the event that changing circumstances would render the information
in the rental registration inaccurate, the owner shall be responsible for
updating such information within a period of 90 days.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall
conduct such inspections as may be necessary to verify compliance with
the provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, or any other local,
regional, state or federal laws, rules or regulations that may apply,
including the rules of this section. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) shall have 30 days after the filing of a rental
registration application in which to schedule the first such compliance
inspection in order to verify the correctness of the information stated in
the application. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee, authorized
representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s) believed to
be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector, as the case may be)
shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant to
§ 36-10A(2) of this chapter, along with such other legal requirements as
may apply, to permit such inspection(s). If the Code Enforcement
Officer finds a discrepancy in the classification of the property, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice to the owner advising of the
actual classification of the property.
F. Fee(s); rental registrations. New registrations and registration
renewals shall require payment of a fee, which shall be determined by
resolution of the Board of Trustees and contained in the Village of
Brockport Fee Schedule. Payment of the fee shall be required at the
time of filing of an application for a rental registration or registration
renewal. Fees shall be assessed, administered and enforced by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport.
§ 36-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-5
1:270
§ 36-5. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings or portions thereof, and accessory structures and equipment
thereof, which are constructed, converted from one use or occupancy
classification or subclassification to another, or have equipment
installation or structural alterations. Permission to use or occupy or put
into service a building, structure or portion thereof or equipment for
which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by
issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance. No
building or portion thereof shall be occupied without a valid certificate
of occupancy.
B. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance for residential
rental property will expire upon the sale or transfer of title to the
premises, unless the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance
has been issued no earlier than 60 days prior to transfer of title to the
new owner. If a property is occupied at the time of title transfer and the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance will expire with the
transfer, the new owner must, within 10 days, apply for a new
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance in order to avoid
vacating the property.
C. Any building or structure which has been vacant or which has had
utilities disconnected in excess of nine consecutive months shall also
require a new certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, and
otherwise may not be used for any purpose.
D. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of a building
permit was completed in accordance with all applicable provisions of
the Uniform Code, Energy Code and local laws, if applicable, and that
the structure, building or portion thereof that was constructed or was
converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification
or had equipment installation or structural alterations complies with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy Code and local laws.
For purposes of § 36-5B of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a current certificate of occupancy if the residential rental
property, in its entirety, substantially conforms to the requirements of
this Code, the Uniform Code, if applicable, and all other applicable
laws, ordinances or rules. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his/her
authorized inspector) is authorized to inspect the building, structure or
work prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance. In addition, where applicable, documents or inspection(s)
reports substantiating compliance can be prepared in accordance with
the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or are otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, and such documents or inspection report(s) will be at the
§ 36-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-5
1:271
expense of the permit holder or applicant prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
E. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections.
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
(3) The building permit number, if any.
(4) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any.
(5) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property.
(6) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued.
(7) The use and occupancy classification of the structure.
(8) The type of construction of the structure.
(9) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any.
(10) If an automatic fire sprinkler, fire-suppression system/systems or
fire alarm/alarms are provided, a notation as to whether the
automatic fire sprinklers and fire-suppression system/systems or
fire alarm/alarms are required.
(11) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit.
(12) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
F. Whenever violations of the Housing and Buildings Code or Chapter 58,
Zoning, of the Code, or any other applicable law, ordinance or rule are
discovered, and those violations are such that the dwelling and/or any
dwelling unit thereof is deemed a structure unfit for human habitation
pursuant to § 36-15 of this chapter, the existing certificate of occupancy
shall become null and void. In that case, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the registered owner(s) that the continued occupancy or use
of the building is forbidden unless a conditional certificate of occupancy
can be obtained as provided in § 36-7B of this chapter.
G. Notwithstanding the existence of a valid certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance, the Code Enforcement Officer may cause the
subject building to be inspected as often as may be necessary for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any violations of
the provisions of the laws, ordinances or rules which are enforced
§ 36-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-5
1:272
§ 36-6. Residential rental property renewals of certificates of
occupancy.
hereunder. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee, authorized
representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s) believed to
be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized
inspector) for the proper enforcement of this provision, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized inspector, as the case may
be) shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant to
§ 36-10A(2) and such other legal requirements as may apply to permit
such inspection(s).
H. Revocation or suspension of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance was issued in error
because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the
relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance.
I. Fee(s); certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. Initial
issuance shall require fee payment specified in or determined in
accordance with the provisions set forth as required by this chapter and
shall be deposited with the Village of Brockport. Application fee(s) shall
be determined by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees as
contained in the Village of Brockport Fee Schedule. Payment of fee(s)
shall be required at the time of filing of an application for a certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance, and any assessed reinspection
fees shall thereafter be paid prior to issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance. Fee(s) shall be assessed,
administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Village of Brockport.
J. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
property by reason of inspections made pursuant to an application for a
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or the failure to make
inspections pursuant to an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or the issuance of or the failure to issue a
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
A. Where no changes of occupancy or use have occurred and where there
is full compliance with the applicable provisions of § 36-4 of this chapter
regarding the required registration of residential rental properties as
well as full compliance with the laws, ordinances and rules specified in
the certificate of occupancy and any other applicable laws, ordinances
or rules, a certificate of occupancy for a residential rental property shall
be issued and shall remain valid for a period of three years. For
purposes of renewal, no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of a
§ 36-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-6
1:273
§ 36-7. Conditional certificates of occupancy.
certificate of occupancy, it shall be the obligation of the owner to notify
the Code Enforcement Officer in order to cause a new certificate of
occupancy to be issued for the residential rental property for which
the existing certificate of occupancy will expire. The Code Enforcement
Officer (or his/her authorized inspector) shall then make an inspection
of the dwelling for which the certificate of occupancy application is
made. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee, authorized
representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s) believed to
be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized
inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his/her authorized inspector, as the case may
be) shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant to
§ 36-10A(2) of this chapter and such other legal requirements as may
apply to permit such inspection(s).
B. Fees for certificates of occupancy shall be set periodically by the Board
of Trustees of the Village.
C. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
property by reason of inspections made pursuant to an application for a
renewed certificate of occupancy or the failure to make inspections
pursuant to an application for a renewed certificate of occupancy or the
issuance of or the failure to issue a renewed certificate of occupancy.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a conditional
certificate of occupancy allowing the temporary occupancy of a building
or structure, or portion(s) thereof, prior to the completion of all the
work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no event
shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a conditional certificate of
occupancy unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines:
(1) That the subject building or structure is in compliance with
Chapter 58 of the Code, or otherwise that applications for any
necessary approvals have been filed with the Village;
(2) That the subject building or structure, or designated portion(s)
thereof, may be occupied safely;
(3) That any required fire- or smoke-detection, carbon monoxide and/
or fire-protection equipment has been installed and is operational;
and
(4) That any required means of ingress and egress from the subject
building or structure have been provided.
B. If a conditional certificate of occupancy is issued, it shall state the
specific work remaining to be done in connection with the building
permit issued for the subject building or structure in order to bring the
subject building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
§ 36-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-7
1:274
§ 36-8. Certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance issuance
and filing.
§ 36-9. Responsible parties.
The owner of a property is the party deemed responsible for compliance
with the legal requirements of this chapter. Owners are persons with record
title of property by conveyance deed, gift, devise, court order, or otherwise
(including, but not limited to, by unrecorded instruments of conveyance
or transfer, installment lease purchase option agreements, installment land
contracts, and wrap-around contracts with deed transfer upon fulfillment of
conditions stated), or any other person in actual possession of or otherwise
having charge, care or control of the property, including but not limited
to as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, heir or distributee, and/or
their guest(s) or agent(s). A "person" is defined, for purposes of this section,
to include living persons or entities with the jural identity of a person, i.e.,
corporations, partnerships, LLCs, etc.
provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy Code and/or local law(s), as
well as the date by which the indicated work is required to be
completed, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, but which
in no event shall exceed six months from the issuance date of the
conditional certificate of occupancy.
C. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
property by reason of inspections made or the failure to make
inspections pursuant to the issuance of a conditional certificate of
occupancy or the issuance of or the failure to issue a conditional
certificate of occupancy.
A. Assuming all required conditions are satisfied in connection with any
building permit issued for the subject building or structure, and
otherwise that there is no existing violation of any applicable laws,
ordinances or rules, a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written application
thereof or, in the alternative, a conditional certificate of occupancy if
authorized pursuant to § 36-7 of this chapter.
B. A record of all certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance, and
conditional certificates of occupancy, and their status, shall be kept in
the office of the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Change of use or occupancy. No change of use or occupancy shall be
made to a building or structure if it would result in any change in
classification under the Uniform Code, this chapter, Chapter 58 of the
Code, or any other applicable law, ordinance or rule, unless it is found
by the Code Enforcement Officer to comply therewith, and the subject
building or structure shall not be occupied until a new certificate of
occupancy, as applicable, is issued.
§ 36-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-10
1:275
§ 36-10. Inspections.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be
responsible to make or cause to be made property inspection(s) to
determine the conditions of buildings and dwellings, including multiple
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, boardinghouses, rooming
units and premises, in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare
of the public under the provisions of this chapter. For that purpose, the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) is authorized to
enter any dwelling, building, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling, rooming
house or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing
his duties under this chapter. The owner, operator or occupant of every
dwelling, building, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or
the person in charge thereof, shall give the Code Enforcement Officer
free access thereto and to all parts of the premises on which it is
located at all reasonable times for the purpose of performing his duties
under this chapter. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee,
authorized representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s)
believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be
authorized to apply for a search warrant [pursuant to § 36-10A(2) of this
chapter and such other legal requirements as may apply] to permit such
inspection(s).
(1) Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent
or employee, access to any part of such dwelling unit, rooming unit
or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Application for search warrant. If in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) he has been
unreasonably or unlawfully refused entry into the premises and/or
property for purposes of conducting necessary property
inspection(s), he shall apply forthwith for a search warrant, said
application to be brought before a Village Justice of the Village of
Brockport or any other court of competent jurisdiction. Upon
issuance of any such search warrant by the Village of Brockport
Justice Court and/or other court of competent jurisdiction, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall conduct the
inspection pursuant to the provisions of Criminal Procedure Law
Article 690. [Amended 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
(3) Coordination of enforcement. Property inspections and the issuing
of orders in connection therewith pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer. Wherever in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer it is necessary or desirable to have inspections
of any condition by any other department of the Village, the Code
§ 36-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-10
1:276
§ 36-11. Construction inspections.
Enforcement Officer shall arrange for this to be done in such
manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be
unnecessarily subjected to multiple inspections or conflicting
orders.
B. Administrative liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by
statute, local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the
municipality charged with the enforcement of the Housing and
Buildings Code shall render himself personally liable for any resulting
damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter.
No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal
proceeding under this chapter shall be liable for any resulting damage
unless he/she acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds
for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an
unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any Mayor,
Trustee(s) of the Village of Brockport, officer, agent or employee of the
municipality as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his/her duties under this chapter shall be defended by the
legal representative of the municipality at no cost to the Mayor,
Trustee(s) of the Village of Brockport, officer, agent or employee of the
municipality until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
A. Work where a building permit has been issued shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer (or his authorized inspector). The permit holder shall notify the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is completed
and ready for inspection. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee,
authorized representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s)
believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector, as the case may
be) shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant to
§ 36-10A(2) of this chapter and such other legal requirements as may
apply to permit such inspection(s).
B. Elements of work to be inspected. In connection with the issuance of a
building permit, the following elements of work shall be subject to
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector), without limitation, and as deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer:
(1) Preconstruction work site.
(2) Footing and foundation.
(3) Sanitary/storm laterals and water services.
§ 36-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-11
1:277
§ 36-12. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
(4) Structural framing assemblies.
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in.
(6) Fire-resistant construction.
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations.
(8) Electrical rough-in.
(9) Fire-suppression and fire alarm systems installations and tests.
(10) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, gas appliances, chimneys,
flues or gas vents.
(11) Energy Code compliance.
(12) Final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Construction inspection results. Upon inspection, the holder of the
building permit or an authorized agent shall be notified of the work or
portion of work which has been satisfactorily completed or otherwise
notified regarding any noncompliant work under the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or local law(s). Any designated noncompliant work shall
remain fully exposed and accessible until such time as found to be
satisfactorily completed by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) after reinspection.
D. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
property by reason of construction inspections made pursuant to an
application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate
of compliance or the failure to make construction inspections pursuant
to an application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy,
certificate of compliance or the issuance of or the failure to issue a
building permit, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of compliance as
a result of making construction inspections.
A. Inspections required. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) shall perform firesafety and property maintenance
inspections of buildings and structures at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly that contains
one or more areas of public assembly with an occupant load of 100
persons or more shall be performed at least once annually as
provided by § 36-3 of this chapter.
§ 36-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-12
1:278
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as health care, private schools and day
cares shall be performed at least once annually.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all residential
rental one- and two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings,
boardinghouses, furnished-room houses, rooming houses, tourist
homes, apartment houses, group homes or any other type of
residential rental property shall be performed at least once every
three years.
(4) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all
nonresidential buildings and structures not included in Subsection
A(1) and (2) above shall be performed at least once every three
years.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by this
section, firesafety and property maintenance inspections of any
building or structure may also be performed by the Code Enforcement
Officer (or his authorized inspector) at any time upon:
(1) The request and/or consent of the owner of the building or
structure to be inspected or an authorized agent of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a complaint statement
alleging the existence of conditions or activities with respect to a
building or structure which fail to comply with the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or local laws; or
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable
which gives rise to a cause to believe that there exist conditions or
activities with respect to a building or structure which fail to
comply with the Uniform Code, Energy Code or local laws;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained. Should an owner (and/or agent, employee, authorized
representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s)
believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector, as the case
may be) shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant
to § 36-10A(2) of this chapter and such other legal requirements as
may apply to permit such inspection(s).
C. Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Brockport responsible for any damages to persons or
property by reason of firesafety and property maintenance inspections
or the failure to make or to cause to made any such firesafety and
property maintenance inspections.
§ 36-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-13
1:279
§ 36-13. Complaints.
§ 36-14. Stop-work orders.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, local law(s), or any
other rule, regulation or ordinance. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer, at his discretion, may deem to be appropriate:
(1) Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged
to be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection.
Should an owner (and/or agent, employee, authorized
representative, or operator) decline consent to inspection(s)
believed to be necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) for proper enforcement of this provision, the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector, as the case
may be) shall be authorized to apply for a search warrant pursuant
to § 36-10A(2) of this chapter and such other legal requirements as
may apply to permit such inspection(s).
(2) If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person(s) who may be responsible for the
violation with notice of the violation and an opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the
manner described by this chapter.
(3) If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order pursuant to § 36-14 of this
chapter and/or issuing a red tag/placard pursuant to § 36-15 of this
chapter.
(4) If a violation which was found to exist is subsequently indicated to
have been abated or corrected, performing a confirmatory
inspection to ensure the remediation of the violation and, if
remediation is confirmed, preparing and filing a final written report
reflecting the remediation of the violation.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) is authorized to issue stop-work orders pursuant to this
section. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) to be contrary to applicable provisions of the
Uniform Code, Energy Code or local laws, without regard to
whether or not any building permit or approval was issued or
required to be issued for the work to be completed;
(2) Work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) to be conducted in a dangerous or unsafe
manner, without regard to whether or not a building permit or
§ 36-13 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-14
1:280
§ 36-15. Structures unfit for human habitation (red tag/placard).
approval was issued or required to be issued for the work to be
completed; or
(3) Work that is being performed without a building permit or
approval, if a building permit or approval is required, or work that
is being performed under a building permit or approval which has
become invalid, has expired, or has been suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector);
(3) State the reason(s) for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the condition(s) which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) shall cause a copy of the stop-work order to be
served on the owner of the affected property and, if different, also to be
served on the holder of the building permit or approval, which is to be
served personally or by registered mail/certified mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be permitted,
but not required, to cause a copy of the stop-work order to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in the work affected by the stop-work order, which may be
served in any manner. Failure to serve this copy shall in no event affect
the validity of the stop-work order. In all cases, the Code Enforcement
Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall also cause a copy of the stopwork
order to be posted on the noncompliant building or other
structure, equipment or land.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder, if different, and any
other person performing, taking part in or assisting in the work being
performed shall immediately cease all work which is the subject of the
stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address the events described in
Subsection A of this section and in no event shall limit the ability and
authority of the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
to pursue any other remedy or penalty pursuant to this chapter or
under any other applicable state or local law. Any such other remedy or
penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
§ 36-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-15
1:281
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
finds that any building, dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, or
any other structure or premises is potentially unsafe and/or constitutes
a potential hazard to the safety, health or welfare of the occupants or to
the public because it is significantly in disrepair, damaged or
unsanitary, or because it lacks necessary sanitary facilities or
equipment, or otherwise because it fails to comply with the minimum
provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Code, or other applicable state
or local law, but has not yet reached such state of disrepair as to be
condemned as an unsafe building pursuant to the provisions of Article II
of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) may declare such building, dwelling, multiple dwelling,
dwelling unit, structure or premises unfit for human habitation and thus
order it to be vacated by all occupants thereof pending the appropriate
remediation.
B. Any building, dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, or other
structure or premises which is declared unfit for human habitation shall
be posted with a red tag/placard by the Code Enforcement Officer (or
his authorized inspector). The red tag/placard shall include the
following:
(1) The name of the Village.
(2) The name of the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) issuing the red tag/placard.
(3) The section of this chapter under which the red tag/placard is
issued.
(4) If not directed by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) to be vacated immediately, the date by which the
dwelling, building, multiple dwelling or structure, or premises must
be vacated.
(5) Unless all entry is forbidden by the Code Enforcement Officer (or
his authorized inspector), an order that the building, dwelling,
multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, or other structure or premises
must not be occupied until the red tag/placard is removed from the
subject property by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector).
(6) The date that the red tag/placard is posted.
(7) A statement that it constitutes a violation of law under this chapter
for any such red tag/placard to be defaced or removed by other
than the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector).
C. Notice to owner. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) has declared a building, dwelling, multiple
dwelling, dwelling unit, or other structure or premises unfit for human
§ 36-15 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-15
1:282
habitation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide separate notice
of such declaration to the owner thereof. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
(4) State the required remedies to correct the deficient property
conditions.
(5) If the property is not already vacant, state that all occupants must
vacate immediately, or by a date specified, and that the property
must remain vacant until appropriately remediated.
D. Service of notice to owner. Notice of the declaration of a structure as
unfit for human habitation shall be served upon the property owner in
the same manner as provided in § 36-27D of this chapter. When the
existing property conditions require the removal or demolition of the
building, the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
shall have authority for emergency measures as provided in Article II of
this chapter pertaining to unsafe buildings.
E. Removal of red tag/placard. No person other than the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall deface or
remove a red tag/placard from any building, dwelling, multiple
dwelling, dwelling unit, or other structure or premises which has been
declared unfit for human habitation.
F. Vacating of structures declared unfit for human habitation. A building,
dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, or other structure or
premises which has been declared unfit for human habitation by the
Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be vacated
immediately, or alternately by a date listed on the placard. It shall be
unlawful for any person to occupy, and/or for any owner or operator to
permit to be occupied, any building, dwelling, multiple dwelling,
dwelling unit, or other structure or premises which has been declared
as unfit for human habitation after the red tag/placard is posted or after
the vacate date on the placard.
G. Occupancy of building. No building, dwelling, multiple dwelling,
dwelling unit, or other structure or premises which has been declared
unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until so approved by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector). The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector)
shall remove the red tag/placard only when the indicated defect(s) have
been appropriately remediated or as otherwise may be required by
judicial proceedings.
§ 36-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-15
1:283

ARTICLE II
Unsafe Buildings
§ 36-16. Removal or repair of unsafe buildings.
§ 36-17. Investigation and report.
When in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer a building or structure
is determined to be dangerous or unsafe to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and an unsafe building, pursuant to this article, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall make a formal inspection thereof and report
A. The purpose of this article is to promote, protect and preserve the
safety, health, welfare and property of residents and owners of property
within the Village of Brockport by providing an ordinance for the
removal or repair of unsafe buildings therein that, from any cause, may
now be or shall hereafter become dangerous, unsafe or a public
nuisance or fire hazard.
B. Unsafe buildings; repair or demolition and removal. The owner of any
building or structure, with owner as defined in § 36-9 of this chapter,
shall at all times maintain and keep the same in good repair and in a
healthy, safe, secure and usable condition. If a building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is in such state of disrepair as to constitute an
unsafe building, as defined in Subsection C below, it shall be repaired
and made safe, healthy, secure and usable by the owner thereof or
otherwise be demolished and removed.
C. Unsafe buildings; definition. An unsafe building is any structure or
edifice or portion thereof where:
(1) The walls are in poor structural condition, the floors are overloaded
or there are other major structural defects, including significant
exterior deterioration; or
(2) There is a lack of safeguards against fire or the structure is so
poorly maintained as to constitute a fire hazard; or
(3) It is open and/or unsecured at the doorways, windows or walls,
permitting unauthorized access and entry; or
(4) It is or may become a place of rodent infestation; or
(5) There is debris, rubble or parts of buildings or structures left after
demolition, reconstruction, fire or other casualty or occurrence; or
(6) There are substantial and significant violations of the Uniform
Code or any other state or local codes, which violations constitute a
danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the public; or
(7) There presents any other danger to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public.
§ 36-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-17
1:285
his findings and recommendations in writing to the Village Board with
regard to the repair or demolition and removal of said building or structure.
§ 36-18. Order to repair or demolish and remove; hearing to be
scheduled.
The Village Board shall thereupon consider said written report from the
Code Enforcement Officer, and if it finds that said building or structure
is dangerous and unsafe to the public, it shall, by resolution, order the
repair of said building or structure if it can be safely repaired and, if not,
then its demolition and removal, and shall further order that a hearing be
held before the Village Board at a time and place therein specified and
on at least 10 days' notice to the owner of said building or structure and
owner of the land upon which said building or structure is situated, with
owner as defined in § 36-9 of this chapter, as well any tenant or occupant
of said building or structure or of the land upon which it is situated, or any
other identified persons having an interest therein to determine whether
said order to repair or remove shall be affirmed or modified or vacated,
and in the event of affirmance or modification, to assess all costs and
expenses incurred by the Village of Brockport in connection with the repair
or removal of such building or structure, pursuant to § 36-23 below, against
the land upon which it is situated.
§ 36-19. Contents of notice to repair or demolish; alternative repair
or demolition by Village.
A. Contents of notice to repair or demolish to include as follows:
(1) The name of the owner of the building or structure and, if different,
the name of the owner of the land upon which said building or
structure is situated, as appears from the tax and/or deed records;
(2) A brief description of the subject premises and its location;
(3) A description of the building or structure and a statement
identifying the defects that make it an unsafe building;
(4) An order requiring the building or structure to be made safe and
secure or be demolished and removed; and
(5) The time and place of the hearing to be held before the Village
Board, at which hearing the owner, occupant or other interested
person may contest the order and findings of the Village Board.
B. The securing or removal of said unsafe building or structure should
commence within a specified number of days of the service of the notice
to repair or demolish and shall be completed within a specified number
of days thereafter.
C. In the event that the owner, occupant or other interested person fails to
contest such order and fails to comply with the same, the Village Board
will order the repair or the demolition and removal of such unsafe
§ 36-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-19
1:286
§ 36-20. Service and filing of notice to repair or demolish.
§ 36-21. Hearing.
The Village Board shall conduct the public hearing at the time and place
specified in the notice to repair or demolish. It may adjourn the hearing
from time to time until all interested parties are heard and until the hearing
is completed. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village Board shall
determine by resolution to revoke the order to repair or remove, modify said
order to repair or remove, or continue and affirm said order to repair or
remove, and in the event of modification or affirmance, direct the owner or
other interested person(s) to complete the necessary work within the time
specified in the order to repair or remove or such other time as shall be
determined by the Village Board.
building or structure by the Village, and the Village will assess all costs
and expenses incurred in such repair or demolition and removal against
the land upon which such building or structure is located.
D. If an unsafe building under this article is made safe and secure by the
boarding up thereof, the material used shall be approved in advance
and, further, shall be painted as near as practicable the same color as
the building.
A. A copy of said notice to repair or demolish shall be personally served
upon the owner, as defined in § 36-9 of this chapter, or upon one of the
owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or other
person or entity having a vested or contingent interest in the premises
as shown from the tax and/or deed records or from the records of the
Monroe County Clerk's office.
B. If no such person can be reasonably found for personal service, then a
copy of said notice to repair or demolish shall be mailed to such person
by registered mail addressed to his/her last known address and by
personally serving a copy of said notice to repair or demolish upon
person(s), if any, occupying said premises, and by also securely and
visibly posting a copy of said notice to repair or demolish upon said
building.
C. A copy of said notice to repair or demolish shall be filed in the Monroe
County Clerk's office, which shall be filed in the same manner as a
notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules (CPLR) and shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency as
therein provided. A notice to repair or demolish which is so filed shall
be effective for a period of one year from the date of filing, subject to
being vacated upon order of a judge or justice of a court of record or
upon the written consent of the Village Attorney of the Village of
Brockport. Upon the presentation and filing of a certified copy of such
order or such consent, the Monroe County Clerk's office shall mark
such notice to repair or demolish and any record or docket thereof as
cancelled of record.
§ 36-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-22
1:287
§ 36-22. Failure to comply.
In the event of the refusal, failure or neglect of the owner or other
interested person(s) so notified to comply with said order to repair or
remove within the specified time, and after the public hearing, the Village
Board shall order that such building be made safe and secure or demolished
and removed, either by employees of the Village or by independent
contractors. The Village reserves the right to proceed with competitive
bidding for an award of a contract for repair or demolition after its
determination of the potential cost and taking into consideration whether
emergency action is required.
§ 36-23. Assessment of costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the
proceedings set forth in this article, including the actual costs for making
safe and securing or demolishing and removing the unsafe building, and
also including any attorneys' fees incurred for the enforcement of this
article, shall be assessed against the land on which the unsafe building was
or is located and shall be included in the tax levy and collected against
said parcel of land, or alternatively may be collected in the same manner as
provided in General Municipal Law § 78-b.
§ 36-24. Emergency situations.
Where it reasonably appears that there is a clear and imminent danger
to the life, safety or health of any person or property unless an unsafe
building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished and removed,
the Village Board may by resolution authorize the Code Enforcement Officer
to cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building immediately, with
the assessment of all attendant costs and expenses pursuant to § 36-23 of
this chapter.
§ 36-25. Application for court order.
The Village Board, in it discretion, may elect to apply to the Supreme Court
of the State of New York for an order directing that an unsafe building be
repaired and secured or demolished and removed.
§ 36-22 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-25
1:288
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 36-26. Enforcement.
Except as otherwise authorized, the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village
of Brockport and his authorized inspector(s) is/are the official(s) charged
with enforcing the provisions of this chapter by notice, ticketing, etc., or by
such other enforcement procedures, means and methods as set forth in the
chapter or otherwise permitted by law.
§ 36-27. Notice of violation; compliance orders; appearance tickets;
penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village of Brockport determines that any
activity has not been carried out in accordance with the requirements
of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or this chapter, the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall be authorized to
issue a written notice of violation(s) to the owner, as defined in § 36-9 of
this chapter, and/or the owner's agent and/or any occupant(s) of the
subject property or to any combination of property managers or agents,
builder, architect, tenant(s), contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part in work
being conducted on or about a building structure, premises or property.
B. Informal compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer (or
authorized inspector) is authorized to order, either in writing or by any
other means, the remediation of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure or premises in violation(s) of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter.
C. Compliance order/order to remedy. The Code Enforcement Officer (or
his authorized inspector) is further authorized to order, in writing, the
remediation of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure or premises in violation of the Uniform Code,
Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that such condition or
activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance
order/order to remedy. The compliance order/order to remedy shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector).
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or this chapter.
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity.
§ 36-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-27
1:289
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for compliance.
(6) Direct that compliance occur within the specified period of time,
and state that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may
be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall cause
the compliance order/order to remedy to be mailed to the property
owner identified in filings with and records of the Village of Brockport
(or as indicated in the real property records of the Monroe County
Clerk), and/or to the property owner as defined in § 36-9 of this chapter,
by registered and/or certified mail, and/or a copy thereof may be
personally served on the owner of the affected property. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause a
copy of the compliance order/order to remedy to be mailed to any
property manager or agent, builder, architect, tenant(s), contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work being performed or
occurring at the affected property and/or involved in the use of the
affected property, also by registered and/or certified mail and/or by
personal service thereof.
E. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) is authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation(s)
of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or this chapter.
F. Civil penalties. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to
exceed $250 or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 11-16-2015
by L.L. No. 1-2015]
G. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of or to enforce
any provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or this chapter or any
term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance, conditional certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance, stop-work order, operating permit, residential
rental registration, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use
of a building or structure violates any provision of the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or this chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order
or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or
this chapter, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of
the Village of Brockport in the Supreme Court or in any other court
having the requisite jurisdiction to obtain an order directing the
§ 36-27 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-27
1:290
§ 36-28. Recordkeeping.
The Village of Brockport shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement personnel,
including records of:
removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this
subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization
from the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport.
H. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedies available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 36-14 (Stop-work orders) or § 36-15 (Structures unfit for human
habitation) of this chapter or any other chapter of this Code or local law,
in any other section of the local law(s), or in any other state or local law,
as applicable. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be
pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the
pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in
§ 36-14 (Stop-work orders) or § 36-15 (Structures unfit for human
habitation) of this chapter or local law, in any other section of local
law(s), or in any other applicable law. In particular, but not by way of
limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in this section shall be in
addition to and not in substitution for or limitation of the penalties
specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law, and any
remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any
penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law.
A. All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied.
B. All plans, specifications and construction documents approved.
C. All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, conditional certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued.
D. All inspections and tests performed.
E. All statements and reports issued.
F. All complaints received.
G. All investigations conducted.
H. All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by §§ 36-2
through 36-8 and 36-11 through 36-15, inclusive, of this chapter, and all
such records shall be public records open for public inspection during
normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to buildings or
§ 36-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-28
1:291
§ 36-29. Program review and reporting.
§ 36-30. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport may, by resolution,
authorize the codes official of any municipality within New York State or
enter into an agreement in the name of the Village of Brockport with other
governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of NYCRR, or any other applicable law(s).
§ 36-31. Validity.
structures or appurtenances thereto shall be retained for at least the
minimum time period so required by state law and regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Brockport a written report and summary of all
business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and
activities described in § 36-28 (Recordkeeping) of this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Village of Brockport, on a form prescribed by the
Secretary of State, a report of the activities of the Village of Brockport
relative to administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials that the Village of
Brockport is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations,
statistics and other information and accounts of the activities of the
Village of Brockport in connection with administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code.
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Saving clause. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
C. Unconstitutionality or invalidity in part. Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter be declared unconstitutional
or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the chapter shall not be
§ 36-28 BROCKPORT CODE § 36-31
1:292
affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect, and to this
end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 36-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-31
1:293
Chapter 37
PUBLIC OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of ethics — See Ch. 13.
§ 37-1. Defense and indemnification; liability for costs of defense
and indemnification.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 18 of the Public Officers Law, the governing
body of the Village of Brockport hereby agrees to be held liable for costs
incurred under the provisions of such section by conferring upon the
officers and employees of the Village of Brockport the benefits of § 18 of the
Public Officers Law.
Chapter 38
LIMITED-TRAFFIC STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 15.
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 54.
§ 38-1. Restricted travel on certain streets.
§ 38-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each offense. The
maximum fine for the first offense shall not be more than $100.
Chapter 39
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any commercial vehicle on the following
Village streets when the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds 11 tons:
Adams Street, Brockway Place, Centennial Avenue, Chappell Street,
Coleman Creek Road, Erie Street, Fayette Street, Gordon Street, High
Street, Park Avenue, South Street, Spring Street and Oxford Street;
except that such vehicles may be driven on these streets, for not more
than the minimum distance necessary, for the purposes of making
deliveries or picking up deliveries on properties situate on the specific
streets.
§ 36-31 BROCKPORT CODE § 38-2
1:294
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Limited-traffic streets — See Ch. 38.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 54.
§ 39-1. Notification of unsafe conditions or snow and/or ice.
A. Liability of Village or commission or agency thereof in certain actions.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of
Brockport or against a commission or agency thereof for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign or
device or other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village
or by a commission or agency thereof being defective, out of repair,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence or
accumulation of snow or ice and materials upon any street, highway,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign or device
or other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village or by a
commission or agency thereof unless written notice of the existence of
such condition, relating to the particular place, had theretofore actually
been given to the Clerk of the Village of Brockport and there was a
failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained
of or to cause the snow or ice and materials to be removed or the place
otherwise made reasonably safe. No civil action shall be brought or
maintained against the Village of Brockport or the Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Brockport, or any officers, agents or
employees of the Village of Brockport, for damages or injuries to person
or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign or device or other
property owned, operated or maintained by the Village or by a
commission or agency thereof being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed or for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence or
accumulation of snow or ice and materials upon any street, highway,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign or device
or other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village or by a
commission or agency thereof unless written notice of the existence of
such condition, relating to the particular place, had theretofore actually
been given to the Clerk of the Village of Brockport and there was a
failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained
of or to cause the snow or ice and materials to be removed or the place
otherwise made reasonably safe.
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:295
§ 39-2. Effect on claims and causes of action.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirements or statute of
limitations or to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Brockport.
§ 39-3. Notification of defective or unsafe conditions.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of
Brockport or the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Brockport,
or any officers, agents or employees of the Village of Brockport, for
damages or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign
or device or other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village
or by a commission or agency thereof being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed unless written notice of such defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway, bridge or culvert or any
other property owned or maintained by the Village Brockport was actually
given to the Village Clerk of the Village of Brockport or Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Brockport and that there was a failure or
neglect within a reasonable time after the giving of such notice to repair
or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of; and no such
action shall be brought or maintained for damages or injuries to persons or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice and
materials upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
highway marking, sign or device or other property owned, operated or
maintained by the Village or by a commission or agency thereof unless
written notice thereof, in a form acceptable by the Village Clerk of the
Village of Brockport, specifying the particular place and defect, was actually
given to either the Village Clerk or Superintendent of Public Works of the
Village of Brockport and there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow
or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within
a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 39-4. Records.
The Village Clerk of the Village of Brockport shall maintain an indexed
record of all written notices which said Village Clerk shall receive pursuant
to this chapter of the existence of a defective, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed condition in or upon or of an accumulation of ice or snow upon
any highway, bridge, culvert or sidewalk within the Village of Brockport.
Said record shall state the date of receipt of the notice, the nature and
location of the condition stated to exist and the name and address from
whom the notice is received and date referred to the Superintendent of
Public Works. The record of each notice shall be preserved for a period of
five years after the date it is received.
§ 39-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 39-5
1:296
§ 39-5. Transmission of notices.
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Brockport shall
transmit, in writing, to the Village Clerk of the Village of Brockport, within
10 days after receipt thereof, all written notices and the action taken to
correct the defect, danger or obstruction complained of.
§ 39-6. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to repeal or modify or waive
any existing requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to
these classes of action, but they shall be held to be additional requirements
to the right to maintain such action, nor shall anything herein contained
be held to modify any existing rule or law relative to the question of
contributory negligence nor to impose upon the Village of Brockport any
greater duty or obligation than to keep its streets, sidewalks and public
places in a reasonably safe condition for public use and travel.
§ 39-7. Substitute notice.
There shall be no substitute for written notice as set forth in this chapter.
Constructive notice is hereby expressly declared to be insufficient notice.
Chapter 40
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Sewer use — See Ch. 42.
Water use — See Ch. 56.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 41-1. Registration.
Any plumber intending to conduct the business of plumbing in the Village
of Brockport must register personally in the office of the Village Clerk
and pay the required fee for a license plate in addition to the regular fee
before he shall receive a certificate of registration and a metal plate or a
certificate of competency. A certificate will not be issued until a written
examination provided by the Village is satisfactorily passed or waived where
the applicant is currently licensed in the county.
§ 39-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-2
1:297
§ 41-2. Expiration and renewal of licenses and registration.
All certificates of registration and all licenses issued hereunder shall expire
on the 31st day of December of the year in which they are issued and,
upon payment of a fee, may be renewed within 30 days preceding such
expiration. Such renewals shall be for one year from the first day of January
in each year.
§ 41-3. Fees to be set by Village Board.
The Village Board, from time to time, shall set a schedule of license fees,
registration fees, examining fees and plumbing permit fees.
§ 41-4. Bonds.
A bond in the sum of $5,000, to be approved by the Village Board, shall
be executed by every person and filed in the office of the Village Clerk
before any permit shall be issued, as herein provided, conditioned that the
Village of Brockport will be indemnified and saved harmless from all claims
or damages caused or occasioned by any negligence in either the execution,
performance or protection of his work, or from any unfaithful or inadequate
work done under or by virtue of his work as a plumber. Such bond shall
be renewed from year to year so long as the person, firm or corporation
engages in or does plumbing work in the Village of Brockport.
§ 41-5. Reissuance of license plate.
The Village Clerk may refuse to issue a license plate to any person until he
has received or obtained satisfactory evidence or proof that the applicant is
entitled to such plate.
§ 41-6. Revocation of license.
The Village Clerk, after a hearing, may suspend or revoke the license herein
provided for a violation by the licensee, his agents or employees of any
law or code of the State of New York or ordinance or law of the Village of
Brockport relating to the conduct of the plumbing business.
§ 41-7. Plumbers permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the trade, business or calling
of plumbing in the Village of Brockport unless he shall hold a permit. This
section shall not apply to a person or a member of his household doing
repair work on his own, provided that he has permission from the Inspector
to do such work, but in no event shall any person perform work or repairs
on the Brockport sanitary sewer without a special permit from the Village.
§ 41-8. Fees per opening.
The Village shall charge a flat rate per opening at the time the building
permit is issued of $25, plus $2 per opening.
§ 41-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 41-9
1:298
§ 41-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 8-1985]
Chapter 42
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made
thereunder, or who shall work in violation of any statement,
specification or plan submitted thereunder, or who shall violate any
permit issued thereunder, or who shall continue to work upon said
structure after service of notice in writing from the Building Inspector
of the Village of Brockport to desist therefrom, shall subject the person,
firm or corporation to a penalty in the sum of $250, and in addition,
such violator shall pay all cost and expenses incurred by the Village in
determining such violation; and when such violation is continuous, each
day thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Penalties
for such violations shall be collected and violations of this chapter shall
be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law effective in the Village
of Brockport. Every violation of this chapter shall constitute disorderly
conduct, and every person violating the same shall be a disorderly
person. Each and every day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Service of the notice shall be sufficient if directed to the owner, agent of
the owner, or the contractor and left at his last known place of business
or residence if with the Village of Brockport, and if no place of business
or residence is found, then the notice shall be served by posting in a
conspicuous place on the premises which are the subject of the
violation.
§ 41-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-9
1:299

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
§ 42-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Sewer Use Ordinance."
§ 42-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to protect the sewage collection and
treatment facilities, to prevent danger to life or damage to property, to
promote the health, safety and general welfare, to prohibit the introduction
of stormwater, surface or subsurface waters into the sanitary sewers, to
provide for the fair distribution of treatment costs and to form a basis and
policy for controlling the quantity and quality of wastes accepted into the
sewage system of the Village of Brockport, Monroe County, New York.
§ 42-3. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system carrying sewage which receives discharge from soil,
waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building's sewer.
BUILDING SEWER (sometimes called HOUSE LATERAL) — The
extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all other wastes not
being domestic wastes, including but not limited to the wastes from
commercial, laboratory and industrial processes, wastes from domestic
operations, or certain trade operations, such as sand, grit, waste
petroleum products from automotive service stations and the like,
animal wastes, straw and related items from dairy or other farming
operations.
DOMESTIC WASTES — Waterborne human or animal excreta or body
wastes and normal culinary, laundry and washing wastes originating in
residences.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-3
1:301
OWNER — Any person in title to or having any interest in real property
in any of the sanitary sewer districts and their extension or extensions,
and/or any drainage district or districts now existing or subsequently
created by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport, New York.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The waste from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/4
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is controlled by Sewer Commissions
of the Village of Brockport, New York.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries sewage and
to which stormwater, surface waters and groundwater are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — The water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments and other places.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage under the control of the Sewer
Commissions of the Village of Brockport, New York.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER COMMISSION — The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Brockport.
SEWER DISTRICT — Any of the sanitary sewer systems, sewer districts
and their extension or extensions, and/or any drainage district or
districts now existing or subsequently created by the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Brockport.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries
stormwater and surface water drainage but excludes sewage,
commercial-industrial and domestic wastes.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the
Village of Brockport. His office is now located in the Village Hall on
Market Street, in the Village of Brockport, New York.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filterings.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 42-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-3
1:302
§ 42-4. Building sewers and connections; permits.
§ 42-5. Use of sewers for discharge of nondomestic wastes.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
C. Additional definitions shall be read with and include the definitions
following in § 42-12.
A. The sewer systems of the sewer districts of the Village of Brockport,
New York, as constructed, or as hereafter added to or changed, shall be
under the charge and control of the Sewer Commission, under whose
supervision they shall be used by property owners. No person shall
enter into, open or interfere with or use or do any repair or
maintenance work with respect to said sewer systems except under the
inspection and direction of the Sewer Commission and after a written
permit shall have been issued by the commission of the sewer district in
which such entering, opening, use, repair or maintenance is to take
place. The Sewer Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to
govern the maintenance and use of the sewer systems and shall therein
fix the amount of fees that shall be chargeable to persons or property
owners who may wish to enter or use the sewer systems, which fee shall
be sufficient in amount to pay for the cost of inspection of such entry or
entries.
B. Present waste contributors other than domestic waste contributors
shall apply for a permit within 120 days of the adoption of this article.
C. Permits granted under this article shall be for a specific waste or
wastes, and such permits shall be granted only after the submission and
approval of plans as set forth hereinafter. Subsequent wastes of
different quantity, quality or characteristics shall be covered by
separate permits.
D. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for domestic
waste service and for service to all other contributors. The owner or his
agent shall make application on a form furnished by the respective
Sewer Commissions. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit fee in an amount fixed in
the rules and regulations for sewer commissions in the Village of
Brockport shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
E. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Sewer Commission from any loss or damage that may, directly or
indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
F. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
§ 42-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-5
1:303
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water, impounded water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature lower than 32° F. or
higher than 150° F.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams
per liter, by weight, of fats, oils or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grit, straw, animal wastes, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works, in the opinion of the Sewer Commission.
(6) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than
nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works, in the opinion of the Sewer Commission.
(7) Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, in
the opinion of the Sewer Commission.
(8) Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance.
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Sewer Commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, grit and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer Commission and shall
be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when
§ 42-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-5
1:304
bolted in place, shall be gas-tight and watertight. Grease and oil
interceptors shall be constructed in any place or building having a
capacity to serve group meals.
D. Where installed, all grease, oil, sand and grit interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
E. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per
liter by weight; or containing more than 350 milligrams per liter by
weight of suspended solids; or containing any quantity of substance
having the characteristics described in Subsection C of this section; or
having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the sewer district, shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Sewer Commission. Where necessary, in the opinion of
the Sewer Commission, the owner shall provide at his expense such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to
350 milligrams per liter by weight; or reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided
for in this section; or control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the approval of the Sewer Commission, together with a
letter from the New York State Department of Health approving the
proposed preliminary treatment facilities, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
F. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required for any waters or
wastes, no permit will be granted until such pretreatment units have
been placed in operation and have demonstrated their effectiveness by
test. The cost of such testing, sampling, and analyzing shall be borne by
the waste contributor. Said preliminary treatment facilities shall be
maintained continuously and satisfactorily in effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
G. When required by the Sewer Commission, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying commercial-industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be conveniently and safely located. It is to be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Sewer
Commission. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
H. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in Subsections B and E shall be
determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination
§ 42-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-5
1:305
§ 42-6. Repair and maintenance work.
§ 42-7. Power and authority of inspectors.
of Water and Sewage," or with methods approved by New York State
Department of Health, and may be determined at the control manhole
provided for in Subsection H or upon suitable samples taken at said
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole may be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. If in the judgment of the Superintendent analyses must be
performed which are beyond the scope of the laboratory at the sewage
plant, these analyses shall be performed at a laboratory designated by
the Superintendent, and the cost of these analyses shall be borne by the
owner.
I. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Sewer Commission
and any industrial, commercial or other owner from whose premises an
industrial-commercial or domestic waste emanates which is of unusual
strength or character from being accepted by the Sewer Commission
for treatment subject to payment therefor by such owner.
A. Any repair or maintenance work in connection with sewer pipes and
drains connected directly or indirectly to any sanitary or storm sewer
system or storm drain in the Village shall be performed in accordance
with the specifications and under the supervision and inspection of the
Sewer Commission.
B. Charges.
(1) For work performed on sewers, pipes, laterals or drains which are
not a part of a sanitary sewer or storm sewer system at the
direction or under the supervision of the Sewer Commission for the
particular or special benefit of any individual parcel or portion of
real property, a charge is hereby established in an amount equal to
the actual cost thereof to the Commission.
(2) The Commission shall annually assess against the individual parcel
of land the amount of any such charges remaining unpaid on
October 1, and such charges shall be added to the tax roll and
collected in the same manner and at the same time as the other
taxes are assessed, levied and collected in the Village pursuant to
statute.
A. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Sewer
Commission bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observations, measurement, sampling and testing, or proper activities
in accordance with the terms of this article or any regulations
promulgated thereunder. The powers and authority herein granted
§ 42-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-7
1:306
§ 42-8. Cancellation of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to cancellation
after a hearing, in the event of a finding by the Sewer Commission at such
hearing that the user or permittee of the sewerage system has violated any
of the provisions of this article. Such hearing shall take place on 10 days'
written notice to the permittee or user. Upon any cancellation provided for
in this section, the Sewer Commission may terminate the use of the sewer
by severing the connection to the sewerage system.
§ 42-9. Violations; penalties for offenses.
§ 42-10. Enforcement.
The Board of Commissioners shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
article.
shall be in addition to powers of inspection otherwise granted by law to
Sewer Commissioners.
B. All information in the possession of the owner bearing on the industrial,
commercial or other process, which, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, affects the sewage, works or systems, shall be made
available to the Superintendent or his authorized representative.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible in
money damages for any injury to the sewer system or expense caused
the Commission by such violation. This money may be collected by civil
action in the Supreme Court of the State of New York. Obedience to the
ordinance may also be enforced by injunction.
B. Any person violating any provisions of this article and interfering with,
entering or using said sewer systems without obtaining permission
hereunder shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $100 or to imprisonment of not less than one
day nor more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment; and
in addition, when a violation of this article or any of the provisions
thereof is continuous, each 24 hours thereof shall constitute a separate,
distinct and additional violation.
§ 42-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-10
1:307

ARTICLE IA
Rental Fee
[Added 4-27-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 42-10.1. Legislative intent.
§ 42-10.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL WATER CONSUMPTION — The number of gallons of water billed
to a property by the Village of Brockport for the period July 1 to June 30.
This number will be used to compute the sewer rental fee for the next
succeeding Village tax year. Accordingly, for the Village tax year beginning
June 1, 2011, the sewer rental fee will be based upon water consumption
for the period July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2010.
COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The system for the
collection, treatment or disposal of municipal sewage, domestic sewage,
liquid industrial wastes or other wastes, including all sewer pipes and
appurtenances which are owned or operated or maintained by the Village of
Brockport, including sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment and
disposal works.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes but shall not be
limited to the following annual costs:
A. The Village of Brockport operates and maintains a sanitary sewer
collection system for properties located within the Village as well as a
limited number of additional properties located outside the Village
which utilize the Village sewer system as out-of-district users.
B. For the purpose of operating and maintaining the sewage systems of
the Village of Brockport, including for the purposes of debt services and
to establish a reserve fund for capital improvements and equipment,
the Village of Brockport hereby establishes a sewer rental fee for use of
the Village wastewater collection facilities or any part or parts thereof.
C. This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article 14-F of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York, and any and all
amendments thereto.
Salary and wages, including benefits, of personnel operating,
maintaining and administering the wastewater collection and
conveyance system.
A.
Costs of materials and supplies for the wastewater collection and
conveyance system.
B.
Costs of any indebtedness necessary for the operation and
maintenance, as well as repair, improvement and reconstruction of the
wastewater collection and conveyance system.
C.
§ 42-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-10.2
1:309
SEWER RENTAL FEE — The rent, fee or charge imposed to system users
by the Village of Brockport for the operation and maintenance costs
hereinabove described.
SYSTEM USERS — Any properties that have a sanitary sewer system
available to them in the Village of Brockport and are connected or serviced
by the collection and conveyance system or any part of parts thereof.
§ 42-10.3. Scope.
Sewer rental fees shall constitute charges established and imposed
pursuant to this article, and any and all amendments thereto, for the use
of the collection and conveyance system operated, owned or maintained by
the Village of Brockport, or any part or parts thereof.
§ 42-10.4. Computation and billing of sewer rental fee.
D. Equipment costs.
E. Insurance costs.
F. Any other incidental costs not hereinabove specified.
A. The sewer rental fee will be assessed on a monthly or quarterly basis
and computed solely based upon annual water consumption as herein
defined in this article.
B. The sewer rental fee will be based upon the following formula:
Total annual operation and maintenance costs/Total thousands of
gallons of water consumed by system users = Sewer rental fee per
1,000 gallons.
C. Sewer rental fees for system users shall appear on the regular water
bills issued by the Village, which are issued alternatively either on a
monthly or quarterly basis.
D. Every year the Village Board shall review and may revise the sewer
rental fee rate as may be deemed necessary. System users shall be
notified of rate changes on an annual basis.
E. All sewer rental fees are due and payable at the same time as the
regular water bill. In the event payment is not made by the date
designated for payment of the regular water bill, then a penalty of 10%
shall be added to the sewer rental fee.
F. Sewer rental fees and any corresponding penalties which become due
and owing as provided in this article may be included as part of the
Village tax levy, accounted for and collected pursuant to Article 14 of
the Village Law of the State of New York and/or may be collected
pursuant to the provisions of Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York.
§ 42-10.2 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-10.5
1:310
§ 42-10.5. Effective date.
This article is effective immediately beginning with the fiscal year which
commences June 1, 2011, and will be included with the regular water bills
issued by the Village of Brockport beginning June 1, 2011.
§ 42-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-10.5
1:311

ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections to Storm Sewer
§ 42-11. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article of the Sewer Use Code of the Village of Brockport
is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Brockport through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system (aka "MS4") to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES general permit for
municipal separate storm sewer systems. The objective of this article is:
§ 42-12. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have the meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedule of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMP also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Protection Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereof.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activity requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit Stormwater Discharge From Construction Activity, GP-02-02,
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediments and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 42-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-12
1:313
as amended or revised. Currently these activities include, but are limited to,
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal
storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
except as exempted in § 42-17.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
an MS4, except as exempted by § 42-17.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance, or a
combination thereof, which is an undesired by-product waste resulting
from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources, except garbage.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Brockport.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A drain or
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains):
Any drain or conveyances which allows any nonstormwater discharge,
including treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water, to enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system
from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency;
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency;
or
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.
C.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Brockport;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; and
§ 42-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-12
1:314
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
waste and yard waste; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordnances and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from construction of a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel or land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more
parcels of land or residential households, or private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which
stormwater, surface waters and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such groundwater, surface waters and stormwaters may be inadvertently
present. The admixtures of sewage with industrial wastes, as defined above,
or other wastes also shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning of the
definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
C. Which is not a combined sewer.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Village of Brockport must take all necessary
actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards.
A.
Section 303(d) listed waters: the condition in the Village of Brockport's
MS4 permit that applies where the Village of Brockport discharges to a
303(d) listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management
B.
§ 42-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-12
1:315
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual or general area-wide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels (e.g., ditches), reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — Code Enforcement
Officer, the Municipal Engineer or other public official(s) designated by the
Trustees of the Village of Brockport to enforce this article. The SMO may
also be designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to applicable municipal boards
and the Municipal Engineer as well or designates the inspection of
stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to
the 303(d) listed water.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the Village
of Brockport MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water
body or watershed into which the Village of Brockport discharges. If
the discharge from the Village of Brockport did not meet the TMDL
stormwater allocation prior to September 10, 2003, the Village of
Brockport was required to modify its stormwater management program
to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the
TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Village of Brockport's MS4 Permit that applies if
a TMDL is approved in the future by the EPA for any water body or
watershed into which the Village of Brockport discharges: Under this
condition, the Village of Brockport must review the applicable TMDL
to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges.
If the Village of Brockport is not meeting the TMDL stormwater
allocations, the Village of Brockport must, within six months of the
TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 42-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-12
1:316
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department of
Environmental Conservation as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean
Water Act; 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall
short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourse and water
bodies, as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
§ 42-13. Applicability.
This Illicit Discharge Ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm
drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the Village of Brockport. The article also applies to
stormwater entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 42-14. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer (SMO) shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the Village of Brockport may be delegated in writing by the
Village of Brockport to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 42-15. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination,
pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 42-16. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. Authorized inspectors of the Village of Brockport bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
§ 42-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-16
1:317
for the purposes of inspection, records examination and copying,
observation, measurements, sampling, and testing pertinent to
discharge or potential to discharge, and for repair and maintenance to
the municipal separate storm sewer system.
B. Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction, unless the nondomestic
source specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Village of Brockport that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as confidential information according
to the criteria set forth in 40 CFR 2.208 and 2.302, as may be amended
from time to time.
(1) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose confidential information shall not be
made available for inspection by the public. Such confidential
proprietary information is not subject to FOIL disclosure.
Stormwater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
(2) Information accepted by the Village of Brockport as confidential
shall be made available upon request to any agency meeting the
requirements of Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, including
officers, employees or authorized representatives of the United
States concerned with carrying out the Clean Water Act bound by
the confidentiality rules in 40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
§ 42-16A, the Village of Brockport shall observe all reasonable and
proper safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company. In the event of injury or death to any person on the premises
(including the authorized inspectors of the Village of Brockport), other
persons in the employ of New York State or United States agencies
charged with responsibility for regulating and monitoring illicit
discharges, and peace officers on premises to assist such persons,
caused by the failure of the company (or responsible person or entity) to
observe the ordinance requirements herein and applicable public
health and safety standards, and/or caused by the negligence or failure
of the company or responsible entity or person to maintain safe
conditions, such company, entity or person shall indemnify and save
harmless the Village of Brockport against any claims and/or demands
for personal injury, death or property damage (including all fees and
expenses), and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Village of
Brockport.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village of Brockport access to the
premises or other interference with the regulatory and enforcement
§ 42-16 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-16
1:318
§ 42-17. Discharge prohibitions; exceptions.
activities of the Village of Brockport shall be a violation of this article.
Access to property and/or records of a nondomestic source may not be
refused on the basis that the Village of Brockport refuses to sign any
waiver, access agreement, indemnity, privacy or similar document.
E. If the Village of Brockport has been refused access to a building,
structure or property or any part thereof, and if the Village of Brockport
has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of the Village of Brockport to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Village of Brockport will make an application to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative search and/or
seizure warrant, describing therein the specific location subject to the
warrant. The warrant application shall specify what, if anything, may be
searched and/or seized on the property described. If granted by the
court, such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Village
of Brockport in the company of a uniformed officer of the law
enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the property. In the event of
an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections may be
made without the issuance of a warrant. In the event that a violation is
found by a court of competent jurisdiction and/or in a stipulation of
settlement after the Village of Brockport has obtained an administrative
search warrant, the owner of the property shall reimburse the Village of
Brockport for all of its enforcement expenses, including the obtaining of
the administrative search warrant, including its reasonable attorneys'
fees.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such
activities include failing private sewage disposal systems as defined in
§ 42-12, improper management of animal waste, or any other activity
that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.
B. Upon notification to a person/entity that he, she or it is engaged in
activities that cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable
actions to correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
C. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
§ 42-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-17
1:319
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: waterline flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated and non-sediment-laden pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, airconditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools
(if dechlorinated; typically less than one ppm chlorine), firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing pollutants.
Regardless of exemption, best management practices should be
implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Village of Brockport as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Village of Brockport and Village consent prior to
the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Village
of Brockport.
D. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection. Such connections are per se violations of
this article and the New York State and United States statutes and
regulations incorporated by reference herein and, accordingly, are
not and cannot be considered nonconforming uses and are not
subject to grandfathering.
(3) A person or entity is considered to be in violation of this article if
the person connects a pipe or line conveying sewage to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or allows such a
connection to continue.
E. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained, in
§ 42-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-17
1:320
§ 42-18. Suspension of MS4 access.
or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street,
alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drainage system, or water of
the United States, any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn waste, garbage, litter
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations,
so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited
in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
F. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person
shall construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe
or drain so as to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquids or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
ground surface or into any storm sewer or drain or as to endanger any
watercourse or body of water, unless a permit for such discharge shall
have been issued therefore by the Monroe County Department of
Health or by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of
private sewage disposal systems shall operate, maintain and inspect
such systems in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary Code.
G. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer without written
permission to do so from the Village of Brockport.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Village of Brockport may, without prior notice, suspend discharge
access into the MS4 to a person or entity when such a suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment; to
the health or welfare of persons; to the storm drainage system
including but not limited to pipes, manholes, outfall structures and
storm laterals; or to the waters of the United States. If the violator fails
to comply with a suspension order, the Village of Brockport may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or waters of the United States or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Village of Brockport will notify a violator
of the proposed suspension or termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the Village of Brockport to reconsider the
suspension or termination of MS4 access by requesting a hearing
before the Village Board of Trustees. It shall be unlawful for any person
to reinstate MS4 access to premises suspended or terminated pursuant
to this section without the prior approval of the Village of Brockport.
§ 42-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-19
1:321
§ 42-19. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village of Brockport prior to discharge or as a condition
of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, certificate of occupancy,
operating permit, rental permit, or development or improvement plan (all
without limitation), upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement
proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 42-20. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the Village of
Brockport must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or
whenever the Village of Brockport has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition
which constitutes a violation of this article. Illicit discharges are
deemed and recognized to be per se hazardous activity, constituting
imminent threats to the public health and safety; immediate access to
suspected offending facilities is deemed necessary to prevent such
hazardous occurrences.
B. Access to facilities. The Village of Brockport shall be permitted to enter
and inspect, at any time, facilities subject to regulation under this
article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the Village of Brockport.
C. Facility operators shall allow the Village of Brockport ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling and
examination of the private storm drainage system. Persons or facility
operators must supply copies, if requested by Village of Brockport, of all
records kept under the conditions of the SPDES stormwater discharge
permit. Persons or facility operators must also identify the performance
of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
D. The Village of Brockport shall have the right to place or position on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Village of Brockport to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's discharge to the storm sewer system.
E. The Village of Brockport has the right to require the discharger to
install at his, her or its expense monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at his,
her or its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow
and quality shall be calibrated as necessary and recommended by the
manufacturer to ensure their accuracy.
§ 42-19 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-20
1:322
§ 42-21. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants.
F. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which allows for
unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or sampling of the
storm drainage system shall be promptly removed by the discharger at
the written or verbal request of the Village of Brockport and shall not be
replaced. All costs associated with clearing such access restrictions
shall be borne by the discharger in full.
G. Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Village of Brockport, in
allowing the Village of Brockport access to a facility, which is permitted
under the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
SPDES Program, for the purposes of conducting any activity authorized
or required by the permit is considered a violation of said program and
of this article.
H. If the Village of Brockport has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm sewer
system exists, and the Village of Brockport is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or
that there is a need to further inspect and/or sample the private
stormwater system to verify compliance with this article or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the Village of Brockport may seek
issuance of an administrative search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
I. In an emergency situation (imminent hazard and danger to the public
health, safety and welfare), the Village of Brockport may enter the
premises forthwith to inspect and contain the emergency situation and
prevent further hazard to the health and safety of the public; in such
emergency situations, the Village of Brockport may "red tag" the
premises, in which case the use and occupancy of the premises shall
forthwith cease and the premises shall be vacated unless or until there
is an administrative or court order terminating the red tagging and/or
the emergency is otherwise abated and terminated in a manner
satisfactory to the Village of Brockport.
A. Best management practices. The Village of Brockport will adopt
requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any
activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States. Such BMPs already adopted by any state, federal or
local agency shall be deemed incorporated herein by reference. The
owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for
a property or premises which is or may be the source of an illicit
§ 42-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-21
1:323
§ 42-22. Watercourse protection.
discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity to the maximum extent practicable shall be deemed compliant
with the provisions of this section. Appropriately designed structural/
nonstructural BMPs shall be included as part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where individual sewage treatment
systems are contributing to the Village of Brockport being subject to the
special conditions as defined in § 46-16 of this article, the owner or
operator of such individual sewage treatment system shall be required
to maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained
and inspected in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary
Code.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Repair or replace private sewage disposal systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewage system design
standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage
disposal system unless a permit is obtained from the Monroe
County Health Director or his or her authorized
representative.
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly
owned land such that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended
use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property in a manner which prevents illicit
discharges and keeps the watercourse free of trash, debris, yard/lawn
waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 42-21 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-23
1:324
§ 42-23. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in the
illegal discharges of pollutants into a stormwater MS4, the public or private
storm drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take
all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of
any such release. In the event a release of hazardous materials occurs,
said person shall immediately notify the appropriate emergency response
agencies via emergency dispatch services 911 and NYSDEC Region 8 Spill
Response Team and/or call the New York State Spill Hotline at
1-800-457-7362 within the time frame established by law of the occurrence.
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify
the Village of Brockport in person or by phone, facsimile or other suitable
and generally accepted means of communication no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the Village of Brockport at 49 State
Street, Brockport, New York 14420, postmarked within three business days
of the date of the in-person or phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 42-24. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Whenever the Village of Brockport finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Village of
Brockport may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person.
(1) Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(b) The elimination of illicit connection or discharges.
(c) That violating discharger, practices or operations shall cease
and desist.
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property.
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs.
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
§ 42-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-24
1:325
§ 42-25. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the Village of Brockport. The notice of appeal must be received within
30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within
15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of
the municipal authority or its designee shall be final. Such administrative
appeal is deemed a predicate for any other appeal process initiated by the
violator.
§ 42-26. Corrective measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the Village of Brockport, its representatives and/or employees may enter
(g) Revocation and reapplication of any operating permit or
certificate of occupancy or other municipal or local permit.
(h) Penalties may include any and all directions to abate, penalties
and fines as provided in the Codes of the Village of Brockport
and in the laws and regulations of the State of New York, which
penalties and fines are hereby and herewith incorporated by
reference herein.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 42-24 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-26
1:326
upon the subject private property with the consent of the owner or with a
valid search and/or seizure warrant and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
§ 42-27. Cost of abatement.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs,
including applicable monetary penalties and fines. The property owner may
file a written protection claim objecting to the amount of the assessment
within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as
determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration
of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property
for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provision
of this article shall become liable to the Village of Brockport by reason
of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal
payments. Interest at the rate of 6% per annum shall be assessed on the
balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
§ 42-28. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Village of Brockport
may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling
the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 42-29. Alternative remedies.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, a person may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney and concurrence of the
Stormwater Management Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional;
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article;
(3) Environmental damage was minimal;
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation; and
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following, but
are not limited thereto:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops;
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain markings; and
§ 42-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-29
1:327
§ 42-30. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 42-31. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $250 per violation per
day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 180 days.
§ 42-32. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Village of Brockport to seek cumulative remedies.
(3) Watercourse, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 42-29 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-32
1:328
ARTICLE III
Administrative Provisions
§ 42-33. Validity.
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of this
chapter be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this
chapter but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 42-34. Effect upon inconsistent ordinances.
In the event that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the
provisions of any ordinance of the Village of Brockport heretofore adopted,
the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable and shall supersede such
inconsistent prior provision. However, in such event, only the prior
provisions inconsistent with any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
superseded, and all other provisions in any such heretofore adopted
ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall continue
in full force and effect.
§ 42-35. Repeal of prior ordinances.
Any and all existing sewer ordinances, sewer use ordinances or sewer
commission ordinances adopted by the Board of Trustees Village of
Brockport are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 42-36. When effective; repealer.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect 30 days after its final passage
and adoption. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 42-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-36
1:329
Chapter 43
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code and administration — See Chs.
10 and 11.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
§ 42-36 BROCKPORT CODE § 42-36
1:330
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 43-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, is to provide equitable methods for individuals,
businesses and services to identify themselves, express opinions, reduce
signage conflicts, promote traffic and pedestrian safety, and increase the
aesthetic value and economic viability in the Village of Brockport. At no time
should these be interpreted to regulate any aspect of the content of any
sign.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and terms shall be
construed as follows, unless otherwise expressly provided. If no specific
definition is set forth therein, all words shall have their usual English
language meanings.
A-FRAME SIGN — A portable sign with two sides that are connected at the
top and spread at the bottom to make it stable yet moveable. An A-frame
sign is not considered to be a temporary sign.
ABANDONED SIGN — Any sign or portion thereof (see "sign" definition this
section) that contains a message or advertisement that no longer represents
any existing personal, public or business interests.
AWNING SIGN — A sign affixed to an awning.
BILLBOARD OR POSTER SIGN — A panel for the display of either
advertisement or public messaging in a public place, such as alongside
highways or on the side of a building.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN — A sign which contains numbers, letters,
or symbols, designed to be moved, interchanged, or replaced by means of
removable letters or other devices.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not affixed to a building but standing
apart therefrom, whether fixed to the ground or movable. The area of such
sign shall be considered to be the maximum height times the maximum
width.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign used in conjunction with a home
occupation as described in § 58-9A(5)(a)[4].
HUMAN PERSON SIGN — Someone who applies or carries an
advertisement on their person, most commonly holding or wearing a sign
which includes advertising. Such advertising shall not include logos worn
for the purpose of clothing.
MARQUEE — A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by
the building and projecting more than two feet from the face of a building
that may or may not extend over a public way.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached or affixed to a marquee.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-2
1:331
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which lawfully exists prior to the
effective date of this chapter, but which, due to the requirements adopted
herein, no longer complies with its height, area, placement regulations or
other provisions.
PENNANT SIGN — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material,
whether or not it contains a message of any kind, suspended from a rope,
wire or string, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure, or the ground that is designed to be moved from place to place.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign projecting more than 12
inches from a building or structure via a pole, standard, wires or chains.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area of land over which facilities such as highways,
sidewalks or the locations of utility lines are built and which may include an
area between a public sidewalk and a street, including, but not limited to,
the area of land commonly referred to as the "tree lawn."
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail, personal services businesses,
professional private and civic offices or other commercial establishments
that is planned, developed, owned and managed as a single property.
SIGN — Any symbol, emblem, or display of lettering, logos, designs or
pictures, whether or not attached to a building or window or to a
freestanding structure, and visible to the public, and which either conveys
a message or advertises, directs, invites, announces or draws attention to a
land use, events, goods, products, services or facilities available.
SIGN AREA — The surface area of a sign that is within view of a public
right-of-way, visible from any one point of view. For measurement purposes,
the sign surface area shall be calculated as follows:
For rectangular wall signs: that area of the smallest rectangle that
can be placed over the entire sign, including its lettering, pictorial
matter or devices, frame and decorative moldings along its edges and
background, if of a different color from the predominant color
surrounding the sign.
A.
For irregular wall signs: that area defined by the edges of the sign,
including all lettering, pictorial matter or devices, frame and decorative
moldings and background, if of a different color from the predominant
color surrounding the sign.
B.
For letters, pictorial matter or devices not attached to frames or
freestanding: that area defined by the smallest rectangle or rectangles
that can be placed over any series of letters, pictorial matter or devices
which can be considered as a unit. In the event that both uppercase and
lowercase letters are used, the area shall be defined by the smallest
rectangles that can be placed over the series of lowercase letters
plus the area of the smallest rectangles that can be placed over the
individual uppercase letters. In the event that a letter or letters or other
pictorial matter is placed as a separate unit on background boards, the
C.
§ 43-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-2
1:332
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign constructed of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic
or light fabric, wallboard or other light, impermanent material with or
without frames intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to or painted onto a wall of a building
or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately
parallel to the face of said wall which does not project more than 12 inches.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign attached to or painted on a window; also, a sign
that is within five feet inside a window and visible from any public right-ofway.
§ 43-3. General regulations.
sign area shall be calculated as the sum of the areas of the background
boards.
For freestanding double-faced signs: the area of one entire side of the
sign calculated as above.
D.
For multiple-sided signs: the maximum area visible from any one point
of view.
E.
For signs on other than flat surfaces: the maximum actual surface area
visible from any one point of view.
F.
A. No sign shall be erected or placed in such a manner as to confuse or
obstruct the view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal, or
device, nor obstruct free and clear vision of any traffic sight lines,
intersections, sidewalks, or driveways. Furthermore, no sign shall
impede the intended function of any operational doors or windows,
ventilation systems, fire escapes or exitways or any utility access, or
cause any other hazard by its placement.
B. No permanent, freestanding sign shall be placed or located within any
established rights-of-way, tree lawns, easements, drainage swales or
disrupt any drainage patterns, unless otherwise authorized pursuant to
the Brockport Village Code or other municipal, county, state or federal
laws or regulations.
C. Signs may be illuminated (where so indicated in this chapter) internally
or externally, but may not be flashing, and no animation shall be
permitted other than such action signs containing time and
temperature changes unless prescribed under the approval granted by
the Historic Preservation Board pursuant to Brockport Village Code
§ 58-23D for those premises or districts listed or identified as historic.
D. Historic review. Any sign, except temporary signs, in any Village of
Brockport designated historic district, including any state or federally
designated historic property, shall be approved by the Village of
Brockport Historic Preservation Board prior to installation, erection,
repair or replacement. Signs shall be comprised of materials and colors
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-3
1:333
§ 43-4. Sign permits required; application; fee; exemptions.
appropriate to the era of the construction of the building, pursuant to
Brockport Village Code (§ 58-23D).
E. When not directly associated with a commercial activity, all flags,
insignia or emblems of any government, school or religious
organization are exempt from these regulations.
A. Except as specifically excluded herein, no property owner, lessee,
contractor, or other person shall display or cause to be displayed any
sign without first obtaining from the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee an approved permit to do so, paying the fees prescribed
therefor, and otherwise complying with all of the applicable provisions
of § 43-4C. Regular maintenance of existing signs that conform with
this chapter shall not require a permit.
B. If a governmental agency requires the relocation of a sign, any
applicable fees described in the Village of Brockport fee schedule shall
be waived, provided such relocated sign is not altered in size or area in
any form or content. In all cases, if any proposed relocated sign for
whatever reason is either located or proposed to be located in any
historic district or on an historic listed property, such sign shall not be
moved or altered without first obtaining the review and approval of the
Historic Preservation Board, as per Brockport Village Code § 58-23D.
C. Sign permit application procedure shall include submission of detailed
plans and information, including the dimensions of the sign, the
materials incorporated in its construction, the methods and materials
used to support the sign, the type of illumination, if any, and its exact
location on the building or premises. A sketch, in color, of the proposed
sign drawn to a scale of not less than 1/4 inch to one foot shall be
provided.
D. Any person, firm or corporation who proposes a land use or an addition
to a land use which requires site plan approval by the Planning Board
and which includes any sign/signs shall include in their site plan
submittal the location, size and nature of the proposed sign/signs. Such
sign plans, as stated herein, shall also be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer (or his authorized Inspector), Historic
Preservation Board or Zoning Board of Appeals if applicable or required
for approvals, and any fee for said applications, reviews and approvals
as set forth by the Village of Brockport.
E. Structural features of any given sign shall be required to be constructed
to generally accepted design standards as approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer, but this chapter takes precedence with respect to
area, location, illumination and other characteristics.
F. All electrically illuminated signs shall require an electrical inspection
certificate of approval which shall be submitted to the Code
§ 43-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-4
1:334
§ 43-5. Temporary signs.
Enforcement Officer or his designee before the sign is electrically
operated or lit.
G. The application for a sign permit shall include the authorized signature
consent of the owner of the property.
H. Exempt signs. No permit shall be required for signs as follows; however,
exempt signs shall conform to all other applicable sign regulations as
required by this code.
(1) Any permitted sign in a residential zone, as specified in § 43-7.
(2) Temporary signs.
(3) Federal, state, county, municipal signs or historical markers.
(4) Signs of public utility companies, railroads or federal or state
authorities, which may include signs indicating danger or the
location of utilities.
(5) Signs of an official or legal nature which are erected by public
officers performing official duties, including those erected
pursuant to law or by administrative or court order.
(6) Signs identifying a school, church, public building, playground
situated on or off the property to which they relate.
(7) Signs posted by nonprofit, benevolent and/or civic organizations.
(8) Window signs.
(9) Real estate "for sale" and "for rent" signs, during the period of time
said property is available for sale or for rent.
A. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Up to four
temporary signs may be allowed per parcel.
B. Temporary signs shall not be larger than six square feet in area on
either of two sides in residential zoned districts, nine square feet in
area on either of two sides in business zoned districts and 15 square
feet in area on either of two sides in industrial zoned districts and
limited to a height from grade of not more than 42 inches. These
restrictions shall not apply to lawfully established billboards.
C. Temporary signs may not be placed on any municipal or utility company
trees and/or poles, fences or park lands. Signs established in violation
of this section may be immediately removed by the Village of Brockport.
D. Temporary signs affixed or mounted to a vehicle, wagon, or trailer shall
not be any greater than six square feet in area on either of two sides.
Exemption: signs that are affixed to buses, taxis, and signs affixed to
company vehicles.
§ 43-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:335
§ 43-6. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 43-7. Signs permitted in O Districts and Q Districts (residential
areas).
Only the following signs shall be permitted in any residential zone:
E. Temporary signs may be displayed up to 45 days on any individual
property.
A. The following signs or devices shall be prohibited in all zones: the
outdoor use of pennants, streamers, windmills, flashing, moving,
reflective, animated or human person signs.
B. The following shall be prohibited in all zones: display of obscene and
offensive sexual material per New York State Penal Law.
C. Awning signs, overhanging signs and projecting signs must have a
clearance under them of at least eight feet above the ground.
A. One sign, identifying a permitted residential professional office or
approved home occupation, which shall indicate only the name of the
professional office or home occupation located at the residence, shall
not be situated closer than 10 feet to any property line. Such signs shall
not exceed four square feet in area, may be two-sided, and shall not
exceed a height from grade of more than 48 inches. They shall not be
illuminated. (See Village of Brockport Zoning Code § 58-9A(5)
regarding home occupations).
B. One sign, identifying a school, church, public building, playground, or
other such use, which shall be situated on the property to which it
relates, not less than 10 feet from a street (unless the building is closer
than that to the street, in which case it shall be not less than 1/2 the
distance from building to street). Such signs shall not exceed 10 square
feet in area, may be two-sided, and shall not exceed a height from grade
of more than 48 inches. They may be only externally illuminated.
C. One identifying sign relating to an apartment complex site, which may
show or include the name of the complex, the presence or lack of
vacancies, the location of the rental agent's office and his/her telephone
number, and the complex address. Such signs shall not exceed 25
square feet in area and may be two-sided. They shall only be externally
illuminated. Such signs may be located in any of the required yard
areas but shall not be situated closer than 10 feet to any property line
or the street line (unless the building is closer than 25 feet to the street,
in which case it shall not be less than 1/2 the distance from building to
street or 10 feet, whichever is greater).
D. One identifying sign relating to a residential development site, which
may show or include the name of the residential development. Such
signs shall not exceed 25 square feet in area, may be two-sided, and
shall only be externally illuminated. Such signs may be located in any of
§ 43-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-7
1:336
§ 43-8. Signs permitted in Business and Industrial Zones, B, I, LI
and Q Districts (business areas).
the required yard areas but shall not be closer than 10 feet to the
property line or street line.
A. All signs permitted in residential zones; however, in these zones,
temporary signs pertaining to sales or construction may be located
anywhere within the property to which they pertain.
B. One wall sign, which may be externally or internally illuminated, upon
the front facade of a building for each permitted use or activity.
(1) Said sign, or signs, in the aggregate, including window signs, shall
not exceed two square feet in area for each linear foot of public
frontage. If a use is on a corner, then one sign may be placed on
each facade of an occupancy which faces a parking area or street or
the canal, and if such building is more than 100 feet distant from
the nearest street to the rear of the property, then such sign may be
three square feet in area for each linear foot of public frontage.
(2) Such sign shall not project more than 12 inches beyond the
building facade on which or in front of which it is displayed, shall
be at least eight feet above a public sidewalk and shall not be
higher than the highest point of the facade of the building.
C. One freestanding sign shall be permitted when the main building is set
back a minimum of 25 feet from the property line. Such sign shall not
exceed an area of 25 square feet, plus five square feet for each
separately operated use or activity in the structures, if there is more
than one. In no case shall any sign exceed 40 square feet in area on
either of two sides. Such signs shall be for no other purpose than
identifying the facility and listing the individual occupants and may be
located within any required yard area, but shall not extend beyond any
property line and shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
D. A shopping center, industrial park or medical center may have one
directory sign at any location therein which shall not exceed five square
feet on any one side for each acre of land in said shopping center,
industrial park or medical center, and, likewise, a sign not exceeding
two square feet on one side for each acre of land may be located at
major points of entrance. These signs shall not exceed three in number.
(1) In a shopping center or medical center having walkways roofed
over with a permanent canopy or some similar other structural
device, there may be one illuminated or nonilluminated sign for
each structure or occupant. Said sign may be hung from the
underside of the canopy and shall not exceed eight square feet on
one side.
(2) Freestanding directional signs which are necessary to control and
regulate the movement of traffic on interior roadways and/or
§ 43-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-8
1:337
parking areas in shopping centers, industrial parks or medical
centers are permitted; provided, however, that the number,
location and size are approved by the Planning Board.
E. Motor vehicle service stations and hotels or motels may have only the
following, subject to Planning Board review and approval:
(1) One freestanding identification sign which does not exceed 25
square feet in area on either of two sides and is not more than 20
feet in height. Such sign may be set at the corner of the property if
the station or resort facility is a corner location, in which case the
base shall be set in a planted area. If the station or resort facility is
not on a corner, the sign may be erected in any required yard area,
but shall not extend over the property line.
(2) One wall sign on each facade of the building that faces a street,
provided that the area of the sign does not exceed 10% of the area
of the facade, including window and door areas.
F. Projecting or overhanging signs shall be permitted on the following
conditions:
(1) Said signs shall not exceed 15 square feet, with the largest
dimension not exceeding five feet.
(2) No sign shall extend higher than the second-floor windowsill or be
placed on or attached from any roof of a building.
(3) No internally lit signs shall be permitted.
(4) Projecting or overhanging signs that are to be located on any
designated historic property or premises require approval of the
Historic Preservation Board prior to issuance of permits by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
G. At the termination of a business, commercial or industrial enterprise,
all signs pertaining thereto shall be removed from the public view
within 90 days.
H. Time-temperature signs, subject to Planning Board review and
approval.
I. Portable signs.
(1) Only one portable sign is permitted to be placed on public property
per business. One additional portable sign is permitted to be
placed, provided such sign is located entirely on the property
owned by the business.
(2) Portable signs shall not exceed a sign area of three feet by two feet
per sign side.
(3) Portable signs shall not exceed a cumulative height of 3 1/2 feet
from grade.
§ 43-8 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-8
1:338
§ 43-9. Nonconforming/legally existing signs.
§ 43-10. Maintenance.
(4) Display or the placement of the sign shall be immediately in front of
the business to which it refers.
(5) Display or the placement of the sign shall be only during the normal
business hours of the business to which it refers.
(6) Portable signs shall be weighted to prevent movement.
(7) Portable signs shall not impede any pedestrian traffic or obscure
motorist views or sight lines at any time. Placement of signs must
comply with Americans with Disabilities Act sidewalk guidelines
which can be accessed via the Village website under the Building/
Code tab.
(8) Any business, individual or other entity placing a portable sign
upon public property shall provide, upon request of the Code
Enforcement Officer, a certificate of insurance for commercial
general liability with limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate containing
an endorsement naming the Village of Brockport as an additional
insured. Failure to provide same shall be a violation of this chapter.
(9) The Code Enforcement Officer may order the immediate removal of
any portable sign not in compliance with these regulations.
A. Any new, altered or relocated sign pertaining to a nonconforming use in
a residential zone shall conform to the restrictions governing the use if
it were in a business or industrial zone, except that the permitted sign
area shall be 1/2 that which would be permitted if the use were located
in the business or industrial zone.
B. Whenever a nonconforming sign has been unused, or the product or
service it refers to has been nonexistent for a period of 90 days, such
nonconforming sign shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any
future signage shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
A. The display surfaces, together with all of their supports, of all signs
shall be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound at all
times. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized Inspector) may
order the repair or removal of any sign that is not maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Responsibility for the
removal of the sign shall be that of the property owner or the past
occupier of the premises.
B. If the Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized Inspector) shall
determine that any sign in the Village constitutes a hazard or nuisance
to health, safety, morals or general welfare of the Village; he/she shall
§ 43-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-10
1:339
§ 43-11. Appeals.
§ 43-12. Violations; penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days or a fine not to exceed $250, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 43-13. Validity.
notify the owner of record or occupier of the premises by written notice
for immediate removal of said sign.
C. Any failure to keep signs in good repair, or discontinuance of the use or
service advertised by the sign for a period of nine months, shall
constitute abandonment, and the sign or appurtenance may not then be
replaced or reused and shall be removed.
D. Restoration and repairs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
restoration or repair of a sign destroyed or partly destroyed by fire,
explosion, act of God or act of public enemy, subsequent to the
enactment of this chapter, nor shall this chapter prevent the
continuance of such use as existed at the time of the destruction or
partial destruction of such sign, provided that restoration is
commenced within 90 days after the date the sign was destroyed.
A. Any persons or entity aggrieved by the enforcement of this chapter may
seek appeal via application and public hearing before the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall have the same authority and apply
the same procedures and criteria as set forth in New York State Village
Law, Article 7, for zoning variances and interpretations.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, or his Inspector, is authorized to enforce
this chapter and issue appearance tickets for violations of this chapter.
Furthermore, the Village is empowered to pursue any civil remedy to
enjoin or correct any violation of this chapter. The Village reserves the
right to recover any costs incurred for removal and/or abatement of any
violation of this chapter.
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this code, which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this code are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Saving clause. This code shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation of the municipality existing prior to the
effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall
continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
§ 43-10 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-13
1:340
§ 43-14. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter, including references to signs in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Brockport, is hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 43-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
New York State Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law.
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
C. Unconstitutionality or invalidity in part. Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase in this code be declared unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason, the remainder of the code shall not be affected
thereby and shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this code are declared to be severable.
§ 43-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-15
1:341
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 45
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 5.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 15.
Garbage, refuse and open burning — See Ch.
21.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 54.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 43-15 BROCKPORT CODE § 43-15
1:342
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Regulations
[Adopted 5-4-1908]
§ 45-1. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks.
No person shall ride, drive or lead any horse, team or cow upon any
sidewalk, except that sidewalks may be cleaned by a snowplow drawn by
a horse and, with the permission of the owner, teams may drive upon the
stone and cement sidewalks for the purpose of unloading; no person shall
draw or push anything containing swill, rubbish, offal or other foul matter
upon any sidewalk; no person shall ride any bicycle, motorcycle or other
similar vehicle upon any sidewalk in said Village.
§ 45-2. Sliding on sidewalks.
No person shall slide upon any sidewalk on any sleigh, sled, board or other
contrivance.
§ 45-3. Carts, wheelbarrows, wagons on sidewalks; exceptions.
No person shall push, draw or ride any cart, wheelbarrow or wagon upon
any sidewalk within the limits of this municipality, except that a baby
carriage and other chair carts, or other carts or vehicles for sick or crippled
persons, will be permitted upon such walks.
§ 45-4. Removal of snow and ice, etc.
No owner, occupant, tenant or any person having the charge or control of
any premises, lot, tenement or manufacturing establishment situate within
the Village of Brockport shall suffer or permit any snow, ice or other
substance, encumbrance or obstruction to collect and remain on any
sidewalk fronting on or belonging to said premises so as to impede, obstruct
or render dangerous public travel upon such walks later than 10:00 a.m. of
any day after the same shall have fallen, accumulated or collected thereon,
or for more than two hours after being notified by the President27 or any
of the trustees or the Street Commissioner or his assistant to remove the
same.
§ 45-5. Attracting crowds by selling or advertising.
No person shall, by selling or advertising goods upon the street, attract a
crowd and obstruct a sidewalk.
§ 45-6. Awnings over sidewalks. [Amended 4-6-1987 by L.L. No.
3-1987]
No person shall erect or construct an awning which shall not be at all times,
at its lowest point, at least eight feet above the sidewalk.
27.Editor's Note: Now termed "Mayor."
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-7
1:343
§ 45-7. Sidewalk construction materials.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed upon any street within the limits of
this municipality shall be constructed either of cement or flagstone, with
the following exceptions: A plank or wooden walk may be constructed as
provided by § 45-9 of this article, and a cinder or gravel walk may be
constructed upon the following streets: Washington Street; West Avenue,
west of the west line of lands of George Dean; East Avenue, east of the west
line of lands of Christina Webb; State Street, east of the west line of lands
of the Monroe Agricultural Society.
§ 45-8. Flagstone walks; specifications.
No person shall lay any flagstone walk upon any street within the limits of
this municipality with stones which shall be less than four feet in width and
two feet in length, or less in width than the width of the adjacent walks.
§ 45-9. Plank and wooden sidewalks.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any plank or wooden
sidewalk of any kind upon any street within the limits of this municipality,
except that the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad Company may
be permitted to construct a plank walk between the rails of its tracks on
the Park Avenue and Kenyon Street crossings and between the rails of the
tracks crossing Spring, State and Market Streets and Park Avenue, and the
end of the ties on either side not exceeding two feet.
§ 45-10. Supervision of sidewalk construction.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any sidewalk, except
under the supervision of and in accordance with the directions of the Street
Commissioner and the several ordinances relating thereto.
§ 45-11. Grades of walks.
All grades of walks shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees, and a verbal or
written notice by the Street Commissioner shall be sufficient notice of the
grade upon which any walk may be constructed.
§ 45-12. Width of sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width and shall not be less
in width than that of the adjoining walk on the street.
§ 45-13. Construction specifications.
All cement and flagstone walks shall be constructed substantially in
accordance with the following specifications:
A. Each cement flagstone shall be at least four feet in width and not less in
width than the adjoining walk, and generally four feet in length,
§ 45-7 BROCKPORT CODE § 45-13
1:344
§ 45-14. Trapdoors and grates.
No person shall leave a trapdoor or grate open in any sidewalk at any time
except when receiving or delivering goods, and during such time, said door
or grate shall be surrounded by barriers sufficient to secure public safety.
All iron cellar doors, or covers of any kind over openings into areas or
gratings, or glass skylights in sidewalks shall be kept covered with burlap
or matting from November 15 to April 1 of each year.
measured in the line of the walk, and four inches in thickness
throughout. Each stone shall be separate from the next one and the
joints made with tar paper or sand.
B. For the construction of the three lower inches of the cement flagstones,
concrete shall be made in the following proportions in units of volume
of the component parts: one part of portland cement, two parts of sand,
four parts of broken stone or screened gravel. The sand and cement
shall be thoroughly mixed together dry, in a mortar box or platform,
then mixed with water until there is a good mortar; level off the mortar
and spread over it the required amount of stone or gravel, which shall
be wet. The whole shall be thoroughly mixed by turning and re-turning
with shovels. If broken stone is not used, the mixture may be made with
one part of cement and six parts of good gravel, mixed together dry and
then mixed with water.
C. Wooden frames shall be placed to outline the external edges of the walk
accurately, in height the same as the thickness of the walk and set to
coincide with the established grade of the walk. Said frames shall be
kept in a straight line by a sufficient number of stakes to prevent
bulging when the concrete is rammed in place. The concrete shall be
thoroughly rammed until moisture flushes to the surface, and the top
course immediately put on so as to secure a thorough binding of the two
courses.
D. For the construction of the upper one inch in thickness of said
flagstones, the mixture shall be: one part portland cement, two parts of
clean, sharp sand, granite or quartz screenings that will pass a sieve
having one-fourth-inch meshes, thoroughly mixed with each other,
using water sufficient to make the mass pliable. This course shall be
floated and rubbed smooth and hard, using a float or straightedge,
making the top even with the top of the wooden frames. In floating and
troweling the surface, if the mortar has been made too wet and water
appears, this excess may be absorbed by a mixture of cement and sand
of the proportions used for the topcoat, and not by using clear cement.
E. The wooden frames shall not be considered as a part of the finished
walk and shall be removed, except that they may be left at driveways.
§ 45-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-15
1:345
§ 45-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
Whoever shall violate any provision of this article shall, for each offense,
forfeit and pay the sum of not less than $50 for the use of said Village.
§ 45-15 BROCKPORT CODE § 45-15
1:346
ARTICLE II
Street Regulations28
[Adopted 5-4-1908]
§ 45-16. Racing; playing ball; injuring shade trees or property.
No person shall race or run any horse or team or engage in fast driving or
trial of speed in or upon any street, lane or alley in said Village; no person
shall play ball or aid or assist in playing any game of ball in or upon any
street, alley or public grounds or upon any sidewalk; no person shall hitch a
horse to or cut, girdle or otherwise willfully injure any shade or ornamental
tree in or upon any street or alley or public grounds, or willfully injure any
bridge, sidewalk, post or railing upon or beside any street.
§ 45-17. Use of chains, clevises, ropes, etc., restricted.
No person shall use or cause to be used any chain, clevis, rope or other
article or device, for the purpose of retarding the movement of any carriage,
wagon, sleigh or other vehicle, that will in any way tear, gutter or injure the
roadbed of any road or street within the limits of this Village.
§ 45-18. Occupying and obstructing streets.
No person shall in any way obstruct, encumber, occupy or consent to aid
or abet the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of any part of any
street, lane, alley, sidewalk or public grounds, except so far as the same
shall be necessary for the erection or repair of a building or the grading
or improvement of a lot, and only so long as shall be necessary for the
erection or repair of a building or the grading or improvement of a lot, and
only so long as shall be necessary therefor for the loading and unloading of
wagons and vehicles and the removal of their contents, provided also that a
passageway shall, at all times, be kept clear for travelers and pedestrians,
and provided also that all such obstructions shall be carefully and properly
guarded and lighted at all times during the night; no person shall otherwise
store or keep any property in any street at night.
§ 45-19. Digging and excavating: permission, adequate protection
required.
No person or corporation shall dig or cause to be dug into, through or
across any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds, any trench, ditch or
other opening for any purpose, without the consent of the Board of Trustees
in writing and under the supervision of the Street Commissioner. All such
ditches or trenches or other openings shall be wet down and puddled as
required by this Board, and shall at all times be carefully and properly
guarded and lighted at night.
28.Editor's Note: Section 9-15 of the original ordinance, concerning burning of rubbish and
vehicle and traffic regulations, has been superseded by more recent legislation and
removed from this article.
§ 45-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-20
1:347
§ 45-20. Posting handbills; cutting trees; erecting poles and wires.29
No person shall post or hand any handbill, notice or placard, except legal
notices, upon any post, telegraph pole, tree, fence, bridge or other object in
the streets, alleys or public grounds, except upon billboards authorized and
located by the Board of Trustees; no person shall cut down any tree upon
any street or public ground (unless such tree shall be dead) without first
obtaining the consent of the Board of Trustees; no person or corporation
shall erect or cause to be erected any telegraph, telephone or electric light
pole in or upon any streets or public grounds, or string any wire in, over or
upon the streets or public grounds or upon, over or in front of any building
or buildings, without the consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 45-21. Street crossings; standing time limited.
No steam road cars, engines or trains shall stand upon any street crossing
longer than five minutes at a time.
§ 45-22. Snow and ice encumbrances, steam, ash and rubbish;
snowball throwing; coasting.
No person shall permit snow or ice to accumulate upon any building
adjacent to any street or sidewalk, and no person shall permit snow, ice
or water to fall from such building upon any street or sidewalk; no person
shall cause the steam from any engine to be blown into, upon or over any
street; no person shall place or deposit any ashes or rubbish in or upon any
street, lane or alley or public grounds, except for the purpose of removal,
and in that case the same must be removed before sunset of the same day;
no person shall throw snowballs upon any street or alley or public grounds;
no person shall engage in coasting or sliding upon any street, alley or public
grounds without permission of, or under regulations adopted by, the Board
of Trustees.
§ 45-23. Animals at large.30
No person shall cause, authorize or permit horses, cattle, sheep, swine,
fowls or other animals to run at large upon the streets or alleys or public
grounds to the injury and annoyance of the public, and in case any police
officer of said Village shall find any such animal so running at large, the said
police officer is hereby authorized to impound the said animal or animals,
and sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder after reasonable
public notice thereof, and out of the proceeds to pay the cost of keeping
and sale and the penalty imposed by this article, the remainder, if any, to be
returned to the owner of such animal.
29.Editor's Note: On 8-17-1925, the Board of Trustees resolved that no telephone, telegraph
or light company shall set any poles or trim any trees without the consent of the Street
Committee and under the direction of the Street Commissioner.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Animals, for regulations related to animals running at large.
§ 45-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 45-24
1:348
§ 45-24. Unattended animals; stopping and standing of vehicles.
No person shall permit any horse or mule to stand in a public street
unattended without being securely tethered or tied to a post, ring or secure
weight or other secure fastening; or permit any animal or vehicle to stop or
stand upon any crossing, sidewalk or any bridge, except in case of accident
or other emergency; or, without authority, fasten any animal to a tree or
public lamppost or feed any animal in a public street without permission
of the owner or occupant of the adjoining premises; or place or permit any
vehicle to remain crosswise of any street for a period longer than may be
actually necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading; or permit any
vehicle to stop or stand within the intersection of any street or within 10
feet of a street corner, except in case of accident or other emergency.
§ 45-25. (Reserved)31
§ 45-26. Curb to sidewalk walk. [Added 6-16-1924]
No stepping-stone, block or cement or flagstone walk leading from any
sidewalk to the curb shall be constructed so that the outer end or edge
thereof shall extend to a point nearer than five inches of the outer edge of
the curb, and any such stepping stone, block or cement or flagstone walk
now existing of which the outer edge projects over any portion of the curb
is hereby declared unlawful and shall be removed within 10 days.
§ 45-27. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
Whoever shall violate any provision of this article shall, for each offense,
forfeit and pay the sum of not less than $50 for the use of said Village.
31.Editor's Note: Section 45-25, Speed of surface railroad cars; standing restrictions, was
repealed 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998.
§ 45-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-27
1:349
Chapter 46
TREES AND VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Berms, fences, hedges and screen
plantings — See Ch. 6.
Building Construction Code and
administration — See Chs. 10 and 11.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 17A.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 27.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 46-1. Title; purpose.
§ 46-2. Jurisdiction; effect on other provisions.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Tree/Vegetation Ordinance" for
trees, plants and shrubs and is herein referred to as the "Tree/
Vegetation Ordinance" or "this chapter."
B. Purpose. In recognition of the environmental, health and aesthetic
benefits of its urban forest, this chapter establishes the policies,
regulations and standards pursuant to the planting, maintenance,
protection, preservation, removal and replacement of trees on public
lands within the Village of Brockport. These provisions are enacted to:
(1) Establish the maximum sustainable amount of tree cover on public
lands within the Village.
(2) Maintain Village trees in a healthy state and to prevent or control
hazardous conditions through good arboricultural practices.
(3) Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in genus, species and
age classes in order to provide a stable and sustainable urban
forest.
A. The Village of Brockport shall have full jurisdiction over all trees, plants
and shrubs (excluding grass) located within street rights-of-way, public
parks, public rights-of-way or easements, and other public places in the
Village.
B. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, land
development, safety or health ordinance or code(s) of this municipality,
the County of Monroe or the State of New York, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and the protection of
the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a
provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
§ 45-27 BROCKPORT CODE § 46-2
1:350
§ 46-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall be
defined as follows, unless otherwise expressly provided:
CODE — The Code of the Village of Brockport.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all inspectors employed by the Village of Brockport who are
certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of code enforcement
officer, building inspector or fire marshal, and/or titled as assistant code
enforcement officer, assistant building inspector, deputy fire marshal, or any
combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport who is certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator, or any
combination thereof.
COMPREHENSIVE TREE PLAN — A framework for public tree
management that includes an inventory of existing trees; identification of
planting sites; a prioritized planting plan; and standards for tree selection,
sitting, and planting.
DPW — The Department of Public Works of the Village of Brockport.
INVASIVE SPECIES — A non-native plant species that adversely affects
the habitats they invade economically, environmentally or ecologically and
listed in either the federal or New York State Invasive Plant Inventory,
www.dec.ny.gov/animals/265html; www.nyis.info
MASTER TREE LIST —
other ordinance of the Code of this municipality existing on the effective
date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the
promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other ordinances or
codes and articles are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
C. Partial invalidity. If any section of this chapter shall be held
unconstitutional, illegal, invalid, or otherwise unenforceable as
violative of state or local laws, the remainder of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect and be enforceable as such.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal of tree(s) which is/are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or
unhealthy.
A compilation of suitable and desirable types and species of trees able
to thrive on Village streets and public places within the Village. The
master tree list is housed at the Village office and is drawn from:
A.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:351
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Brockport.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or an organization of any kind, including public or private.
PUBLIC PARKS — Public places within the Village of Brockport officially
designated as public parks.
PUBLIC PLACE — All grounds owned by the Village of Brockport or under
its control or supervision, whether leased or under contract to the Village.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree growing within the boundaries of a public street
or public place.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.) — An area of public land, which may or may not be
owned by the Village of Brockport, over which facilities such as highways,
sidewalks or the locations of utility lines are built. This land may include
an area between a public sidewalk and a street, which can be commonly
referred to as the "tree lawn."
STREET — The entire width of every public street or right-of-way when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
SUPERINTENDENT — The department head of the Department of Public
Works of the Village of Brockport as employed by the Village of Brockport,
who is responsible for Village of Brockport property, streets and roads,
rights-of-way and public facilities and certain services.
TREE BOARD — The Tree Board for the Village of Brockport.
TREE BOARD ANNUAL REPORT — An annual written report to the Village
Board covering the actions and goals relating to the Village's public trees
and including such activities as street tree inventories, tree plantings and
removals, and educational programs for the public.
TREE INVENTORY REPORT — A scientific inventory of Brockport's street
and park trees, completed in August 2006, listing species and variety,
condition and maintenance needs. The report identifies scores of trees, tree
component(s) and vacant tree spaces.
(1) Recommendations from the Tree Inventory Report;
National Grid's "Recommended Small Trees for Planting Under
Low Overhead Utility Lines or Confined Spaces"
(http://www.nationalgridus.com/non_html/shared_ safety_tree.pdf);
and
(2)
Cornell University's "Recommended Urban Trees for USDA Plant
Hardiness Zone 6 and Colder" (http://www.hort.cornell.edu/uhi/
outreach/recurbtree/index.html).
(3)
The master tree list also includes a list of trees that should not be
planted either because they are inappropriate street trees or because
the Village currently has an excessive number of that species of trees.
B.
§ 46-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 46-3
1:352
TREE LAWN — That part of a right-of-way or highway reservation not
covered by the sidewalk or other pavement, lying between a property
boundary line and that portion of the street usually used for vehicular
traffic.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees for the Village of Brockport.
§ 46-4. Tree Board.
A. Membership. The Tree Board shall consist of not fewer than five nor
more than 10 voting members, appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the Village Board. If possible, all members shall be
residents of the Village, and otherwise must be residents of Monroe
County. At least one member should have professional training in
forestry and, if none do, one ex officio, nonvoting member who has
expertise in urban forestry may also be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Village Board. In addition, at least one member
should be an employee of the DPW and, if none is, one DPW employee
may also be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Village Board as an additional ex officio, nonvoting member. Members
shall serve for staggered terms of four years and without compensation.
B. Organization. Members of the Tree Board shall annually select a Chair
and a recording secretary, each to serve a one-year term. The Board
shall adopt rules and regulations concerning its governance and
operation. A majority of current seated voting members shall constitute
a quorum for conducting business.
C. Authorization and duties. The Tree Board shall be authorized to fulfill
the following duties:
(1) Coordinate, recommend and implement the care, maintenance and
planting of all public trees.
(2) Develop a comprehensive tree plan for the Village of Brockport.
(3) Develop a list of appropriate tree species for planting in the various
types of locales within the tree lawn and public parks.
(4) Provide advice and consultation regarding trees to the Village
Board, Village employees and private citizens residing in the
Village of Brockport.
(5) Receive, review and recommend to the Superintendent requests
from property owners for tree plantings, pruning and removals on
the tree lawn.
(6) Regularly communicate with the DPW on all matters regarding
Village trees; work closely with the DPW in planning and
implementing tree planting; and serve as consultants to the DPW in
regard to tree-related problems and hazards.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:353
§ 46-5. Regulation of vegetation.
(7) Identify and maintain a list of trees within the Village of Brockport
that are of historical significance.
(8) Coordinate activities, including but not limited to the
commemoration of Arbor Day, to inform and educate the public
about the urban forest.
(9) Make budget recommendations to the Village Board for Tree Board
expenses and purchase of trees.
(10) Together with the Village, apply for grants related to the planting
and maintenance of our community forest.
(11) Submit an annual report to the Village Board detailing the Tree
Board's accomplishments for the year, including plantings,
educational outreach, activities coordinated with other committees
and boards, etc.
(12) Review Village policies, resolutions and local laws impacting trees.
A. Planting. The Village shall have the responsibility to plant and maintain
trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way of all streets, avenues
and highways and on public grounds. The Tree Board will make all
reasonable efforts to comply with property owners' requests regarding
placement of a tree on the right-of-way adjoining their property.
(1) Any tree that must be removed shall be replaced by new planting,
except in unusual circumstances.
(2) Trees will be replaced in accordance with the master tree plan
developed by the Tree Board.
(3) No person shall plant any street tree except in accordance with
policies, regulations and specifications established pursuant to this
chapter.
(4) Owners of property adjoining a Village street may request a tree for
the tree lawn when one is missing or has been recently removed.
Requests will be submitted on the tree request form available at
the Village of Brockport municipal offices, located at 49 State
Street, Village of Brockport, or downloadable from the Tree Board's
website link, through www.treeboard.brockprtny.org. The Tree
Board will select a suitable tree for the location, which takes into
consideration:
(a) The diversification of our community forest.
(b) The specific location.
(c) The presence of utility lines and other constricting factors.
§ 46-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 46-5
1:354
§ 46-6. Pruning and topping of trees.
(5) Property owners may, at their own expense and with the written
approval of the Tree Board and the Superintendent, plant
appropriate trees on the tree lawn. The Superintendent shall
authorize the approved planting in writing and shall approve a map
or diagram showing the location of the tree planting. Any tree so
planted shall be considered a public tree and be added to the
Village Tree Inventory Report.
A. Topping of trees is expressly forbidden. Tree pruning shall be
accomplished in accordance with the procedures set forth in the most
recent ANSI A300 standards.
B. Tree removal. The Superintendent shall treat or remove any public
trees that are dead, diseased or constitute a hazard to life or property.
No person other than the Superintendent, or his duly authorized
deputy, agent or employee, shall prune, cut down, remove or destroy
any public tree on Village property unless authorized by the
Superintendent.
(1) Requests by persons for removal of diseased or hazardous trees in
the tree lawn must be made to the DPW. Trees will be inspected to
determine their health and any hazard that they pose. Final
decisions regarding removals will be made by the Superintendent.
C. Abatement of hazards. If a tree on property other than lands of the
State of New York, County of Monroe, or the Village of Brockport is
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, in consultation with the
Superintendent, to constitute a public hazard, the owner will be
required, by written notification from the Code Enforcement Officer, to
trim, remove or otherwise control the tree to abate the hazard. Failure
to do so within 15 days will be deemed a violation of this chapter and
can result in noticing, ticketing or such other enforcement procedure
means and methods set forth in the Code, including but not limited to
under Chapter 59 thereof, or as otherwise permitted by law, including
the abatement by the Village of any such tree or tree parts thereof
which are deemed to constitute a public hazard. In the event that
abatement is necessary by the Village, it shall be at the owner's expense
and, if the costs are unpaid by the owner after 30 days from the date of
billing, the costs for the abatement shall then be assessed and levied
against the corresponding property and added to the next Village tax
roll.
D. Abatement of hazards, public nuisances or invasive plant species. No
person shall allow or permit the harboring of, planting of, or allowing
outdoors any type of plant material which may cause harm to the
environment or to persons, or which may additionally be listed as
prohibited by State of New York or United States regulations.
§ 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-7
1:355
§ 46-7. Correction of damage due to tree roots.
Where sidewalk or curb damage due to tree roots occurs, every reasonable
effort shall be made to correct the problem without removing or damaging
the tree. The Superintendent shall be responsible for developing or
approving corrective measures.
§ 46-8. Cooperation between agencies.
Communication between the DPW and the Tree Board regarding any
operations that affect Village trees is essential to the long-term
management of the Village's trees. This includes but is not limited to
notification of tree pruning, removals, requests for plantings, utility
company activities relating to trees, and Arbor Day and other educational
tree programs.
§ 46-9. Planting requirements in new developments.
All new development, including but not limited to residential, commercial,
industrial and parking lots, will have appropriate trees planted at the
customary density in effect for Village street trees.
§ 46-10. Conservation of forest and woodland resources during
development.
Pursuant to § 46-9, for the protection of trees, setting standards and limits
in areas where land use is intensified, developers shall seek the advice of
the Tree Board for planting recommendations.
§ 46-11. Harming public trees, shrubs or plants.
It is a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to damage,
abuse, mutilate or destroy any tree(s), plant(s) or shrub(s) on public lands.
This includes posting signs or handbills on trees or allowing any gaseous,
liquid or solid substance harmful to trees, shrubs or plants to come into
contact with their roots, trunks or leaves, except during application(s) of
substances in the performance of the normal maintenance of streets, roads,
A. Landscaping plans submitted by developers must include the planting
of street trees and, if appropriate, park trees that are in compliance
with the Tree Board's master tree list in terms of size, species and
density.
B. The developer assumes the responsibility of tree planting and all
irrigation and maintenance for a one-year period from the time of
planting and for the replacement of any trees that may die during this
period.
C. Approval by the Village of Brockport Planning Board for new
developments is contingent upon submission of a tree planting plan
approved by the Tree Board.
§ 46-7 BROCKPORT CODE § 46-11
1:356
sidewalks, tree lawns or driveways as performed on behalf of the Village by
the Superintendent.
§ 46-12. Enforcement authority.
The Village of Brockport Police Department and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer are the official(s) authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter
by removal, notice, ticketing, etc., or such other enforcement procedure
means and methods set forth in the Code, including but not limited to under
Chapter 59 thereof, or as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 46-13. Complaints.
The Superintendent shall review and investigate complaints which allege
or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with
this chapter or any other local law or ordinance or regulation adopted
for administration and enforcement of the Tree Ordinance. The process
for responding to a complaint shall include the following steps, as the
Superintendent, at his discretion, may deem to be appropriate:
§ 46-14. Penalties for offenses.
Violation(s) of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $350 for each offense. In the case of a violation
consisting of the abuse, damage, mutilation or destruction of more than one
tree, shrub or plant on public lands, the damage, mutilation, abuse of, or
destruction of each tree, shrub or plant shall be a separate offense. Nothing
in this section shall limit the right of the Village of Brockport to pursue
any remedy available to it pursuant to § 861 of the New York Real Property
Actions and Proceedings Law, Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law
of New York State, or as otherwise permitted by law.
Chapter 47
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 5A.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Tax on utilities — See Ch. 48.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. Utilizing the Village of Brockport police and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer to carry out enforcement proceedings as deemed appropriate in
violations of this chapter or law(s) of the Village of Brockport.
§ 46-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-14
1:357

ARTICLE I
Exemption for Improvements to One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 5-21-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 47-1. Statutory authority; exemption established.
Pursuant to and in exercise of the authority granted by and under § 421-f
of the Real Property Tax Law (hereinafter, RPTL § 421-f), and subject to the
provisions of this article, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the
provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 421-f and the partial exemption from
taxation and special ad valorem levies established therein are hereby made
applicable to and shall be extended by the Village of Brockport.
§ 47-2. Legislative intent.
The intent of this article is to encourage property owners to make
improvements to one- and two-family houses, to improve the quality of
housing in the community, and to preserve and expand the tax base of the
Village of Brockport.
§ 47-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, whenever the following words, terms or
phrases shall appear either in this article or in the provisions of Real
Property Tax Law § 421-f as applied in and to the Village, they shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein below:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor and the joint and several members of the Board
of Tax Assessors of the Town of Sweden.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS — Those routine activities or
undertakings designed and intended to keep up and sustain, or prevent the
deterioration or breakdown of, the original condition, function, integrity or
appearance of a residential building and/or its component parts or systems
and which are not considered as increasing the value of such property.
RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATIONS OR IMPROVEMENTS — Those
activities or undertakings which restore, expand, add to, upgrade, renovate,
remodel or modernize the existing physical structure or the component
parts or systems of a residential building, including but not limited to
those which prevent its physical deterioration or bring it into compliance
with applicable building, sanitary, health and/or fire codes and which are
considered as increasing the value of such property.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any building or structure lawfully designed
and used exclusively for residential purposes and both certified for
occupancy and actually occupied by not more than one or two families, in
accordance with the zoning and other land use regulations of the Village.32
§ 47-4. Application of statutory provisions; limitations.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:359
A. The partial exemption established in and under Real Property Tax Law
§ 421-f shall be granted and applied in and by the Village of Brockport
in accordance with the provisions of such statute, subject to the
following conditions and limitations:
(1) The reconstruction, alteration or improvement qualifying for such
partial exemption is commenced subsequent to the date of
enactment of this article;
(2) Such exemption shall only be applicable to reconstruction,
alterations or improvements of residential buildings as such latter
terms are jointly or separately defined in this article and shall not
apply to any ordinary maintenance or repairs thereto, as likewise
defined hereinabove; and
(3) In the event that a residential building granted such exemption
shall either cease to be used primarily for residential purposes or
shall be used or occupied in any manner which violates applicable
sanitary, health, building or fire or zoning or other land use codes
or in the event that title to such property is subsequently
transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the owner(s)
granted the exemption, then in any of such events the exemption
granted hereunder shall cease.
B. Whenever any partial exemption shall be granted and applied pursuant
to Real Property Tax Law § 421-f and the provisions of this article, such
exemption shall not be reduced or repealed or otherwise impaired by
any subsequent amendment to or repeal of this article but shall
continue in full legal force and effect, as originally granted, until the
expiration of the period for which it was originally so granted.
§ 47-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 47-4
1:360
ARTICLE II
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-15-2008 by L.L. No. 9-200833]
§ 47-5. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law,
real property in the Village of Brockport which meets the requirements
for qualified residential real property shall be exempt from taxation by
the Village of Brockport to the extent authorized therein, subject to the
following maximum exemption.
§ 47-6. Exemption.
Qualified residential real property shall be exempt from taxation by the
Village of Brockport to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such
property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $8,000.
In addition, where a Cold War veteran received compensation from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-related disability, qualifying residential rental
property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product of the
assessed value of such property multiplied by 50% of the Cold War veteran
disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$40,000.
§ 47-7. Application.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owners of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property
Services. The application shall be filed with the Assessor on or before the
first appropriate taxable status date.
§ 47-8. Amendments.
The Village Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of Municipal Home
Rule Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York State applicable
thereto.
33.Editor’s Note: Local Law No. 2-2018, adopted 3-5-2018, made permanent the Cold War
veterans exemption which, per § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law, authorizes a limited
exemption from real property taxes for real property owned by persons who rendered
military service to the United States during the Cold War (September 2, 1945 to December
26, 1991).
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-8
1:361

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Property Conversions
[Adopted 11-27-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 47-9. Legislative intent.
The intent of this article is to encourage the conversion of nonresidential
real property to mixed-use property in order to expand and promote
downtown residential uses, improve the quality of such property, and to
preserve and expand the tax base of the Village of Brockport.
§ 47-10. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to and in exercise of the authority granted by and under § 485-a of
the Real Property Tax Law, the partial exemption from taxation and special
ad valorem levies established therein is hereby made applicable to and shall
be extended by the Village of Brockport.
§ 47-11. Definitions.
In addition to adoption of the corresponding terms as defined in Real
Property Tax Law § 485-a, the following words, terms or phrases shall have
meanings ascribed to them as indicated hereinbelow:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor and the joint and several members of the Board
of Tax Assessors of the Town of Sweden.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS — Those routine activities or
undertakings designed and intended to keep up and sustain, or prevent
the deterioration or breakdown of, the original condition, function, integrity
or appearance of a nonresidential building and/or its component parts or
systems.
§ 47-12. Application of statutory provisions; limitations.
A. The partial exemption from taxation and special ad valorem levies
established in and under Real Property Tax Law § 485-a shall be
granted and applied in and by the Village of Brockport in accordance
with the provisions, conditions and limitations set forth thereunder, and
also subject to the following condition and limitation:
(1) In the event that a mixed-use property granted such an exemption
either ceases to be used primarily for mixed-use purposes or shall
be used or occupied in any manner which violates applicable
sanitary, health, building or fire or zoning or other land use codes,
or in the event that title to such property is subsequently
transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the owner(s)
granted the exemption, then in any of such events the exemption
granted hereunder shall cease.
B. Unless the requirements pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-a, or
as set forth herein, do not continue to be met, whenever any partial
§ 47-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-12
1:363
exemption shall be granted and applied pursuant to Real Property Tax
Law § 485-a and the provisions of this article, such an exemption shall
not be reduced or repealed or otherwise impaired by any subsequent
amendment to or repeal of this article but shall continue until the
expiration of the period for which it was originally so granted.
§ 47-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 47-12
1:364
ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Certain New or Substantially Rehabilitated Multiple
Dwellings
[Adopted 7-15-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
§ 47-13. Legislative intent.
The intent of this article is to encourage revitalization of low- and moderateincome
multiple dwellings in order to improve the quality of such property
and to preserve and expand the tax base of nearby property.
§ 47-14. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to § 421-m of the Real Property Tax Law,
which expressly authorizes a local government's governing body to provide
a real property tax exemption for certain multiple dwellings that are
constructed or substantially rehabilitated in benefit areas designated by the
local government body.
§ 47-15. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, all words will carry their customary
meanings except as expressly defined herein.
BENEFIT AREA — The "benefit area" will consist of those tax lots lying
along the south line of Clinton Street and those tax lots between the north
line of Clinton Street and the south line of the Erie Canal, bounded on the
east by the west line of Main Street and on the west by the west lines of the
properties with Tax Map Nos. 068.52-1-1.3 and 068.52-3-3.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — As used in this article, the term "multiple
dwelling" means a dwelling, other than a hotel, which is to be occupied
or is occupied as the residence or home of three or more families living
independently of one another, whether such dwelling is rented or owned as
a cooperative or condominium.
§ 47-16. Application of statutory provisions; limitations.
The partial exemption from taxation and special ad valorem levies
established under Real Property Tax Law § 421-m shall be granted and
applied in the Benefit Area by the Village of Brockport in accordance with
the provisions, conditions and limitations set forth thereunder, and also
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. In the event that a property had been partially or totally exempt from
taxation prior to the construction or reconstruction of the multiple
dwelling, the exemption shall be calculated based on the taxation and
ad valorem levies that would have been due in the absence of such
preconstruction (or reconstruction) exemption.
§ 47-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-16
1:365

ARTICLE V
Gold Star Parent Exemption
[Adopted 3-5-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 47-17. Exemption granted.
This article authorizes the real property tax exemption, Gold Star Parent
exemption, which, per § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, authorizes a
limited exemption from real property taxes for real property owned by Gold
Star Parents, parents of a child who died in the line of duty while serving in
the United States Armed Forces during a period of war.34
34.Editor's Note: For the purposes of this section, real property owned by a Gold Star Parent
(as defined by New York State Department of Taxation) shall be deemed a qualifying
residence, and a Gold Star Parent shall be deemed a qualified owner for the purposes of
eligibility for the alternative veterans exemption.
§ 47-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-17
1:367
Chapter 48
TAX ON UTILITIES
§ 48-1. Tax imposed.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 131 of the Village Law of the
State of New York,35 a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the
first day of June 1958 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Brockport which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service,36 which has a gross income for the 12 months
ending May 31, 1958, in excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers
subject to such supervision under Article 3-b of the Public Service Law,37
and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after the first
day of June 1958 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business
in the Village of Brockport which has a gross operating income for the 12
months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application
only within the territorial limits of the Village of Brockport and shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision
of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or
consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village of Brockport,
notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to
such transaction within such limits.
§ 48-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in "gross
income"), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Brockport, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever;
also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also profit from the sale of personal property, other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on
hand at the cost of the period for which a return is made; also receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of
35.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 5-530 which contains the authority to impose taxes
on utilities not to exceed 1% of gross income or of gross operating income.
36.Editor's Note: See now the New York State Public Service Commission.
37.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by c. 267 of the Laws of
1970, effective March 1, 1971. Similar provisions are now located in § 240 et seq. of the
Transportation Law.
§ 47-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 48-2
1:368
Brockport other than such as are received from a corporation, a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale
and rentals) within the Village of Brockport whatsoever; provided, however,
that the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged
in selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange
service wholly consummated within the Village of Brockport, and in the case
of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only receipts
from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of Brockport.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Brockport, including cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state, municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — As used in this chapter, includes every person subject to the
supervision of the State Department of Public Service, except persons
engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad
cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit,
subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or
not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity,
steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered through
mains, pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 48-3. Records to be kept.
Every utility subject to tax under this chapter shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Treasurer may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the Treasurer may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:369
§ 48-4. Filing of annual returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
31st day of January, a return for the calendar year preceding the month of
such return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby
is effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required
by the foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly, on or before
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31, a return for the three
calendar months preceding the month of each such return date, and in the
case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which
the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross
income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns
shall be filed with the Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such
purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he may
require to be included therein. The Treasurer, in order to ensure payment
of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental
return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by him, and he
may require any utility doing business in the Village of Brockport to file an
annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him, regardless of
whether the utility is subject to tax under this chapter. Every return shall
have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same,
or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the
corporation, if such business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect
that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 48-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this chapter, each utility shall
pay to the Treasurer the tax imposed by this chapter for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 48-6. Insufficient or unsatisfactory returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this chapter shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not
filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from him, or if no
return is made for any period, the Treasurer shall determine the amount
of tax due from such information as he is able to obtain and, if necessary,
may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall
give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person
against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice
of such determination, apply to the Treasurer for a hearing or unless the
Treasurer of his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing,
the Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the
tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York if application
therefor is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such decision.
§ 48-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 48-6
1:370
An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of
any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any,
shall be first deposited with the Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding or, at the option of the applicant, such
undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties,
costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be
required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent
to the granting of such order. Except in the case of a willfully false or
fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional
tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three years from the
date of the filing of a return; provided, however, that, where no return has
been filed as required by this chapter, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 48-7. Notices.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this chapter may
be given by mailing the same to the persons for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this chapter or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this chapter by the giving of notice, shall commence to run
from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 48-8. Penalties.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof within the time required by this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for
each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Treasurer,
for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return and, if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty
fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 48-9. Refunds.
If within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof, and the Treasurer or the court
shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so
made on the initiative of the Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made
of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Treasurer as
hereinbefore provided, unless the Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore
provided or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it
§ 48-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:371
shall have been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York that such determination
was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected
under this chapter. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore
provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or
penalty complained of, and the Treasurer may receive additional evidence
with respect thereto. After making his determination, the Treasurer shall
give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an
order to review such determination under said Article 78, subject to the
provision hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 48-10. Tax not to be added to bills.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be charged against and be paid by
the utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by
the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 48-11. Enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
chapter, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Treasurer, bring
an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment
obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer. Each such tax
and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the
same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty
imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 48-12. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this chapter, the Treasurer shall have power to
make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this chapter and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 48-13. Returns held confidential; exceptions; penalties for
offenses.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Treasurer or any agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Brockport to divulge or make known
in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income or
any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this chapter.
The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
§ 48-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 48-13
1:372
§ 48-14. Disposition of receipts.
All taxes and penalties received by the Treasurer under this chapter shall be
paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited
in the general fund of the Village.
§ 48-15. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect June 1, 1958.
Village of Brockport in an action or proceeding under the provisions
of this chapter, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission38 in an
action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State
of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding
under the provisions of this chapter when the returns or facts shown
thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding; in either of
which events, the court may require the production of and may admit
in evidence so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby
as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his
duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by him,
nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or the
publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have
failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for
by this chapter, together with any relevant information which, in the
opinion of the Treasurer, may assist in the collection of such delinquent
taxes; or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal
representatives of the Village of Brockport of the return of any person
who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon
or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Brockport, he shall be dismissed
from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment
in the Village of Brockport for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the Treasurer may
exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other village in
the State of New York information contained in returns filed under this
chapter, provided such city or other village grants similar privileges to
the Village of Brockport, and provided such information is to be used for
tax purposes only; and the Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the
State Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
38.Editor's Note: New York State Department of Taxation and Finance.
§ 48-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-15
1:373
Chapter 49
(RESERVED)
Chapter 51
TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND CAMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 10.
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Local law hearings — See Ch. 28.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Streets and sidewalks — Chapter 45.
Vehicle and traffic — Chapter 54.
Zoning — See Ch. 58.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 51-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Trailer Ordinance."
§ 51-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate travel trailers, storage trailers,
temporary construction trailers, house trailers and camping structures
within the Village of Brockport. The Board of Trustees does hereby declare
that this chapter is adopted in the interest of public health and safety of
the inhabitants of the Village of Brockport, to prevent nuisances and to
generally protect the welfare of the public.
§ 51-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR — Shall be deemed to include the
Code Enforcement Officer and all inspectors employed by the Village of
Brockport, as certified by the State of New York State either in the capacity
of code enforcement officer, building inspector or fire marshal, and/or titled
as the assistant code enforcement officer, assistant building inspector,
deputy fire marshal, or any combination thereof.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — An officer employed by the Village of
Brockport as certified by the State of New York either in the capacity of
code enforcement officer, building inspector, fire marshal, planning/zoning
officer, peace officer, stormwater manager, floodplain administrator, or any
combination thereof.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — A written order for the remedying of found
violation(s) of the chapter(s), pursuant to § 51-7.
§ 48-15 BROCKPORT CODE § 51-3
1:374
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — A trailer with or without wheels that is used
exclusively as a temporary field office/offices and may also be secondhand
to store construction material at a bona fide construction site.
HOUSE TRAILER — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40
body feet or more in length or, when erected on a site, is 320 or more
square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein.
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle that has facilities for cooking, living and
sleeping.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A motorized wheeled vehicle used for
camping or other recreational activities and often equipped with living
facilities.
STORAGE CONTAINERS — A transportable box, whether with wheels, such
as a freight trailer, or without wheels, such as a shipping container.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Any portable container, receptacle
or device of a type commonly used for the temporary storage of personal
property, and specifically including those storage facilities generally
referred to as a "portable on demand storage unit."
TENT or TENT HOUSE — Any nonvehicular structure constructed of canvas
or other lightweight material, used for human habitation on a short-term
basis, with or without walls and supported by poles and/or ropes with pegs
and stakes fastened to the ground.
TRAILER CAMP — Any lot, parcel or ground whereon one or more house
trailers, tents or tent houses are permanently placed or fixed in one
location.
TRAILERS — Used in reference to vehicles other than house trailers, travel
trailers or recreational vehicles, and shall include all vehicles coming within
the definition of "trailers" in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, and shall include trailers designed to carry boats, cargo, freight and
other items of personal or discarded property.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A trailer used solely as a residence for camping,
vacation or travel purposes.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended.39
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
§ 51-4. Trailer camps.
No person, firm or corporation being the owner or occupant of any land
or premises within the Village of Brockport shall use or permit the use of
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Building Construction Code.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-4
1:375
said land or premises as a trailer camp or for the placement of a house
trailer, tent and/or tent house as a permanent structure whether intended
for habitable use or not.
§ 51-5. Trailers and camping regulations.
No trailer shall park or remain upon any public highway, public sidewalk or
parking lot exceeding four hours or park on public lands owned by or under
the control of the Village of Brockport, unless in a location where camping
is allowed, and then for a period not exceeding 48 hours.
A. No person shall occupy a portable structure, such as but not limited to
tents, canopies and lean-tos for the purposes of sleeping out of doors on
property either owned by or under the control of the Village of
Brockport, unless in a location where camping is allowed, and then for a
period not exceeding 48 hours.
B. Travel trailers and other trailers, except house trailers, may be parked
for the purpose of storage in residentially and business zoned districts
(Districts B and O as established by the Village Zoning Ordinance
enacted December 21, 1959)40 under the following terms:
(1) In the rear yard of any residential or business lot.
(2) In the side yard of any residential or business lot, if rear yard
parking is impractical because of size, contour or other physical
difficulties or after a review by the Building Inspector, who shall
issue a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals waiving the rear yard
parking storage requirements as noted under § 51-5B(1) because of
lot impracticability.
(3) In a front area driveway of any residential or business lot, between
the dates of April 15 and November 15; however, such travel trailer
cannot be parked or stored in the driveway that would be closer
than 15 feet distant from the nearest street, curb or edge of
pavement.
(4) Such parking of any trailers shall not exceed more than two trailers
on any residential or business lot.
(5) No trailer shall be parked or stored closer than four feet from any
lot line.
(6) Travel trailers or recreation vehicles may be used for temporary
living or sleeping quarters within the Village. Such temporary
living habitation shall not exceed 14 days in any calendar year
when the owner, his/her family or guests may use the same for
sleeping or cooking purposes. Travel trailers or recreation vehicles
may be used for temporary living or sleeping quarters within the
Village during any authorized Village celebration, festival or event
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Zoning.
§ 51-4 BROCKPORT CODE § 51-5
1:376
when prior celebration, festival or event approval has been granted
by the Board of Trustees.
(7) The Zoning Board of Appeals, upon application and subject to
conditions essential to the safety, health and general welfare of the
people of the Village, may authorize waiving or modifying any
requirements pertinent to § 51-B(1) through (6). Said Board may, in
addition, waive application fees, public notices or hearings on such
application.
C. It shall be unlawful to discharge any effluent waste matter from any
travel trailer or recreational vehicle within the Village of Brockport,
unless authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works.
D. It shall be unlawful to remove the wheels from any trailer or otherwise
permanently affix any trailer to the ground.
E. A trailer or storage container used for temporary storage shall be
permitted to be used for a period of no longer than 30 days in
connection with a commercial sale being undertaken by an established
enterprise/business within the Village of Brockport, provided that such
trailer or storage container is located upon the premises of such
commercial enterprise operating the sale. This provision, however, shall
not be used by a single commercial enterprise more frequently than two
times per calendar year and not more than once in any ninety-day
period, with a maximum of one trailer per premises.
F. No more than two trailers may be allowed upon a premises or lot as a
temporary sales and/or construction office when said trailer is part of
the equipment of any person, persons, corporation or partnership that
is in the business of either construction or real estate sales in
conjunction with an active residential or business development site. In
any event, no temporary trailer used in connection with such
construction or real estate sales shall remain upon the premises for
longer than two weeks past the completion of said construction or real
estate sale. In no event will any trailer used in connection with all
development remain on said premises longer than two years from the
date of initial construction. The Planning Board shall review any
request for an additional length of time and/or number over two
thereafter.
G. No more than three trailers or containers that are to be used as a
temporary use storage container may be allowed on an active
residential or nonresidential construction site. All temporary
construction trailers or storage containers shall be used only in
connection with such construction and shall not remain upon the
premises for longer than two weeks past the completion of said
construction. In no event will any trailer or storage container used in
connection with any development remain on said premises longer than
two years from the date of initial construction. Temporary use storage
containers or trailers shall be screened from public view as approved by
§ 51-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-5
1:377
the Code Enforcement Officer. The Planning Board shall review the
request for an additional length of time and/or number over three
thereafter.
H. A temporary trailer may be allowed upon a residential, business and/or
other site wherein there is an emergency, defined as the loss or
destruction of property or a building which would require the use of a
trailer on the site for purposes of storage of goods, equipment, material
and/or sales. In an emergency wherein use of a trailer is requested, an
approval will be granted for a period of 90 days and is renewable at the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer for one additional ninetyday
period. After one consecutive one-hundred-eighty-day period the
Planning Board shall review the request for an additional length of time
thereafter.
I. All existing storage containers or trailers, regardless of size, in
residential and business districts shall be removed within 120 days
upon the enactment and filing of this chapter and/or the filing of an
application to the Village of Brockport Planning Board for the granting
of a temporary storage trailer or container operating permit issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer. All proposed or existing temporary
storage containers or trailers used in any districts for the purpose of
storage shall be permitted if approved by application to the Planning
Board, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) A list of the types of materials to be stored shall be provided to the
Code Enforcement Officer; any changes in materials stored shall
elicit a new list being provided to the Code Enforcement Officer
prior to the change in the type of materials stored. Should the
temporary storage of materials fall under the auspices of any other
regulations, those regulations shall prevail as well as the reporting
thereof and/or filing of Material Safety Data Sheets and/or lists of
contents as required.
(2) All proposed or existing temporary storage containers or trailers
used in any residential or business districts for the purpose of
storage shall not exceed 20 feet in length or occupy a footprint of
more than 160 square feet in area.
Exemption; A temporary sales and/or construction office and/or
when said trailer is part of the equipment of any person, persons,
corporation or partnership that is in the business of either
construction or real estate sales in conjunction with an active
residential or business development site.
J. Location of temporary storage or office trailers or containers shall
either be approved by the Planning Board and/or the Uniform Code of
the State of New York. But regardless, temporary storage or office
trailers or containers shall not be located closer than four feet from any
property line or structure, except in residential districts, where
temporary storage or office trailers or containers shall not be located
§ 51-5 BROCKPORT CODE § 51-5
1:378
§ 51-6. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Brockport (and/or assistant
Code Enforcement Officers, collectively the "Code Enforcement Officers"
hereunder) is/are the official(s) authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter by notice, ticketing, etc., or such other enforcement procedure
means and methods set forth in the Code or otherwise permitted by law.
§ 51-7. Notice of violations; penalties for offenses.
closer than 10 feet from all property lines and/or any other structure on
the property and/or any adjacent property thereof.
A. Informal compliance orders; The Code Enforcement Officer (or his
authorized inspector) is authorized to order in writing the remedying of
any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about any building,
structure or premises in violation(s) of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter or local law(s). Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer can issue an
informal (voluntary compliance) order either in writing or verbally.
B. Notice of violation; When the Village of Brockport determines that
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter or any other chapter of this Code, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a written notice of violation/violations to the owner,
owner's agent and/or resident, e.g., tenant/tenants.
C. Compliance orders; The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) is authorized to order in writing the remedying of any
condition or activity found to exist in, on or about any building,
structure or premises in violation of the Uniform Code, Energy Code or
this chapter or local law(s). Upon finding that any such condition or
activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance
order. The compliance order shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates this chapter or local
law(s);
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of this chapter or local law(s)
which is/are violated by the specified condition or activity;
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(6) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of
time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel compliance
may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time.
§ 51-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:379
D. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized inspector) shall cause
the compliance order to be mailed to the property owner identified in
filings with and records of the Village of Brockport (or as indicated in
the real property records of the Monroe County Clerk) pursuant to this
chapter, by registered and/or certified mail, and/or a copy thereof may
be served on the owner of the affected property personally, as indicated
below. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not
required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served
on any property manager or agent, builder, architect, tenant(s),
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work or use being
performed or occurring at the affected property, personally or by
registered and/or certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
E. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer (or his authorized
inspector) under the provisions of the Codes Office is authorized to
issue appearance tickets for any violation(s) of the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or this chapter or local law(s). The Code Enforcement
Officer (or his authorized inspector) can issue appearance tickets
forgoing § 51-7B and C, as per the authorization of Chapter 59, § 59-1,
of the Code of the Village.
F. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or the chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary certificate
of occupancy, conditional certificate of occupancy, residential rental
registration statement, stop-work order, operating permit or other
notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any
provision of this chapter, any other chapter of this Code or local law(s)
shall be liable unto civil penalty of not more than $350 for each day or
part thereof during which such violation continues. Each day on which
any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter occurs shall
constitute one offense, and each successive day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person, partnership or entity or corporation shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $350 for each offense. In addition to
any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership or
entity or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter and/or local law(s) shall be required to bear the expense of
such compliance. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
and/or local law(s) shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
§ 51-7 BROCKPORT CODE § 51-7
1:380
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter or local law(s) shall
be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only, all provisions
of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be
recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the Village of
Brockport.
G. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Brockport in a court of competent jurisdiction to
prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct or abate any violation of or to enforce
any provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter or any
other chapter of this Code or local law(s), or any term or condition of
any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance,
temporary certificate of occupancy, conditional certificate of occupancy,
stop-work order, operating permit, residential rental registration
statement, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, Energy Code, this chapter or any other chapter of this Code or
local law(s), or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order
obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter or
local law(s), an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of
the Village of Brockport in the Supreme Court or in any other court
having the requisite jurisdiction to obtain an order directing the
removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this
subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization
from the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport.
H. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 36-14 (Stop-work orders) or 36-15 (Structures unfit for human
habitation) of this Code or any other chapter of this Code or local law, in
any other section of the local law(s) or in any other state or local law, as
applicable. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be
pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the
pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in
§ 36-14 (Stop-work orders) or 36-15 (Structures unfit for human
habitation) of this Code, in any other section of local law(s) or in any
other applicable law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, each
remedy and penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and
not in substitution for or limitation of, the penalties specified in
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:381
Chapter 54
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and processions — See Ch. 33.
Parking — See Ch. 34.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty
specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior
to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in
Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law. [Amended 6-2-2014 by
L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 51-7 BROCKPORT CODE § 51-7
1:382
Part 1
[GAednoeprtaeld R9e-g1u1l-a1t9io2n2s]
ARTICLE I
Word Usage
§ 54-1. Definitions.
As used in this part, words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
CONGESTED DISTRICT — Main Street from the Barge Canal to the
intersection of Erie and State Streets with Main Street.
DRIVER — The person who drives or leads or rides a horse, mule or who
draws, propels or operates a vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLES — All vehicles propelled by power, excepting those
which run only on rails or tracks, and excepting motorcycles, motor bicycles
and motor tricycles.
MOTORCYCLES — Motorcycles, motor bicycles and motor tricycles.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street set apart or intended especially for
vehicles and horses, extending from the curb or gutter to opposite curb or
gutter.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street extending from the curb or gutter to
the nearest lot line.
STREET — A public street, highway or alley in the Village of Brockport.
VEHICLES — All vehicles, excepting those run only on rails or tracks, and
includes the horse, mule or animal drawing the same, if any, and bicycles.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:383

ARTICLE II
Pedestrians
§ 54-2. Pedestrians in streets subject to traffic regulations.
[Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Pedestrians in the streets shall be subject to Article 27, §§ 1150 to 1157, of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as follows:
§ 1150. Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in section
eleven hundred eleven of this title,41 but at all other places pedestrians
shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions
stated in this article.
§ 1151. Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalks.
(a)When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, except
that any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overpass has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
(b)No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impractical for the driver to yield.
(c) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
§ 1151-a. Pedestrians' right-of-way on sidewalks.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alleyway, building,
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any sidewalk
extending across such alleyway, building entrance, road or driveway.
§ 1152. Crossing at other than crosswalks.
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(b)Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
41.Editor's Note: See § 1111 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 54-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-2
1:385
(c) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
§ 1153. Provisions relating to blind or visually impaired persons.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver
of a vehicle approaching an intersection or crosswalk shall yield the
right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing or attempting to cross the roadway
when such pedestrian is accompanied by a guide dog or using a cane
which is metallic or white in color or white with a red tip.
(b)No person, unless blind or visually impaired, shall use on any street or
highway a cane which is metallic or white in color or white with a red
tip.
(c) This section shall not be construed as making obligatory the
employment of the use of a guide dog or of a cane or walking stick of
any kind by a person blind or visually impaired.
§ 1155. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 1156. Pedestrians on roadways.
(a)Where sidewalks are provided and they may be used with safety it shall
be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
(b)Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction. Upon the approach of any vehicle from the opposite
direction, such pedestrian shall move as far to the left as is practicable.
§ 1157. Pedestrians soliciting rides, or business.
(a)No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
or to solicit from or sell to an occupant of any vehicle.
(b)No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(c) No person shall occupy any part of a state highway, except in a city or
village, in any manner for the purpose of selling or soliciting.
§ 54-3. (Reserved)42
42.Editor's Note: Former § 54-3, Pedestrians crossing streets, was repealed 3-16-1998 by L.L.
No. 4-1998.
§ 54-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 54-3
1:386
ARTICLE III
General Operating Regulations
§ 54-4. Right turns.
A vehicle turning into another street to the right shall turn the corner as
near the right-hand curb as practicable.
§ 54-5. Left turns.
A vehicle turning to the left into another street shall, before turning, pass
to the right of and beyond the center of the intersecting streets; provided,
however, that if directed by a traffic officer the vehicle shall pass in front of
instead of around the point of intersection.
§ 54-6. U-turns.
Vehicles turning around, or crossing from one side of the street to another,
except for the purpose of passing other vehicles or because of dangers in
the street, shall do so by turning to the left so as to head in the general
direction of traffic after they have crossed the street.
§ 54-7. (Reserved)43
§ 54-8. Processions.
§ 54-9. Right-of-way for meeting vehicles.
Two vehicles which are passing each other in opposite directions shall have
the right-of-way, and no other vehicle to the rear of either of such two
vehicles shall pass or attempt to pass such two vehicles while they are
passing each other.
§ 54-10. Right-of-way at intersections.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a street or public
road shall grant the right-of-way at such intersection to any vehicle
approaching from his right, provided that wherever traffic officers are
stationed they shall have full power to regulate traffic.
A. No vehicle or street surface car shall be driven through a procession,
except by permission or by order of a police officer.
B. If the procession takes more than five minutes to pass, it shall be
broken and traffic allowed to go through.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 54-7, Passing or meeting streetcars, was repealed 3-16-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998.
§ 54-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-11
1:387
§ 54-11. Right-of-way for fire apparatus.
A vehicle must not be so driven as to impede or obstruct the progress of
the apparatus of the Fire Department or any official or employee of the
Village in the discharge of his duty at a fire. The driver of a vehicle must
not drive through or within the established fire lines or over a line of fire
hose. On the approach of fire apparatus, as evidenced by suitable signal bell
or continuous warning of siren, the driver of a vehicle must immediately
draw up such vehicle as near as practicable to the right-hand curb and
parallel thereto, and bring it to a standstill, and the driver of a street car
must immediately stop his car and keep it stationary until the apparatus has
passed.
§ 54-12. Right-of-way generally; slow and fast vehicles.
The vehicle having the middle line of the highway on its left shall have
the right-of-way. In meeting, both vehicles shall keep to the right, so as
to ensure safe passage, and this without regard to the middle line of
the highway. Slowly moving vehicles must move as near to the curb as
practicable; rapidly moving vehicles must occupy space lying immediately
next to and parallel with the middle of the highway.
§ 54-13. Passing.
A vehicle overtaking another vehicle shall pass on the left side of the
overtaken vehicle and not pull over to the right thereof until entirely clear
of it.
§ 54-14. Signaling intention to pass.
The driver of an overtaking vehicle shall signal his desire to pass an
overtaken vehicle by a blast or stroke of the horn or other signaling device,
and thereupon it shall be the duty of the overtaken vehicle, if possible, to
turn to the right so as to allow the overtaking vehicle a reasonable space in
which to pass or to warn by signal the impossibility of such passage.
§ 54-15. Passing caution and assistance.
In all passing and overtaking, such assistance shall be given by the
occupants of each vehicle respectively to the other as the circumstances
shall demand and either request by voice or signal, and each shall exercise
care and caution to get clearance and avoid accident.
§ 54-16. Vehicles emerging from alleys, garages, driveways.
No vehicle shall emerge from an alley, stable, garage or driveway except
slowly and under control of the driver, who shall give a proper warning by
voice or signaling device to passing vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 54-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 54-17
1:388
§ 54-17. Muffler cutouts prohibited.
The use of a motor muffler cutout is prohibited on any highway within the
limits of the municipality.
§ 54-18. Gongs and sirens.
Gong and siren whistles shall not be used on any vehicle other than
ambulances and vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department.
§ 54-19. (Reserved)44
§ 54-20. Signaling turns and stops.
Before turning to the right or left, and except in an emergency, before
decreasing speed or stopping the driver shall warn those following, either
by holding his arm straight out, horizontal and at right angles to the car, or
by operating an adequate mechanical signal device.
§ 54-21. Signaling approaching pedestrians and points of
obstructed vision.
Upon approaching a pedestrian who is on the traveled part of any street
and not upon a sidewalk, and upon approaching an intersecting street or a
curve or a corner in the street, where the driver's view is obstructed and
where a traffic officer is not on duty, every driver of a vehicle shall slow
down the same and give timely and sufficient signal with his voice, horn or
other signaling device.
§ 54-22. Turning; signal required.
The driver of a vehicle shall, before turning, while in motion or from a
standstill, or changing the course of such vehicle, first see that there is
sufficient space to make such movement in safety and shall give a visible or
audible signal to the traffic officer, if there be such, or to drivers of other
vehicles following of his intentions to make such movement, by signaling as
provided in § 54-20 of this article and, where a police officer is in charge of
the traffic, indicate to him the direction in which the vehicle is to be turned.
§ 54-23. Backing; signal and exercise of caution.
Before backing any vehicle, the driver shall see that the way is clear and
shall give adequate warning and shall, while backing, exercise due vigilance
to prevent accident.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 54-19, Vehicles meeting horses, was repealed 3-16-1998 by L.L.
No. 4-1998.
§ 54-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-23
1:389

ARTICLE IV
Standing and Stopping
§ 54-24. Stopping and standing generally.
§ 54-25. Stopping within intersections.
A vehicle must not stop or stand within the intersection of streets except in
case of accident or other emergency or when directed to stop by the police.
§ 54-26. Obstructing crosswalks.
A vehicle must not stop or stand upon or obstruct a crosswalk except in case
of accident or other emergency.
§ 54-27. Obstructing streets while loading. [Amended 3-16-1998 by
L.L. No. 3-1998]
A vehicle must not stand crosswise on any street for a period longer than
actually necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares or
merchandise.
§ 54-28. Stopping at street corners.
A vehicle must not stop or stand within 10 feet of a street corner any
longer than is actually necessary for the purpose of receiving or discharging
passengers or occupants or loading or unloading goods, wares or
merchandise.
§ 54-29. Stopping at fire hydrants.
A vehicle must not stop or stand within six feet of a fire hydrant any
longer than is actually necessary for the purpose of receiving or discharging
passengers or occupants or loading or unloading goods, wares or
merchandise.
§ 54-30. Defacing signs.
No person shall deface, injure, move or interfere with any signpost,
standard or any signaling device sanctioned, installed or placed by local
authorities for the purpose of directing, restricting or regulating traffic or
established zones.
A. A vehicle must not stop or stand in the street except close to the curb,
unless in case of accident or other emergency or when directed by the
police to stop.
B. A vehicle must not stop or stand with the left side thereof to the curb.
§ 54-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-31
1:391
§ 54-31. Standing while loading.
No vehicle used for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise
shall be left standing on any street in the congested area for a period
longer than may be actually necessary to load or unload its goods, wares or
merchandise, and on no occasion for a period longer than 30 minutes at any
one time.
§ 54-31 BROCKPORT CODE § 54-31
1:392
ARTICLE V
Speed Restrictions
§ 54-32. Speed on turning corners.45
All motor vehicles, motorcycles and all other vehicles: 10 miles per hour
turning a corner.
§ 54-33. (Reserved)46
45.Editor's Note: See also Part II of this chapter, Art. XIII, § 54-66.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 54-33, Regulations for street surface cars, was repealed 3-16-1998
by L.L. No. 4-1998.
§ 54-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-33
1:393

ARTICLE VI
Lights on Vehicles
§ 54-34. Conformance with state law required.
Lights on motor vehicles shall conform to the provisions of Section 386 of
the Highway Laws.47
§ 54-35. Lights on motorcycles.
A motorcycle, during the period of 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before
sunrise, must display a white light visible within a reasonable distance in
front thereof and a red light carried on the rear of the vehicle.
§ 54-36. Lights on bicycles.
Bicycles must exhibit, during the period from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/
2 hour before sunrise, a white light visible within a reasonable distance in
front thereof.
§ 54-37. (Reserved)48
§ 54-38. Parking lights.
No vehicles, unless parked as provided by Section 56 of Article III of this
part,49 shall, at any time from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before
sunrise, be parked in or upon the streets or alleys without having exhibited
thereon a light or lights which shall be clearly visible from in front and from
the rear, so as to warn those meeting such vehicle of its presence.
47.Editor's Note: See now § 375 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 54-37, Lights on other motor vehicles, was repealed 3-16-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998.
49.Editor's Note: The provisions of this ordinance regulating parking have been repealed. For
regulations concerning the manner of parking vehicles, see Ch. 34, Parking, especially
§ 34-8.
§ 54-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-38
1:395

ARTICLE VII
Smoke and Noise Prevention
§ 54-39. Muffler cutouts not to be opened.
The muffler cutout on a motor vehicle or motorcycle must not be opened.
§ 54-40. Discharge of dense smoke prohibited.
Dense smoke must not be caused, suffered or permitted to be discharged
from any motor vehicle or motorcycle.
§ 54-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-40
1:397

ARTICLE VIII
Dangerous and Annoying Practices Prohibited
§ 54-41. Tricks or fancy riding on bicycles or motorcycles.
The driver of a bicycle or motorcycle must not coast or ride with hands off
the handlebars or practice any tricks or fancy riding thereon.
§ 54-42. Passengers on bicycles or motorcycles.
The driver of a two-wheeled bicycle or motorcycle must not carry any other
person thereon, and no other person shall ride thereon except on a seat
securely fastened to the machine in the rear of the driver and provided with
footrests and handgrips.
§ 54-43. Windshield wipers required.
In case it is raining or snowing, and a vehicle is traveling at a speed
exceeding 10 miles per hour, the driver thereof must not have a windshield
or other obstruction on said vehicle extending to or above the line of his
vision, unless kept clean by a proper cleaning device.
§ 54-44. Gongs on unauthorized vehicles prohibited.
A gong similar to that used on ambulances or police and fire vehicles must
not be placed or used on any other vehicle.
§ 54-45. Loaded vehicles: noise prevention and safety precautions.
A vehicle must not be driven through the streets loaded with iron or other
material that may strike together without properly deadening such material
so that it will not cause any unnecessary noise. A vehicle shall not be driven
loaded with lumber, gas pipes, iron bars or other materials, extending more
than six feet in the rear of said vehicle, unless the driver shall display upon
the rear of said vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a red light during the
nighttime and a red flag during the day.
§ 54-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-45
1:399

ARTICLE IX
Applicability; Violations and Penalties
§ 54-46. Applicability.
This part applies to all public streets, highways, alleys and places of the
Village of Brockport.
§ 54-47. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-13-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
Except where a special penalty is otherwise provided herein, any person
who violates the provisions of this part shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be subject to the performance of community service and/or a fine of not less
than $50 and a maximum fine not exceeding $250.
§ 54-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-47
1:401

Part 2
[TArdaoffipct eRde6st-r2i-c1t9io4n1s]
ARTICLE X
Main Artery Streets
§ 54-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLES — Shall include all vehicles propelled by any power, including
muscular power, and specifically shall include motor vehicles, trucks, horsedrawn
vehicles and bicycles.
§ 54-49. Streets designated.
The following public streets in the Village of Brockport, New York, are
hereby designated as main arteries of travel:
§ 54-50. Full stop required.
No person operating a vehicle approaching a main artery of travel shall
enter the same without coming to a full stop before entering such main
artery of travel, unless otherwise directed by a peace officer or a signal.
§ 54-51. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall forfeit and
pay to the Village of Brockport, New York, a penalty not less than $50 for
said violations.
A. Main Street, including North Main Street and South Main Street.
B. Park Avenue.
C. State Street.
D. Fayette Street.
E. Utica Street.
F. Adams Street.
G. Holley Street, excepting the Monroe Avenue intersection.
H. Monroe Avenue and the continuation of Holley Street from the forks
westerly, hereby designated as a main artery of travel from Main Street,
and continuing an unbroken artery through Holley Street to the Village
boundary line on Holley Street.
I. East Avenue at Fayette Street.
§ 54-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-52
1:403
§ 54-52. Publication; when effective.
This article shall be entered in the minutes of the proceedings of the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport and published in the Brockport
Republic-Democrat, the official paper of the Village of Brockport, on June
5, 1941, and a printed copy thereof posted conspicuously in at least three
public places in said Village upon the date of publication thereof, and this
article shall take effect 11 days after such posting and publication.
§ 54-53. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances conflict with the foregoing
article.
§ 54-52 BROCKPORT CODE § 54-53
1:404
ARTICLE XI
Turning Restrictions
[Added 7-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-199950]
§ 54-54. Restrictions designated.
These designated intersections in the Village of Brockport, New York, have
the following turn restrictions:
§ 54-55. through § 54-59. (Reserved)
A. Intersection of Main Street and Centennial Avenue: no left turn from
Centennial Avenue north on to Main Street.
50.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Vehicular Traffic on Fair Street, adopted 7-15-1940, as
amended, was repealed 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998.
§ 54-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-55
1:405

ARTICLE XII
Vehicular Traffic on Water Street
[Added 11-21-1949]
§ 54-60. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLES — Includes all vehicles propelled by any power, including
muscular power, and specifically shall include motor vehicles, trucks, horsedrawn
vehicles and bicycles.
§ 54-61. One-way traffic.
No person shall operate a vehicle on Water Street westerly to Main Street in
the Village of Brockport, New York, or northerly from Market Street on said
Water Street in said Village; it being the purpose and intent of this article
to permit the vehicles to enter said Water Street from Main Street only and
to prohibit all vehicles from entering said Water Street from Market Street
and specifically to prohibit all vehicles from moving along said Water Street
in the direction toward Main Street.
§ 54-62. Penalties for offenses.
§ 54-63. Publication; when effective.
This article shall be entered in the minutes of the proceedings of the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport and published in the Brockport
Republic-Democrat, the official paper of the Village of Brockport, New York,
on November 24, 1949, and a printed copy thereof posted conspicuously
in at least three public places in said Village upon the date of publication
thereof, and this article shall take effect 11 days after such posting.
§ 54-64. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances conflict with the foregoing
article.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall forfeit
and pay to the Village of Brockport a penalty not to exceed $50 for each
and every offense, to be recovered with the cost of suit.
B. In addition to the penalty above described, it is hereby ordained that
each and every violation of this article constitutes disorderly conduct,
and the person violating the same shall be a disorderly person and shall
be liable to a penalty of not to exceed $50 for each and every violation
thereof, and in case of default in payment of such penalty, the defendant
shall be committed to the Monroe County Penitentiary for a term not to
exceed one day for each dollar of the penalty.
§ 54-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-64
1:407

ARTICLE XIII
Speed Limit; Union Street Traffic
[Added 8-20-1951]
§ 54-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLES — Shall include all vehicles propelled by any power, including
muscular power, and specifically shall include motor vehicles, trucks, horsedrawn
vehicles and bicycles.
§ 54-66. Speed limit; exception.51 [Amended 3-2-1953; 5-2-1957]
No person shall operate a vehicle upon any public street within the Village
of Brockport at a rate of speed exceeding 30 miles per hour, except that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to West Avenue; Route 31; State
Highway 5425, between the intersection of the westerly Village line with
the northerly Village line at Station 106 + 37 on State Highway 5425 and a
point 1,963 feet easterly from that intersection, said point being at Station
126 + 00 on State Highway 5425.
§ 54-67. One-way traffic on Union Street.
Union Street in the Village of Brockport is hereby designated a one-way
street, and vehicular traffic thereon shall move in an easterly direction only.
§ 54-68. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall forfeit and
pay to the Village of Brockport a penalty not less than $50 for each and
every offense.
§ 54-69. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances conflict with the foregoing
article.
§ 54-70. Effective date.
This article shall take effect September 10, 1951.
51.Editor's Note: See also Part I of this chapter, § 54-32, for speed limit while turning
corners.
§ 54-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-70
1:409

ARTICLE XIV
Traffic-Control Signals
§ 54-71. Interpretation of signals.
Whenever traffic controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different
colored lights successively or with arrows, the following colors only shall
be used, and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and,
except where superseded by pedestrian control signals, shall also apply to
pedestrians, as follows:
A. Green alone:
(1) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may proceed straight through
or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such
turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Steady yellow alone:
(1) Vehicular traffic facing such signal is thereby warned that the red
signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red
signal is exhibited.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway.
C. (Reserved)52
D. Steady red alone:
(1) Vehicular traffic facing such signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an
indication to proceed is shown.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway.
E. Steady red with green arrow, steady yellow with green arrow, or green
arrow alone:
(1) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow,
but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding a dark period or red-green combined, was
repealed 3-16-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1998.
§ 54-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-71
1:411
§ 54-72. Signs.
Vehicular traffic shall obey signs requiring obedience to traffic-control
signals at intersections other than those at which such signals are located.
No intersection not controlled by such signs prior to the effective date
of this article shall hereafter be made subject to such method of control,
and no ordinance, order, rule or regulation requiring such obedience shall
hereafter be adopted.
§ 54-73. Signals other than at intersections.
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at
a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable, except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
§ 54-74. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS — Such control signals as are erected under
order of the State Traffic Commission or the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Brockport, New York.
§ 54-75. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to those
penalties prescribed in Sections 4 and 5 of the Main Artery Street
Ordinance, dated June 2, 1941,53 prescribing the penalties for the violation
thereof, it being the intent to make the penalties identical.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
53.Editor's Note: See Art. X of this part of this chapter, § 54-51, for penalty provisions.
§ 54-71 BROCKPORT CODE § 54-75
1:412
ARTICLE XV
One-Way Traffic54
[Added 9-8-1969]
§ 54-76. One-way streets.
§ 54-77. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-16-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998.]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall forfeit and
pay to the Village of Brockport a sum not less than $50 for each and every
offense.
§ 54-78. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the foregoing are
hereby repealed insofar as such ordinances conflict with the foregoing
article.
§ 54-79. Effective date.
This article shall take effect October 15, 1969, or 10 days after publication,
whichever shall occur first.
A. King Street in the Village of Brockport is hereby designated a one-way
street with traffic running in a westerly direction from Main Street to
Union Street.
B. Queen Street in the Village of Brockport is hereby designated a one-way
street with traffic running in a southerly direction from King Street to
Erie Street.
C. Queen Street in the Village of Brockport is hereby designated a one-way
street with traffic running in a northerly direction from King Street to
Clinton Street.
D. Lincoln Street in the Village of Brockport is hereby designated a oneway
street with traffic running in a northerly direction from Erie Street
to King Street.
54.Editor's Note: See also §§ 54-61 and 54-67 of this chapter.
§ 54-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-79
1:413
Chapter 55
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 5.
Firearms, fireworks and explosives — See Ch.
18.
Fire alarm systems — See Ch. 19A.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 35.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
§ 55-1. Intent; policy; construal of provisions.
The making and creating of disturbing, excessive or offensive noises within
the jurisdictional limits of the Village of Brockport is a condition which
has persisted, and the level and frequency of occurrences of such noises
continues to increase. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Brockport to prevent any unreasonable, loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise. These noise levels are a detriment to the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Village of Brockport. Every resident is entitled to an environment in
which disturbing, excessive or offensive noise is not detrimental to his or
her life, health or enjoyment of his or her property. The chapter is to be
construed liberally, but it is not intended to be construed so as to discourage
the enjoyment by residents of normal, reasonable and usual activities.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association or corporation, whether such
person is the owner, lessee or charter member, its servants, agents or
employees and/or their guests.
SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS — Any radio device or apparatus or
any device or apparatus for the amplification of sounds from any radio,
phonograph or other sound-making or sound-producing device or any
device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human
voice or other sounds.
TO USE OR OPERATE ANY SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS IN, ON, NEAR
OR ADJACENT TO ANY PUBLIC STREET, PARK OR PLACE — To use or
operate or cause to be used or operated any sound device or apparatus
in front of or outside any building, place or premises or in or through any
window, doorway or opening of such building, place or premises abutting on
or adjacent to any public street, park or place where the sounds therefrom
may be heard upon any public street, park or place, or from any stand,
platform or other structure, or from any airplane or other device used for
flying, flying over the Village, or in any boat or on the waters within the
§ 54-79 BROCKPORT CODE § 55-2
1:414
jurisdiction of the Village, or anywhere on or in the public streets, parks or
places.
UNNECESSARY — That which is not required by usual circumstances.
USUAL — The normal noise range for a particular type of vehicle or
mechanism.
§ 55-3. Prohibited noises and acts.
A. No person with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm or recklessly creating a risk thereof shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit to be made unreasonable noise. For the purpose of this chapter,
"unreasonable noise" is any disturbing, excessive or offensive sound
that disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
B. The following acts among others by any person are declared to be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. This enumeration shall not
be deemed exclusive.
(1) Any unnecessary noise from any sources which are of such
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or
health of any individual or contrary to the public welfare, especially
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(2) Noise from a dog or other pet/animal that is continuously
disturbing the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity and
exceeds 15 minutes.
(3) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair or
so loaded or operated in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary noise; the making of improper noise or disturbance or
operating an automobile or motorcycle in such a manner as to
cause excessive squealing or other excessive noise of the tires.
(4) Noise from a burglar alarm or other alarm system of any building,
motor vehicle or boat which is continuous and exceeds 15 minutes.
(5) Noise from any sound-reproduction system operating or playing
any radio, portable radio, tape player, television, tape deck or
similar device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner
as to be heard 40 feet from its source or over any property line.
(6) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair,
of any building other than between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except
in case of a public safety or emergency.
(7) The operation of power equipment in residential zones outdoors
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day and
on weekends between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 55-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:415
§ 55-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following acts:
§ 55-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-13-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002; 11-16-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment
not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 56
WATER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 42.
§ 56-1. Rules and regulations.
Rates, rules and regulations shall be established by the Board of Water
Commissioners, Village of Brockport.
(8) The sounding of any horn or signaling device of an automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle for any unnecessary or unreasonable
period of time.
(9) Offering for sale anything by shouting or outcrying upon the public.
The use and operation of sound devices and apparatus for
commercial or business advertising purposes are prohibited. It
should be unlawful for any person to use or operate or cause to be
used or operated any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or
adjacent to any public street, park or place for commercial or
business advertising purposes.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
B. Noise from Village-sponsored celebrations or events.
C. Noise from individually sponsored events which have been authorized
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Brockport.
D. The operation or use of any organ, radio, bell chimes or other
instrument, apparatus or device by any church, synagogue or school
licensed or chartered by the State of New York.
E. Noise generated by the installation and maintenance of utilities.
§ 55-3 BROCKPORT CODE § 56-2
1:416
§ 56-2. When effective.
Local Law No. 6 of the year 1983 shall become effective upon filing with the
Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 58
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCE
Animals — See Ch. 5.
Berms, fences, hedges and screen
plantings — See Ch. 6.
Building Construction Code — See Ch. 10.
Building construction administration — See
Ch. 11.
Driveways — See Ch. 16.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 26.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 27.
Minimum Housing and Buildings Code — See
Ch. 36.
Sewer use — See Ch. 42.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 43.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 45.
Trees and vegetation — See Ch. 46.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 51.
Noise — See Ch. 55.
Water use — See Ch. 56.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 59.
§ 56-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-2
1:417

ARTICLE I
Title and Definitions
§ 58-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "1959 Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Brockport."
§ 58-2. Word usage; definitions.
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense
include the future tense; the singular shall include the plural; the word
"lot" includes "plot" and "parcel"; the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; "occupied" or
"used" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
ACCESSORY — When used to modify buildings, structures or uses, those
buildings, structures or uses customarily incidental to and on the same lot
with the permitted use.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building containing more than two dwelling units
with not more than six lodgers or boarders per family, but not more than 20
individuals.[Added 11-19-1973]
AUTO COURT — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or
in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, designed
primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing accessory offstreet
parking facilities. A restaurant, tea room or similar establishment
located on the same premises as an "auto court" shall be considered as
an accessory use. The term "auto court" includes facilities designated as
tourist courts, motor lodges, motels and similar uses.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
height above the level of the adjoining ground.[Added 3-29-1965]
BOARDINGHOUSE, FURNISHED-ROOM HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE and
TOURIST HOME — A multiple dwelling in which there are fewer than
30 sleeping rooms, occupied primarily by individuals whose permanent
residency is without the Village of Brockport, transients or otherwise
temporary residents, in which there are provided services incidental to
its use as a temporary residence. Said services may include the providing
of meals or kitchen facilities, but the provision of said services is not
mandatory for purposes of this definition.[Amended 11-19-1973]
BOUNDARY LINE FENCE — A barrier of wood, metal, transite, fabricated
materials or natural vegetative growth maintained on or without two feet of
a property boundary line.
BUILDING — Any structure other than a boundary fence or boundary wall.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:419
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the lot line or to the major portion
thereof, transecting that point in the building face which is closest to such
lot line. The building face includes sun parlors, breezeways and porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps, patios and
terraces. Where the overhang of a roof is greater than two feet measured
from the face of the building, the "building line" shall be established as the
eave of the building. The "building line" of any accessory building shall be
the eave line.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
height below the level of the adjoining ground.[Added 3-29-1965]
CONVERSION (CHANGE IN CLASSIFICATION) — A change from
nondwelling or private dwelling use to multiple dwelling or mixed
occupancy.[Added 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
DOG KENNEL — A structure used for the harboring of more than three dogs
that are more than six months old.55
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A dwelling used or designed for uses as defined
as a multiple dwelling in the New York State Multiple Residence Law.56
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied by two
families living independently of each other.[Amended 12-7-1970]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or
more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.[Added 11-19-1973]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING — The use of an electric vehicle charging
station by which electric vehicles are fueled through the transfer of
electricity into the vehicle battery.[Added9-19-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION — A system for the charging
of an electric vehicle. Components typically include a charging kiosk and
transformer.[Added9-19-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of the owner or operator of such
premises.[Added 11-19-1973]
FAMILY — [Amended 12-7-1970; 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
Includes.
(1) One, two or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
A.
55.Editor's Note: The definitions of "dwelling" and of "dwelling, one-family," as amended,
which followed in this section, were repealed 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995.
56.Editor's Note: See Chapter 61-B of the Consolidated Laws, Article I, § 4, Subdivision 33.
§ 58-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-2
1:420
FILLING STATION, PUBLIC GASOLINE — Any area of land, including any
structure or structures thereon, that is or are used or designed to be
used for the supply of gasoline or oil for the propulsion of vehicles. For
the purpose of this chapter, there shall also be deemed to be included
within this term any area or structure used or designed to be used for
polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning
or servicing such motor vehicles.
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together
as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
(2)
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a
single dwelling unit who are not related by blood, marriage or legal
adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
B.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure and
function resembles a traditional family unit.
(1)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the
various occupants act as separate roomers may not be deemed to
be occupied by the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
(2)
The group shares expenses for food, rent or ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses.
(3)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing
in the household who are enrolled in a local school.
(a)
Members of the household having the same address for the
purposes of voter registration, driver's license, motor vehicle
registration and filing of taxes.
(b)
(c) Members of the household are employed in the area.
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more, whether in the current dwelling unit or other dwelling
units.
(d)
Common ownership of the furniture and appliances among the
members of the household.
(e)
(f) The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
(4)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is
the functional equivalent of a family.
(5)
C.
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:421
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings.
GROUND FLOOR AREA — The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
HOME — See "unit, single-family dwelling."58[Added 4-17-1995 by L.L.
No. 3-1995]
In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall include:
(1) Basement space.
(2) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of
seven feet six inches or more.
(3)
(4) Penthouses.
Attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been laid, providing
structural headroom of seven feet six inches or more.
(5)
(6) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
(7) Enclosed porches.
Accessory uses, not including space for accessory off-street
parking.
(8)
A.
However, the floor area of a building shall not include:
Cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing shall be
included for the purpose of calculating requirements for accessory
off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street loading berths.
(1)
Elevator and stair bulkheads, accessory water tanks and cooling
towers.
(2)
Floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural
headroom of less than seven feet six inches.
(3)
Attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been laid, providing
structural headroom of less than seven feet six inches.
(4)
(5) Uncovered steps.
(6) Terraces, breezeways and open spaces.57
B.
57.Editor's Note: The definition of "garden apartments," added 3-29-1965, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-20-1971.
58.Editor's Note: The definition of "home occupation," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-12-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978.
§ 58-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-2
1:422
HOUSE TRAILER, TRAILER CAMP, CAMP UNIT — The definitions of the
terms "house trailer," "trailer camp" and "camp unit" shall be those
definitions as given in Chapter 51, Trailers and Trailer Camps, of the Code
of the Village of Brockport.
JUNKYARD — A lot or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the
collection, storage and sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded materials, or for the collection, dismantling, storage
and salvaging or abandonment of machinery or vehicles not in operating
condition and for the sale of parts thereof.
NONCONFORMING USE — A building, structure or use of land existing at
the time of enactment of this chapter and which does not conform to the
regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated.
OVERNIGHT GUEST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for use by transient guests for
compensation.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space other than a one-lane driveway
available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having an area of not
less than 200 square feet and a width of not less than nine feet exclusive of
passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto, and giving access thereto
and having direct access to a street or an alley.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS — Areas of land five acres or more
in size on which it is proposed to erect at least three buildings and general
development by one owner without subdivision of ownership. Such districts
are designated by amendment of this chapter by the Board of Trustees to
add such area as districts.[Added 1-3-1971]
RAISED RANCH HOUSE — A single-family dwelling having two principal
floors, one above ground level and one below ground level. The entrance
vestibule is at ground level.59[Added 3-29-1965]
STREET GRADE — The established grade of the street upon which the lot
fronts, the grade being the grade as established by the Village.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. For the
purposes of this chapter, where the street line is not readily determinable,
the street line shall be that line as shall be established by the
Superintendent of the Street Department of the Village.
TERRACE or PATIO — An area adjacent to a dwelling, open to the sky, and
may extend into a required yard, and elevated not more than 18 inches
above average ground grade.
UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
by one family.[Added 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used, they shall mean that such maintenance
59.Editor's Note: The definition of "rooming house," added 12-7-1970, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 11-19-1973.
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:423
and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.[Added
11-19-1973]
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky.
YARD, FRONT — That area of the lot extending across the entire front of the
lot, bounded by the street line and the front building line between the two
side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — That area of the lot extending across the entire rear of the
lot, bounded by the rear lot line and the rear building line and between the
two side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — That area of the lot between the side building line and its
related side lot line and between the front yard and rear yard.
§ 58-3. State Building Code standards adopted.
Construction of all buildings within the Village of Brockport shall meet the
minimum standards of the New York State Building Codes.60
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Building Construction Code.
§ 58-2 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-3
1:424
ARTICLE II
Districts Established
§ 58-4. Districts. [Amended 1-3-1971; 11-19-1973; 5-7-1984 by L.L.
No. 1-1984; 1-16-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; 10-1-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Brockport is hereby divided
into or overlaid by the following districts, which are sometimes referred to
in this chapter by the abbreviations indicated:
Districts Established Abbreviations
O Residential Use District O District
B Business Use District B District
LI Limited Industrial Use District LI District
I Industrial Use District I District
Q Planned Development District Q District
HO Historic Overlay District HO District
§ 58-5. Zoning Map; district boundaries. [Last amended 10-1-2007
by L.L. No. 3-2007]
The boundaries of the use districts shall be as shown on the map, and every
section thereof attached to and made a part of this chapter, entitled Official
Zoning Map of the Village of Brockport, Monroe County, New York.61 The
boundaries between use districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either
along the boundary lines of various properties, lots or the center lines of
streets, railroad rights-of-way, public lands or a specified physical feature,
or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto. Where figures are shown
on the Zoning Map between a street line, railroad rights-of-way, public
lands or a specified physical feature and a district boundary line, they
shall take precedence. When the location of a use district boundary line is
not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the map
measured from a given line where the street layout, railroad rights-of-way,
public lands or a specified physical feature actually on the ground varies
from the street or physical feature layouts as shown on the Zoning Map.
The designations shown on the Map shall be applied in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular area in
question.
§ 58-6. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-29-1965; 5-21-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
All land in the Village of Brockport shall fall within one of the established
land use control districts as shown on a map titled "Zoning Map Village
of Brockport, Monroe County, New York," adopted December 21, 1959, as
61.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 58-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-6
1:425
amended, hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map," said map being filed
in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Brockport.
§ 58-6 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-6
1:426
ARTICLE III
Regulations
§ 58-7. Public properties and public utilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the construction, use or maintenance
of public or municipal buildings, structures or facilities, parks or other
publicly owned properties, except the sewage disposal plant, in any district,
nor the installation, maintenance and operation of such public utilities and
facilities as may be essential to the servicing of any district or area in which
it is located; however, the permit for such construction must be approved by
the Board of Appeals after public hearing upon due notice.
§ 58-8. Application.
A. Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) Site plan and building approval by the Planning Board is required
for all land use and/or development within the Village of Brockport,
including but not limited to expansion, reorientation, reduction
and/or alteration of off-street parking areas and driveways in
accordance with § 58-22B and Chapter 16, Driveways, § 16-8.
[Added 12-16-1968; amended 12-20-1971; 1-19-1987 by L.L.
No. 2-1987; 10-19-1987 by L.L. No. 6-1987; 10-21-1991 by
L.L. No. 4-1991; 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995; 12-16-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
(2) No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, altered
or placed unless in conformity with the regulations for the district
in which it is located and until a permit therefor shall have been
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) No building or structure shall exceed the height, accommodate or
house a greater number of families, occupy a greater percent of lot
area or have narrower or smaller front, side or rear yards than
specified herein for the district in which such building, structure or
use is located.
(4) No part of a yard or other open space required about any building
or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space
similarly required for another building or structure. There shall be
but one principal use of any one lot.
(5) Unless otherwise regulated, accessory structures and garages
which are necessary to a residential use and located in a side yard
shall meet the same front and side yard requirements as
established for the principal building, and accessory buildings and
structures entirely within the rear yard shall be placed not less
than three feet from a side lot line or from a rear lot line, except
§ 58-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-8
1:427
that a structure which is accessory to a dwelling erected and
occupied prior to the date of the enactment of this chapter may be
placed in the rear 30 feet of the lot, not less than one foot from the
side lot line. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
(6) When a lot in a B District or in an I District abuts a lot in the O
District or in the T District,62 there shall be provided in such B
District or I District lot a yard or open space abutting the
residential use district lot of not less than equal to the height of the
business or industrial building wall nearest the residential lot line.
[Amended 11-19-1973]
(7) Two or more abandoned, disabled, dismantled or partly dismantled
vehicles allowed to remain on any premises for a period of more
than 30 days; the storage, sale or abandonment of wastepaper,
rags, scrap metal, discarded materials; or the collecting,
dismantling, storage, salvaging or abandonment of machinery or
vehicles not in operating condition shall constitute a junkyard and
is a violation of this chapter, except when located in the I District
and in compliance with the provisions for the Industrial District.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(8) Used building materials which have been salvaged for use in the
construction of another building shall not be stored other than in
the I District, except when intended for use in the erection of a
building or structure on any premises for which a building permit
has been issued. [Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(9) In any district, it shall be unlawful to occupy, for sleeping purposes
or for public assembly purposes, all or any part of a one-story
structure, the floor of which is below the required yard elevation.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(10) Where two or more adjacent parcels of land are, at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, in the same ownership, they shall for the
purposes of this chapter be considered as a single lot. [Amended
5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(11) In any district, whenever a vacant lot in the same ownership as an
abutting lot or a lot fronting on the same street opposite from a lot
which is occupied at the date of the enactment of this chapter by a
legal nonconforming use and there is need for off-street parking
area for vehicles of potential clients and employees of said
nonconforming use, the Board of Appeals, after public hearing, may
authorize the granting of a permit or the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the use of such vacant lot for off-street parking, in
accordance with a plot plan and statement of establishment and
maintenance as submitted by the applicant and as may be approved
62.Editor's Note: T Residential Use Districts (T Districts) were repealed 5-7-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984.
§ 58-8 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-8
1:428
or as may be modified and approved by the Board of Appeals.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984]
(12) In any O District, it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain outdoor
advertising signs or billboards, except those business and
professional announcement signs as may herein be permitted.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984,]
(13) In any O or B District, the placing, location or use of house trailers,
mobile homes or other vehicles or of similar structures as dwellings
is prohibited. Such vehicles and structures may be established in
Industrial Use Districts in conformity with the provisions of the
house trailer regulations of the Village of Brockport63 and pertinent
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 11-19-1973; 5-7-1984 by
L.L. No. 1-1984]
(14) In any district, it shall be unlawful to establish or maintain a private
dump, a waste disposal area or a facility for the depositing, burying
or otherwise disposing of or treatment of animal, vegetable,
mineral, chemical or radioactive waste materials. Incineration of
combustible materials is permitted pursuant to appropriate Village
fire regulations and laws. This prohibition shall not apply to the
composting of manure from domestic animals or fowls and
vegetative plants for the purpose of agricultural soil improvement.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(15) Any parcels of land which are split by two or more different types of
zoning within a specific parcel of land (tax account number) as of
the effective date of this amendment shall, for the purposes of
zoning, carry the zoning classification of whichever type of zoning
covers the majority of the area within that parcel. [Added
12-4-1978 by L.L. No. 9-1978; amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984]
(16) All work related to a total rehabilitation of any facade on Main
Street between the New York State Canal and State Street and Erie
Street and on Market Street from Main Street to Water Street shall
require continuation of the theme of the 1979 through 1984
Community Development Facade Program and shall require Village
Planning Board approval. [Added 9-4-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
(17) A variance is not required wherein a structure complies with all
setback regulations on an existing tape location map and
discrepancies are shown on a new instrument survey for said
structure, provided that the discrepancy does not exceed 12 inches.
Any such violation is waived by the Village of Brockport. [Added
3-4-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Trailers and Trailer Camps.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-8
1:429
(18) At no time shall there be parked or stored at any premises,
driveway or yard more than one unlicensed vehicle. Any vehicle
remaining on a premises longer than 10 days after the owner has
been notified by certified mail to remove such vehicle shall be
towed by orders of the Village of Brockport at the owner's expense.
[Added 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
(19) Display of house numbers. [Added 12-1-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997]
(a) All principal structures located within any residential,
commercial or industrial zoning district shall have or display at
least one set of street numbers assigned to it. Numbers must
be prominently displayed on the front of said structure and in
no case shall script design be permitted.
(b) In the case where the principal structure is not clearly visible
from the street or more than 75 feet from the edge of the road
right-of-way, a post with the property numbers displayed upon
it, not to exceed five feet in height, shall be installed in close
proximity to the property access no less than five feet nor more
than 25 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way. All
numbers must be visible from the street away from shrubs,
fence and trees.
(c) All numbers shall be Arabic in design only, with a minimum of
five inches in height and shall sharply contrast in color from
the structure.
(d) In the case of new construction, no temporary or final
certificate of occupancy will be issued until the Building
Department verifies that such street numbers have been
properly installed. Furthermore, no inspection for new
construction will be provided until the developer installs the lot
number in a prominent location on the site prior to
construction.
(e) The absence of address numbers, or the insecure fastening or
absence of any whole number thereof, or the use of any
number not properly assigned by the Village, or its failure to
meet visibility requirements, shall be considered to be in
violation of this chapter.
(f) Any structure having street numbers that are Arabic in design,
logical in sequence, within the distance required, a minimum
of four inches in height and of contrasting colors as of the
effective date of this section shall be deemed to be in
substantial compliance with this section.
(g) Address numbers on mailboxes are not acceptable as a
substitute for above regulations.
§ 58-8 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-8
1:430

B. Area of dwelling; room size. Multiple dwellings, two-family dwellings or
rooming houses shall have a living space allocated per bedroom to a
single roomer or lodger of not less than 80 square feet, and for each
additional roomer or lodger occupying the same room, an additional 80
square feet shall be allocated. One toilet and bath shall be allocated for
six persons residing in said dwelling. [Added 2-3-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; amended 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]

§ 58-9. O Residential Use District (O Districts).
The following regulations shall apply in the O Residential Use District.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Churches and similar places of worship, convents and parish
houses.
(3) Public parks, playgrounds and similar recreational areas.
(4) Public and parochial schools at all educational levels, public
libraries and other municipal building and uses.
(5) Home occupations. [Amended 6-12-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978]
(a) An occupation may be conducted in a dwelling, provided that:
[1] No person other than members of the family residing on
the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
[2] Any and all home occupations shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to the area of the dwelling unit used for
residential purposes by the residents thereof, and the total
floor area of any and all home occupations shall not exceed
25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit. [Amended
9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
[3] There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
buildings or premises or other visible evidence of the
conduct of such home occupation.
[4] There shall be no exterior display or indication of the use
other than a specifically permitted sign.
[5] No home occupation shall be extended into an accessory
building.
[6] No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
be provided by an off-street area located other than in a
required front yard.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-9
1:431
[7] No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation, which equipment or process creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses of persons off the lot if the
occupation is conducted in a single-family residence or
outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a
single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference with any radio or
television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuation
in the line voltage off the premises.
[8] Any type of business or stage of manufacturing or
repairing of any items whether or not the sale of same
takes place in the home shall require a home occupancy
permit. [Added 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(b) Any person desiring to carry on a home occupation must obtain
a special conditional use permit. This permit may be granted
by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[1] In order to grant any conditional use, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall find that the establishment, maintenance or
operation of the use applied for will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the
health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be
injurious to the property and improvements in the
neighborhood or to the general welfare of the Village.
[2] The conditional use permit shall be void if the use shall
cease for more than six months for any reason.64
[3] The Zoning Board of Appeals, on its own motion, may
revoke any conditional use permit for noncompliance with
conditions set forth above.
[4] Information to be included on the permit shall be as
follows:
[a] Name, address and telephone number.
[b] Location and size of use.
[c] Nature and intensity of the operations involved in or
conducted in connection with it.
[d] Number of persons to be involved in occupation.
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(5)(b)[2], which dealt with granting of the original
permit and reapplication thereafter, was repealed 10-19-1987 by L.L. No. 6-1987. This
local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection A(5)(b)[3], [4] and [5]
as [2], [3] and [4].
§ 58-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-9
1:432
[e] Safety restrictions.
(6) Farms and gardens.
(7) Accessory buildings and uses which usually accompany and are a
part of a permitted use.
(8) Garages for storage of autos ordinarily used by occupants of the
dwelling, not to exceed a two-auto capacity.
(9) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Added 9-10-1990 by L.L. No.
1-1990]
(a) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A residential
dwelling that makes available a room or rooms for overnight
accommodations to transient paying guests, with or without
inclusion of one daily morning meal per paying guest as part of
the accommodations provided.
(b) Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall be permitted as a
home occupation as per § 58-9A(5) in the O Residential Use
District, subject to the issuance of a special conditional use
permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals and to the following
conditions and limitations listed below and any special
conditions the Zoning Board of Appeals feels appropriate:
[1] The applicant for a special permit shall submit to the
Zoning Board of Appeals such plans of the structure and
layout of the residence as the Zoning Board of Appeals
deems necessary to assure that the bed-and-breakfast
usage complies with this section.
[2] The applicant shall be the owner of the premises and a fulltime
resident of the premises.
[3] No more than nine guests per night shall be permitted in
any bed-and-breakfast establishment, and the Zoning
Board of Appeals may fix a lower maximum in the permit.
No paying guest shall stay on any one visit for more than
15 days.
[4] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall have a minimum of three off-street
parking spaces, and no permit shall be issued if a variance
for off-street parking has been granted within five years of
the date of the application for the special permit.
[5] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall not contain an accessory apartment.
§ 58-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-9
1:433
[6] The only meals to be furnished shall be one daily morning
meal per paying guest.
[7] Any new owner of the residence in which a bed-andbreakfast
establishment is operated must apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a special permit to continue a
bed-and-breakfast use.
[8] Any applicant, after receiving a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals, shall obtain a certificate of
occupancy from the Building Inspector prior to operating a
bed-and-breakfast, which shall be valid for 12 months, at
which time a new certificate of occupancy will be required
at a fee of $50.
[9] No permit shall be granted for a bed-and-breakfast if a
bed-and-breakfast exists or a permit has been issued for a
bed-and-breakfast within 500 feet from the property for
which a new permit is requested.
(c) Conditions for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
[1] Exterior.
[a] No overgrown plantings.
[b] No peeling paint or missing siding.
[c] Parking area to be maintained.
[2] Interior.
[a] Local fire alarm.
[b] Emergency lighting.
[c] All electrical, plumbing, heating and interior finishes
shall meet with the Building Inspector's satisfaction.
B. (Reserved)65
C. Building height limit. No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
D. Minimum lot width 85 feet, minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
E. Percentage of lot coverage. One-family dwellings and their accessory
structures shall not cover more than 30% of the lot area. Not more than
one dwelling shall be erected, placed or occupied on one lot.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Permitted uses conditional, was repealed 6-12-1978
by L.L. No. 4-1978.
§ 58-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-9
1:434
F. Yards. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be
provided for all buildings, structures and uses:
(1) There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth;
however, the front setback in any event shall not be less than the
average front setback established by existing residences on the
same street, to be determined by an average of the setbacks within
200 feet of said lot. [Amended 8-7-1961]
(2) There shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet in depth.
(3) There shall be two side yards, both of which shall be not less than
10 feet in width. [Amended 7-7-1969]
(4) Where a lot has, at the time of the enactment of this chapter, a
width of less than 85 feet, the side yard requirements shall be
modified in proportion of the lot width to the required lot width, so
that one side yard shall have a width of not less than four feet and
the other side yard shall have a width of not less than 11 feet.
(5) For corner lots, there shall be a yard of not less than 30 feet in
width along the side lot line adjacent to the side street and
extending from the front line of the lot to the rear line of the lot.
(6) Where yards have been established to greater or lesser depths or
widths than required by this chapter within 200 feet of the
premises for which a building permit is filed, the Board of Appeals
may vary the yard depth and width requirements so as to be in
harmony with the character of the development of the
neighborhood.
G. Motor vehicles parking and storage. [Amended 11-19-197366]
(1) When at the time of application for a building permit to erect a
dwelling it is determined that the size or location of the dwelling on
the lot is such that a garage could not be erected on the lot, within
the provisions of this chapter, a notation of this fact shall be made
on the building permit.
(2) At no time shall there be parked or stored at a dwelling's driveway
or yard more than two pickup trucks, one ton or less, or two vans,
one ton or less, or one such pickup truck and one such van. No
larger commercial or commercially used vehicles are permitted at
any time in a dwelling's driveway, yard or garage. [Added
4-18-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983; amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984]
(3) No disabled or partly disabled vehicles are permitted at any time,
except when housed within a closed garage or structure.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Subsection G(1), relating to required offstreet
parking spaces, and redesignated former Subsection G(2) as Subsection G(1). For
off-street parking regulations, see now § 58-22.
§ 58-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-9
1:435
§ 58-10. Electric Vehicle Charging Stations.68 [Added 9-19-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
[Amended 4-18-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983; 9-3-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985; 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
H. Small lots. Where undue hardship is imposed by these regulations,
applicable to the size, shape, frontage, area or topography of lots
having at the time of enactment of this chapter an area or width less
than required by this chapter, the Board of Appeals shall vary the
applications of these regulations to the extent necessary to permit
reasonable use of the premises so as to be consistent with the intent
and purpose of this chapter. Sixty-five-foot building lots and above shall
be permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon application; in those
areas of the Village where smaller lots are found, another smaller lot
would be consistent with the surrounding neighborhood. Such
permission shall be subject to whatever conditions the Zoning Board of
Appeals may deem appropriate to keep the new house in harmony with
the character of the development of the neighborhood wherein it is
located. [Amended 4-18-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983]
I. Area of dwelling: size of room. [Amended 3-29-1965; 5-7-1984 by
L.L. No. 1-1984]
(1) Dwellings shall have minimum floor areas as follows: one-story
ground floor, 1,100 square feet; two- or three-story: ground floor,
700 square feet; split level: 1,100 square feet aboveground; raised
ranch: 800 square feet aboveground. The area of porches and auto
garages shall not be included.67
A. Permit required. No person shall install an electric vehicle charging
station within the Village without a permit issued from the Building
Department. Charging station permits shall become invalid unless the
authorized installation is completed within six months. Upon
completion of an installation, the permittee must contact the Building
Inspector and arrange an inspection of the charging station with a third
party electrical inspector to ensure compliance with all federal, state,
and local laws. The application for a permit shall be as determined by
the Board of Trustees.
B. Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all electric
vehicle charging stations.
(1) All installations must comply with National Electrical Code, NFPA
70, Article 625.
67.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I(2), pertaining to living space, which immediately
followed this subsection, as amended, was repealed 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 58-10, T Residential Use Districts (T Districts), as amended, was
repealed 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984.
§ 58-9 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-10
1:436
§ 58-11. B Business Use District (B Districts). [Amended
12-20-1971]
The following regulations shall apply in the B Business Use District.
(2) All installations must comply with the New York State Existing
Building Code, New York State Fire Code, New York State
Plumbing Code, New York State Mechanical Code, New York State
Fuel Gas Code, and the New York State Energy Conservation
Construction Code.
(3) Any person installing a charging station must, prior to installation,
notify the utility providing electric power to the property.
(4) Each electric vehicle charging station shall include vehicle impact
protection (bollards) or a similar structure.
(5) Components for electric vehicle charging stations may encroach up
to 36 inches into a required setback or buffer.
(6) No more than one charging station may be installed on any parcel
except for the Business District, where two charging stations may
be installed on each parcel.
(7) Notwithstanding any district regulation to the contrary, electric
vehicle charging shall be a permitted accessory use in all zoning
districts.
C. Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to revocation of the charging station permit in additional to
the penalties provided In § 58-30 of the Code of the Village of
Brockport.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling unit subject to all applicable regulations as
defined in § 58-9. [Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984;
9-3-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985; 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995;
4-1-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
(2) Stores or shops for the conduct of retail or personal service
businesses. [Amended 11-4-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974; 5-6-1996
by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(3) Food processing when the products are for sale exclusively on the
premises.
(4) Dance halls, theaters, bowling alleys, billiard rooms, clubs, lodges
and similar places of recreation and hotels, motels, auto courts and
similar places of lodging. [Amended 11-4-1974 by L.L. No.
1-1974; 5-6-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
§ 58-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-11
1:437
(5) Bus stations, communication centers, banks and offices.
[Amended 7-7-1969; 11-4-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974]
(6) Mortuaries, hand laundries, personal service laundries.
(7) Commercial parking lots, small animal hospitals and animal clinics.
(8) Any use similar in character to those enumerated for which the
Board of Appeals may, in appropriate cases and after public
hearing, authorize the issuance of a permit.
(9) Accessory buildings and uses which usually accompany and are a
part of a permitted use.
(10) A building may be used for a combination of residential and
commercial uses, subject to the following: [Amended 4-17-1995
by L.L. No. 3-1995]
(a) No more than two single-family dwellings.
(b) Maximum square feet of unit: 800.
(c) Maximum number of bedrooms: two.
(d) At least 25% of the total building square footage shall be
allocated as commercial space. This space shall occupy the
first floor from the front of the building toward the rear.
[Amended 12-20-1999 by L.L. No. 7-1999]
(11) The Zoning Board of Appeals, after public hearing and subject to
conditions essential to the safety, health and general welfare of the
people of the Village, may authorize the granting of a special
permit for the establishment of membership clubs, lodges, social
and recreational centers and for the erection, alteration and use of
buildings, such as a hospital, convalescent home, home for the
aged, children's nursery, facilities for the developmentally
challenged and medical centers for the care and treatment of
humans, subject to the regulations of such agencies and
departments of the State of New York having jurisdiction relative to
the establishment and operation of such facilities and uses. Such
structures and uses shall also meet the requirements of any
applicable provision of the Multiple Residence Law and such rules
and regulations as may be established by the Village Board.
[Amended 6-12-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978; 5-7-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984; 5-6-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(12) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Added 5-1-1995 by L.L. No.
7-1995]
(a) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A residential
dwelling that makes available a room or rooms for overnight
§ 58-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-11
1:438
accommodations to transient paying guests, with or without
inclusion of one daily morning meal per paying guest as part of
the accommodations provided.
(b) Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall be permitted as a
home occupation as per § 58-9A(5) in the O Residential Use
District, subject to the issuance of a special conditional use
permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals and to the following
conditions and limitations listed below and any special
conditions the Zoning Board of Appeals feels appropriate:
[1] The applicant for a special permit shall submit to the
Zoning Board of Appeals such plans of the structure and
layout of the residence as the Zoning Board of Appeals
deems necessary to assure that the bed-and-breakfast
usage complies with this section.
[2] The applicant shall be the owner of the premises and a fulltime
resident of the premises.
[3] No more than nine guests per night shall be permitted in
any bed-and-breakfast establishment, and the Zoning
Board of Appeals may fix a lower maximum in the permit.
No paying guest shall stay on any one visit for more than
15 days.
[4] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall have a minimum of three off-street
parking spaces, and no permit shall be issued if a variance
for off-street parking has been granted within five years of
the date of the application for the special permit.
[5] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall not contain an accessory apartment.
[6] The only meals to be furnished shall be one daily morning
meal per paying guest.
[7] Any new owner of the residence in which a bed-andbreakfast
establishment is operated must apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a special permit to continue a
bed-and-breakfast use.
[8] Any applicant, after receiving a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals, shall obtain a certificate of
occupancy from the Building Inspector prior to operating a
bed-and-breakfast, which shall be valid for 12 months, at
which time a new certificate of occupancy will be required
at a fee of $50.
(c) Conditions for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
[1] Exterior.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-11
1:439
[a] No overgrown plantings.
[b] No peeling paint or missing siding.
[c] Parking area to be maintained.
[2] Interior.
[a] Local fire alarm.
(13) Restaurant, as defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law,
Article 1, § 3, Subdivision 27: "Restaurant shall mean a place which
is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the
serving of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable
kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for
cooking an assortment of foods, which may be required for
ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must, at all times, be in charge
of a chef with the necessary help, and kept in a sanitary condition
with the proper amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on said
premises and must comply with all the regulations of the local
department of health. 'Meals' shall mean the usual assortment of
foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day; the service of
such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall not be
deemed a compliance with this requirement. 'Guests' shall mean
persons who, during the hours when meals are regularly served
therein, come to a restaurant for the purpose of obtaining, and
actually order and obtain at such time, in good faith, a meal
therein. Nothing in this subdivision contained, however, shall be
construed to require that any food be sold or purchased with any
beverage." [Added 5-6-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(14) Bars, taverns, saloons and any other establishment whose primary
purpose is the retail sale of alcohol for consumption on the
premises. [Added 5-6-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(a) Such establishments shall not be located within:
[1] Three hundred feet of another establishment selling
alcohol for consumption on the premises.
[2] Three hundred feet of an O Residential District.
[3] A two-hundred-foot radius of any building occupied
exclusively as a school, church, synagogue or other place
of worship.
(b) The primary purpose shall be determined by the Planning
Board based on, but not limited to, information supplied by the
applicant.
B. Prohibited uses. [Added 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-199069]
§ 58-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-11
1:440
(1) All uses permitted in I Industrial Use Districts unless specifically
permitted in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Mini warehouses, also known as "self-service storage facilities."
(3) The first floor of any building located on Main Street between State
Street/Erie Street and the New York State Canal and on Market
Street between Main Street and the east boundary line of tax
account number 069.045-002.018 shall not be used for residential
purposes. [Added 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
(4) Two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings. [Added 4-17-1995
by L.L. No. 3-1995]
C. Building height. No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
[Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1984; 9-10-1990 by L.L. No.
1-1990]
D. (Reserved)70
E. Yards required. Buildings shall be set back at least 47 feet from the
center of Main Street and State Street or 40 feet from the center line of
any other street within a B District, at least 11 feet from the rear line,
and need have no side yard if the rear portion of the building is
accessible by alley, street or driveway for motor vehicle delivery and
pickup. If such access is not available, a side yard or driveway of at least
11 feet in width should be furnished. [Amended 9-10-1990 by L.L.
No. 1-1990]
F. Sidewalk cafes. [Added 5-6-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(1) Definition. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK CAFE — Those exterior facilities adjacent to and part
of establishments selling food and/or drink that require the use
of some Village-owned property for operation, are temporary in
nature and are open to the elements, except for original awnings.
Sidewalk cafes, upon approval of the Village Board of Trustees,
may be located in the Central Business District of the Village, which
district consists of Main Street from the Canal Bridge south to
Holley Street.
(2) Permit required; restrictions.
(a) No sidewalk or outdoor cafe shall be allowed to operate in any
outdoor area unless a permit has been obtained from the
Village Clerk and permission has been granted by the Village
Board of Trustees.
69.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsections B through D of this
section as Subsections C through E.
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Density, as amended, was repealed 4-17-1995 by L.L.
No. 3-1995.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-11
1:441
(b) Any request for a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be
made, in writing, to the Village Board of Trustees.
(3) Application for permit. The written request/application may, at the
Village Board of Trustees' discretion, contain the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant/
business to be the subject of the application.
(c) The days and hours for which the permit is requested.
(d) The number and type of tables and chairs desired for this area
and a rendering of positions of tables relative to entrances,
exits and the sidewalk.
(e) A description of the facilities and equipment to be used,
including whether live or mechanically reproduced music is to
be played, and other devices needed for amplification of sound,
when applicable.
(f) An indication of all fixtures, such as planters to be used, and an
indication of whether or not they will be removed when the
cafe is closed.
(g) Proof of insurance as outlined in § 58-11F(4)(g).
(h) Any other information that the Village Board of Trustees may
find reasonably necessary for the fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
(4) Conditions for issuance of permit.
(a) The proposed sidewalk cafe will not unreasonably interfere
with the pedestrian traffic and will occupy and use no more
than 50% of the public concrete sidewalk, with the decorative
brickwork being excluded from this calculation.
(b) The applicant has met all other applicable building code,
zoning ordinance and the Historic District's ordinance
requirements.71
(c) The permit holder shall be bound by all applicable rules,
regulations, ordinances, local laws and statutes and shall have
a current Monroe County Health Department permit.
(d) The permit shall be valid for one calendar year beginning in
January and ending in December, regardless of the date of
application. April 1 shall be the earliest date for placing tables
and chairs on the sidewalk.
71.Editor's Note: See § 58-23, Historic preservation.
§ 58-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-11
1:442
(e) A fee of $200 shall be paid upon application for a permit, with
$50 being a nonrefundable administrative charge and with the
remaining $150 being refunded upon denial of a permit or at
the end of the calendar year if there are no penalties or fines
imposed for violation of regulations.
(f) The applicant shall sign an agreement to repair, at the expense
of the applicant, any damage caused to the sidewalk in the
operation of the cafe.
(g) A hold-harmless agreement executed by the applicant and
indemnifying the Village against loss, including costs and
expenses, resulting from injury to person or property as a
direct or indirect result of the operation of the cafe or for such
injury occurring on the premises occupied by the cafe, is
required. The applicant shall be required to obtain a protective
policy of insurance in the amount of $500,000 covering said
hold-harmless agreement. Said hold-harmless agreement shall
be subject to the approval of the Village Attorney.
(h) Upon the request of the Village of Brockport, tables and chairs
are to be removed from the sidewalks at any time during the
season for special events or emergencies.
(5) Cafe regulations. A cafe authorized and operated pursuant to this
article shall:
(a) Comply with all plans submitted to and approved by the Village
Board of Trustees.
(b) Serve or allow to be consumed no alcoholic beverages on or at
any sidewalk cafe.
(c) Be used only by those patrons of the cafe who are eating a meal
or dessert or consuming a beverage normally connected with
the cafe.
(d) Not open for business before 6:00 a.m.
(e) Cease all service of any kind whatsoever at 11:00 p.m., and all
furniture, utensils, containers or any other materials used in
the operation of the cafe shall be removed from the sidewalk
cafe area no later than 11:00 p.m.
(f) Use only paper or plastic dishes when serving patrons of the
cafe.
(g) Remove all cafe structures by October 31 in any year for which
a permit is granted.
(6) Maintenance of premises and furniture.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-11
1:443
(a) The property shall be cleaned and kept refuse-free, and the
sidewalk shall be rinsed nightly. A covered trash receptacle
with the approximate capacity of 30 gallons shall be available
for the use of patrons and shall be removed from the sidewalk
each night at closing.
(b) Furniture shall be of uniform style and color, coordinated to
complement the facades of the Downtown Business District.
The furniture shall also be clean and in good repair.
(c) At the expiration of the term of the permit or at the time that
the business ceases to operate a sidewalk cafe, all Villageowned
property shall be delivered to the Village in good
condition, damage by elements excepted. Public property shall
not be altered in any way during the term of the permit.
(7) Music, lighting and outdoor cooking.
(a) Cafes located in the Business District shall comply with the
Village of Brockport Noise Ordinance.72
(b) Lighting shall be minimal and shall be installed so that direct
or indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause
illumination in excess of 0.5 footcandle on any abutting
property.
(c) No outdoor cooking of any type is permitted in sidewalk cafes.
(8) Notice of violation, fines and revocation of permit.
(a) When a violation of any provision(s) of the Sidewalk Cafe
Ordinance occurs, the appropriate Village representative,
whether it be a police officer or the Building Inspector, shall
give written notice to the applicant to correct said violation
within 24 hours of receipt of said notice by the applicant.
(b) A fee of not less than $25 shall be levied for each violation of
this subsection.
(c) Any person who violates or allows his patrons to violate this
subsection or Chapter 55, Noise, two times in one year shall
have his permit revoked for the remainder of the calendar year.
(d) Issuance of a permit in subsequent years shall be partially
dependent upon the history of the applicant's adherence to
Village ordinances.
(9) Appeal of denial, revocation or issuance of permit. All appeals of
denial, revocation or issuance of permit shall go before the Village
Board of Trustees.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Noise.
§ 58-11 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-12
1:444
§ 58-12. LI Limited Industrial Use District (LI Districts).73 [Added
1-16-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
A. Statement of intent. The purpose of the Limited Industrial Use District
is to establish a district for research- and development-oriented uses,
office buildings and other compatible light industrial, manufacturing
and assembly uses which are in architectural harmony with one another
in a campus-style setting which is attractively landscaped and fitting to
a Village environment.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Scientific or engineering research and/or experimental
development or materials, methods or products.
(2) Engineering design of products.
(3) The manufacture, processing and assembly of previously refined
materials in the following industrial categories:
(a) Communication equipment.
(b) Data-processing equipment and software.
(c) Electronic systems, components and accessories.
(d) Professional, scientific and control instruments.
(e) Office systems and equipment.
(f) Photographic and imaging equipment and systems.
(g) Optics.
(h) Surgical, medical and dental instruments, appliances and
products.
(i) Textiles.
(j) Plastics.
(k) Paper.
(l) Wood.
(m) Metal products.
(n) Machine shops.
(o) Pharmaceuticals.
(p) Precious stones.
73.Editor's Note: Former § 58-12, P Business Use Districts (P Districts), was repealed
12-20-1971.
§ 58-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-12
1:445
(q) Glass.
(r) Ceramics.
(4) Office buildings for executive, engineering and administrative
purposes.
(5) Any other uses similar in character to those listed above, subject to
Planning Board approval.
(6) All uses permitted in any other districts are prohibited.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Prototype manufacturing incidental to research and development
laboratories and corporate headquarters and offices.
(2) Warehousing and storage, provided that such uses shall not occupy
more than 15% of the total building floor area and shall be located
within the principal building of the permitted use.
(3) Noncommercial recreational facilities.
(4) Restaurants, provided that such uses are located entirely within
the building to which they are accessory.
(5) Day-care centers, provided that such uses are located entirely
within the building to which they are accessory.
D. Prohibited uses and activities.
(1) Research and testing laboratories for biotechnology and genetic or
gene research.
(2) Manufacture, storage, handling and use of radiological, chemical
or biological warfare agents or of explosives or blasting agents. The
use of explosives or blasting agents which may be necessary for
construction purposes may be permitted.
(3) Uses which would create, in any manner, noxious or offensive
noise, dust, refuse matter, odor, smoke, gas, fumes, vibration or
glare.
(4) Uses which would create a menace to neighboring properties by
reason of fire, explosion or other physical hazards to any person,
building or vegetation.
(5) Uses which would create harmful discharge of waste materials,
including both airborne and waterborne wastes and refuse.
E. Other requirements.
(1) If an existing use within a Limited Industrial Use District is
proposed to be changed to a separate, different and distinct use, an
application must be made for site plan approval to the Planning
§ 58-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-12
1:446
Board. As part of the review of said application, the Planning
Board, after a public hearing, may require changes in the
development of the site. These changes may include but shall not
be limited to off-street parking, loading areas, landscaping and
screening, lighting, signage and access which would be necessary
to accommodate the proposed new use.
(2) All uses, including equipment for the handling of processes, shall
be conducted in a completely enclosed building. The actual loading
and unloading of materials shall not be restricted to indoor
locations.
(3) No materials, supplies or equipment shall be permitted to be
permanently stored outside any building. Company vehicles may be
parked out of doors overnight, provided that they are stored on the
property to which they are accessory and adequately screened
from public view. A signed permit is required from the Planning
Board for the temporary placement of construction trailers.
(4) All waste, scrap, refuse, empty containers, dry bottles and cartons
shall be stored and handled in suitable containers inside an
accessory structure.
(5) Any building or site that has been abandoned or left vacant shall be
maintained or the Village shall take any action to secure the
building and maintain landscaping at the owner's expense. This
includes, but is not limited to, mowing of lawn, trimming shrubs,
etc.
F. Area, lot and bulk requirements.
(1) No buildings or parking areas are permitted within 100 feet of a
residential district.
(2) No buildings are permitted within 80 feet of any public or private
street. No buildings are permitted within 40 feet of rear property
lines or within 25 feet of any side yard property line.
(3) No parking areas are permitted within 25 feet of any property line
or private street.
(4) The maximum aggregate coverage of any lot by impervious
surfaces, including but not limited to buildings, walks, drives,
parking and loading areas, etc., shall not exceed 60% of the total
area of said lot.
(5) The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) on any lot shall be:
§ 58-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-12
1:447
Building Size
(gross square feet)
Maximum Lot Coverage
(percent)
25,000 or less 0.25
25,001 to 75,000 0.30
75,000 or more 0.35
(a) Examples.
[1] A single-story building with 25,000 square feet (250 feet x
100 feet) would require a lot with a minimum area of
100,000 square feet, or 2.30 acres.
[2] A single-story building with 40,000 square feet (200 feet x
200 feet) would require a lot with a minimum area of
133,333 square feet, or 3.06 acres.
[3] A single-story building with 60,000 square feet (250 feet x
240 feet) would require a lot with a minimum area of
200,000 square feet, or 4.59 acres.
[4] A two-story building with 80,000 square feet (200 feet x
400 feet) would require a lot with a minimum area of
228,571 square feet, or 5.25 acres.
(6) Lot width shall not be less than 150 feet.
(7) Lot area shall not be less than one acre.
(8) No building within a Limited Industrial Use District shall exceed 35
feet in height as measured from the average finished grade at the
perimeter of the building. Building appurtenances and/or service
facilities located on the roof shall be excluded from the thirty-fivefoot
height limitation. The maximum height of any structure,
including appurtenances, shall be 50 feet.
(9) Features on the roof, such as water tanks, cooling towers,
mechanical devices and accessory equipment and bulkheads, shall
be enclosed within walls of a material in harmony with that of the
main walls of the building of which they are a part. Such material
and design shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
(10)Radio and television antennas, masts, aerials, horns, parabolic
reflectors or similar communication devices located on buildings
shall not extend more than six feet above the roof or ridge of such
lines of such buildings and shall not, as measured in plane view
area, occupy more than 10% of the square footage of the building.
(11) The minimum parking ratio for each lot in a Limited Industrial Use
District shall be three parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross building floor area. The Planning Board may reduce the
actual number of parking spaces to be provided based upon
§ 58-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-12
1:448
evidence supplied which would support the specific parking needs
of individual uses. In granting such a reduction, the Planning Board
shall reserve the authority to require additional spaces to meet
actual needs.
(12) The maximum parking ratio for each lot in a Limited Industrial Use
District shall be four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
building floor area.
G. Site plan review and approval. No building permit shall be issued for
the construction of any building or structure, nor shall any site
improvements, grading or alteration of the physical landform or change
in use be undertaken within the Limited Industrial Use District, until a
site plan has been approved by the Planning Board after a public
hearing.
H. Site design and improvement standards for site plan review.
(1) All private-street parking areas and driveways shall be curbed and
shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement, concrete or
unit pavers.
(2) Retaining or freestanding walls shall be finished with
contemporary material compatible with adjacent buildings.
Retaining and freestanding walls shall be landscaped as part of the
overall site landscaping plan.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or unit pavers such as
brick or stone and shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
(4) Access and services drives shall not be less than 24 feet nor more
than 40 feet in width.
(5) No lot shall have more than two access drives from any public or
private street.
(6) All exterior service areas shall be located at the side or rear of
buildings. Under no circumstances shall such exterior service areas
be located between any building and a public or private street
except for access drives to individual lots.
(7) All building service areas shall be sufficiently screened with plants
to conceal the service area activity from off-lot view.
(8) Dumpsters shall be completely enclosed in an accessory building.
(9) One business sign shall be permitted for each lot in the Limited
Industrial Use District. Business signs shall be limited to
information which identifies the address of the building and the
name of the business.
(10) The limitations on the number of signs shall not apply to parking lot
markers, directional signs, entrance and exit signs, and other such
§ 58-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-12
1:449
signs which are erected on the premises, provided that such signs
shall not exceed two square feet in area on one side and do not
contain any advertising material. The number and location of such
signs shall be approved by the Planning Board as part of the site
plan review process.
(11) Business signs shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(12) Directory signs shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(13)No sign or structure support for any sign shall be more than six feet
in height or within 20 feet of any public or private street or within
15 feet of any lot line.
(14) Signs may be internally or externally illuminated, provided that no
direct light is directed toward or visible from any street or other
lot.
(15) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site development
plan. The landscaping plan shall be designed to achieve the
following:
(a) The existing tree cover should be retained to the maximum
extent feasible. Particular emphasis shall be given to retaining
existing trees which are located along the perimeter of a
Limited Industrial Use District. The maintenance of existing
tree cover will serve to conceal proposed buildings and assist
in maintaining a human scale in Limited Industrial Use
Districts.
(b) Proposed landscaping should consist of an appropriate mix and
use of vegetation which is indigenous to this area of New York.
Nonindigenous landscape materials should be limited to use
for accent purposes only.
(c) Plant materials shall serve to provide continuity between lots.
(d) Where the lot lines of the subject lot coincide with that of
another lot in residential or business or commercial use or the
subject lot abuts or is traversed by a nonindustrial zoning
district boundary, there shall be planted or installed along the
lot lines thereof berms, trees, shrubs and/or fencing of such
type and spacing as shall be required by the Planning Board to
adequately screen all operations on the lot from the viewed
adjoining properties. Generally, such screening shall be a
minimum of eight feet in height and, if composed of plants,
shall not be less than four feet in height but capable of
reaching eight feet in height at maturity.
(e) New plantings should be selected and arranged to complement
existing site vegetation.
§ 58-12 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-12
1:450
§ 58-13. I Industrial Use Districts (I Districts).
The following regulations shall apply in the I Industrial Use Districts.
(16) All developed lots which contain unbuilt areas shall be landscaped
with a combination of trees, shrubs, perennials and turf grass.
(17) Landscaping along public or private streets in a Limited Industrial
Use District should have an organized formal planting scheme. A
formal planting scheme with trees lining the street in definite
sequence will define the edges of individual properties and the
boundaries of functional space. New trees shall be planted 50 feet
on center along designated streets. Plantings should be deciduous
shade trees approved by the Planning Board.
(18) Plantings for the space between buildings and parking areas and at
building entrances should be selected and arranged with the intent
of creating human scale outdoor space which recognizes the
pedestrian activity in the Limited Industrial Use Districts and the
need to identify building entrances. Although the Planning Board
shall approve the use of all plantings proposed, a wide range of
ground cover, shrubs and trees are encouraged in Limited
Industrial Use Districts to create interest and a degree of
landscape appropriate to the pedestrian use.
(19) All buildings with exposed foundations shall have foundation
plantings. The purpose of foundation plantings is to screen exposed
foundations and to provide a soft transition between the walls of a
building and the landscape.
(20) All unpaved surfaces not planted with trees, shrubs or ground
cover shall be turf grass.
(21) Lighting shall be placed in a logical manner and shall be
appropriate in style and intensity to provide illumination and
security for each lot. Lighting shall be provided in areas that would
be dangerous if unlit, such as ramps, intersections and abrupt
changes in grade. A lighting plan shall be developed in a manner
that contains and directs lighting into a Limited Industrial Use
District and away from adjacent areas.
I. Area of Village affected. The following tax accounts, presently zoned I
Industrial Use District, shall be rezoned LI Limited Industrial Use
District, and this rezoning classification shall supersede any other
classification referenced anywhere in the Village of Brockport Code:
1011-000; 1017-000; 1018-000; 1019-000; 1020-000.
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Production of farm and garden crops.
(2) Manufacturing and processing.
§ 58-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-13
1:451
(3) Public utility structures and services.
(4) Terminal facilities for transportation services.
(5) Motor vehicle sales, service, storage, repair and parking.
(6) Animal sales lots and storage barns.
(7) Wholesale trades and businesses.
(8) Commercial greenhouses.
(9) Processing of food products.
(10) Laundries, dry-cleaning and dyeing establishments.
(11) Storage and sale of motor vehicle and domestic fuels, both
wholesale and retail, subject to securing a permit under the
procedure defined under Subsection A(15) of this section.
[Amended 7-7-1969]
(12) Storage and sale of building and construction supplies.
(13) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail or personal service
business, dance halls, theaters, bowling alleys, billiard rooms,
clubs, lodges and similar places of recreation, hotels, motels, auto
courts, restaurants and similar places of lodging and entertainment
that do sell alcoholic beverages for on-the-premises consumption.
[Added 11-4-1974 by L.L. No. 1-197474]
(14) Accessory buildings and accessory uses which usually accompany
and are a part of the above permitted uses.
(15) Any other industrial use when authorized by the Board of Appeals,
and subject to securing a permit therefor and to such conditions,
restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by said
Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, for the purpose of
protecting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the
community, except that such authorization by the Board of Appeals
shall not be required for the expansion or extension of present
industrial uses in accordance with I District requirements.
(16) Mini warehouses, also known as "self-service storage facilities."
[Added 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
B. Uses prohibited.
(1) All uses permitted in all other districts are prohibited in the I
District unless expressly permitted in the Industrial Use District.
When unnecessary hardship is imposed by this regulation
prohibiting residence and business uses, the Board of Appeals
74.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(13) and (14) to (14) and (15), respectively.
§ 58-13 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-13
1:452
shall, after public hearing, vary the application of this section so as
to permit the use of such lands, structures and uses for residential
or business purposes in accordance with the provisions specified
for such uses in the Residential Use District or in the Business Use
District.
(2) No building, structure or land shall be used, erected or maintained
which is arranged or designed to be used for any of the following
purposes: [Amended 7-6-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
(a) Slaughtering of animals or manufacture of waste by-products.
(b) Manufacture or storage of explosives.
(3) All uses of land, buildings and structures or industrial processes
that may be noxious or injurious by the reason of the production or
emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes, noise,
vibration or similar substances or conditions; provided, however,
that any uses may be permitted if approved by the Board of
Appeals, and subject to the securing of a permit therefor and to
such conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed
necessary by said Board, after a public hearing, for the purpose of
protecting the health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the
community.
C. Building height. No building or structure shall be erected in excess of
three stories or 45 feet in height, except that this provision shall not
apply to chimneys, water tanks or towers, elevators, silos, ventilators
and other accessory industrial facilities.
D. Required lot area and dimensions: none.
E. Percentage of lot coverage: no requirements, except to meet the
requirements of § 58-13F on off-street parking and § 58-13G on yards,
which follow.
F. Off-street parking.
(1) There shall be provided off-street parking space of at least one
parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area or for
each two workers, as shall be determined by the Board of Appeals.
(2) There shall be provided sufficient additional area for the unloading,
loading and storage of motor vehicles used in the conduct of the
industrial activities. For uses other than an industrial use granted
as a variance by the Board of Appeals, there shall be provided
sufficient space for off-street parking or storage of motor vehicles
which shall congregate as a result of the use of such land, buildings
or structures.
G. Yards. Buildings must be set back from lot lines a minimum distance
equal to the principal height of the structure.
§ 58-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-13
1:453
§ 58-13.1. Q Planned Development District (Q Districts). [Added
1-3-1971; amended 4-3-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
The following regulations shall apply to the undeveloped portion of the Q
District as it existed at the time of the adoption of this amendment.
§ 58-14. Slope of yards.
H. The following tax accounts, presently zoned I Industrial Use District,
shall be rezoned LI Limited Industrial Use District, and this rezoning
classification shall supersede any other classification referenced
anywhere in the Village of Brockport Code: 1011-000; 1017-000;
1018-000; 1019-000; 1020-000. [Added 1-16-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the B Business District as they are regulated
by that district, except for the following:
(a) Setbacks shall be regulated by the Planning Board.
(2) All uses permitted in the O Residential as they are regulated by that
district.
(3) Multiple dwellings, provided that:
(a) Maximum density: eight dwelling units per acre
(b) They are no more than two stories in height, including
basement level, if basement level is used for living space.
(d) Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
(e) Percentage of lot coverage shall be 30% for structures and
50% for structures and parking areas.
(f) Multiple dwellings shall not total more than 35% of the total
number of dwellings, single-family and multiple-family
dwellings in the Q District.
(c) Apartments shall be limited to no more than three bedrooms.
B. The Planning Board shall have the right to regulate any other areas not
covered by this chapter.
A. The surface grade of the front yard of the principal building in a
residential use district or in a multiple-dwelling use district shall be at
the front wall of such principal building on a gradient of not less than
1 1/2% above the established grade of the sidewalk or curb.
B. Where unnecessary hardship due to topographic conditions is proven,
the Board of Appeals shall vary the front yard gradient requirements,
except that minus gradients shall not be established closer than 12 feet
§ 58-13 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-14
1:454
§ 58-15. Clear view of street intersections. [Amended 8-7-1961]
No fence, hedge or other obstruction to a clear view shall be maintained
to a height greater than 30 inches measured from the sidewalk grade
in the triangular-shaped area of a corner lot adjacent to the intersecting
streets. The dimensions of said triangular-shaped area shall be determined
by establishing a point on the side lot line so that each such point shall be
an equal distance from the corner of the intersection of the street lines,
and they shall be connected by a straight line which touches the corner or
face of a structure if there be a structure, except that the two points as
established on the front and side lot lines need not be more than 60 feet
from the corner intersection.
§ 58-16. Stripping of topsoil.
No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil, muck, marl or
humus for sale or for use other than on the premises, except as a necessary
part of a farm or garden operation or for the construction or alteration of a
building or structure on the premises, and for which a building permit has
been issued.
§ 58-16.1. Filling of low-lying lands. [Added 5-1-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995]
to the front building line. Where the principal building is established
on a terrace, the lot shall be graded so that surface water will not be
discharged on adjacent lots.
A. No persons shall fill low-lying areas of any land in the Village of
Brockport without applying for and receiving a permit for such filling.
B. Permits shall be issued by the Planning Board after the applicant has
submitted sufficient documentation demonstrating that as a result of
such filling all of the items listed have been addressed to the
satisfaction of the Board and any other agency or department employed
by the Village.
C. This list includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) The filling shall not adversely affect the distribution of surface
water on or off the site.
(2) The type of material used for the fill shall be approved by the
Board.
(3) All precautions necessary shall be taken to prevent erosion from
the site until the fill is secured.
D. The Planning Board reserves the right to require a public hearing prior
to making a decision on the application.
§ 58-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-17
1:455
§ 58-17. Excavations.
Open excavations shall not be maintained, except those excavations made
for the erection of a building or structure or swimming pool for which a
building permit has been issued.
§ 58-18. Swimming pool enclosures. [Amended 2-7-1966; 5-7-1984
by L.L. No. 1-1984; 6-12-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
A. General requirements. Outdoor swimming pools shall be provided with
an enclosure which shall comply with the following:
(1) The enclosure shall be at least four feet in height and have a
maximum vertical clearance to grade of two inches.
(2) Where a picket-type fence is provided, horizontal openings
between pickets shall not exceed 3 1/2 inches.
(3) Where a chain-link fence is provided, the openings between links
shall not exceed 2 3/8 inches.
(4) The enclosure shall be constructed so as not to provide footholds.
(5) Pickets and chain-link twists shall extend above the upper
horizontal bar.
(6) Such enclosures shall have railings and posts within the enclosure,
which shall be capable of resisting a minimum lateral load of 150
pounds applied midway between the posts and at the top of posts,
respectively.
(7) The enclosure, fence material or fabric shall be capable of
withstanding a concentrated lateral load of 50 pounds applied
anywhere between supports on an area 12 inches square without
failure or permanent deformation.
(8) Gates, provided in the enclosure, shall be self-closing and selflatching
with the latch handle located within the enclosure and at
least 40 inches above grade.
(9) A wall of a dwelling is permitted to serve as part of the enclosure
under the following conditions:
(a) Windows in the wall shall have a latching device at least 40
inches above the floor.
(b) A swinging door in the wall shall be self-closing and selflatching.
(c) A sliding door in the wall shall have a self-latching device.
(10) Setbacks. Pools located in the side yard shall meet the same front
and side yard requirements as established for its principal building.
§ 58-17 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-18
1:456
§ 58-19. Animals and fowl.75
In any district the establishment, maintenance or operation for
compensation of small animal hospitals, clinics, boarding stables, dog
kennels or similar facilities for the housing, boarding, service, treatment,
care, breeding or sale of animals or fowl, and the keeping, feeding, breeding
and production of rabbits or poultry for sale either alive or dressed or
for the sale of eggs, is prohibited. This prohibition shall not include the
housing, care, service, breeding and sale of animals or fowl, or animal or
fowl products, which are a part of a farm operation, nor shall it include the
establishment and operation of small animal hospitals and clinics in the B
Business Use Districts, as provided in this chapter.
§ 58-20. Nonconforming uses.
Pools entirely in the rear yard shall be placed not less than three
feet from the side or rear lot line.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Aboveground pools with at least 46 inches between the pool
decking or the pool top and adjoining grade are exempt from the
requirements of § 58-18 of this chapter, provided that their access
ladder or steps can be blocked in an approved manner when not
intended for use.
(2) A pool less than 24 inches deep is exempt from the requirements of
§ 58-18 of this chapter.
C. Swimming pools, as defined herein, shall require building permits.
D. Any and all electrical work to be done in connection with the
installation and construction of any pool shall be inspected by an
electrical inspection agency approved by the Village of Brockport and a
copy of compliance filed with the Building Department of the Village.
Approved electrical agencies are:
(1) New York State Fire Underwriters.
(2) Middle Department Inspection Agency, Inc.
(3) New York Atlantic-Inland, Inc.
A. The following shall apply to all nonconforming uses: [Amended
7-1-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
(1) Any nonconforming use existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter may be continued, and upon application to and approval by
the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
direct the Building Inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy
extending said nonconforming use within the premises as
75.Editor's Note: For additional provisions concerning animals, see Ch. 5, Animals.
§ 58-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-20
1:457
§ 58-21. Summary of principal requirements. [Added 3-29-1965]
For the sake of convenience of reference, the summary of principal
requirements has been attached.76
§ 58-22. Off-street parking requirements. [Added 3-29-1965;
amended 11-19-1973, effective 1-1-1974]
prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals to conform as nearly as
practical to the requirements for the district in which the building,
structure or use is situated.
(2) A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use for the district
in which it is located, shall not thereafter be changed to a
nonconforming use, nor shall one nonconforming use be
substituted for another simply because it is generically similar to
an existing nonconforming use.
(3) A nonconforming structure, when removed from any premises,
shall not be relocated on the premises except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the district in which it is
located.
(4) Restoration and repairs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
restoration or repair of a building destroyed or partly destroyed by
fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy subsequent to the
enactment of this chapter, nor shall this chapter prevent the
continuance of such use as existed at the time of the destruction or
partial destruction of such building, provided that restoration is
commenced within six months after the date of destruction and is
completed within nine months of the date of destruction. Any major
restoration to the facade of any nonconforming use shall be
approved by the Historic Preservation Board.
(5) Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period
of nine months, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
A. In order to better provide for the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village, it is the intention of this section of the section
that all structures and land uses in present existence or those to be
altered or erected be provided with sufficient off-street automobile
parking for those persons making use of such structures. It is the
further intention of this section of the chapter to ensure particularly
that fire-protection, firefighting and other emergency services be able
to operate and provide for the benefit of the inhabitants of this Village
76.Editor's Note: The original Zoning Code with all attachments is on file in the Village
records.
§ 58-20 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-22
1:458
unhindered by undesignated and unlimited parking areas on the
premises subject to this chapter.
(1) No permit for the erection or substantial alteration of a structure or
for the development of a land use shall be issued unless off-street
automobile parking shall have been planned in accordance with
this section.
(2) Required parking facilities for the enlargement or extension of an
existing structure or use shall be provided as a condition for the
issuance of any building permit for such enlargement or extension
in the future. In the case of practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship to such properties arising out of this requirement, appeal
may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall require
that degree of compliance as it may deem reasonable for that part
of the structure or use that is legally nonconforming, but shall not
waive any part of the requirement for that part of the structure or
use that constitutes an enlargement or extension thereof. However,
in no event shall consideration be given nor a decision be
determined on whether to issue a building permit, certificate of
occupancy or the granting of a variance by the Zoning Board of
Appeals by the fact that maximum economic benefit from the
premises may not be derived because of the requirements of this
section. [Amended 7-20-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987]
(3) This section is applicable to the present O Residential Use District,
those structures in the B Business Use Districts whereby this
section may be reasonably applied to such a structure located in
said district, and to all other use districts presently existing or
future use districts augmenting or replacing those districts
presently in existence whereby this section can be reasonably
applied. [Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
B. Schedule of requirements. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
as follows: [Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 9-4-1984 by
L.L. No. 3-1984; 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990; 9-8-1998 by L.L.
No. 8-1998; 5-1-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
(1) Preexisting parking.
(a) Legal preexisting uses shall be deemed to comply with the
parking regulations of this section. However, if any legal
preexisting use is replaced by another use or if any said legal
preexisting use is expanded, the new or expanded use shall
comply with the parking regulations of this section.
(b) All other preexisting uses shall comply with the parking
regulations of this section.
(c) For preexisting uses, parking requirements computed from the
regulations established in this section may be reduced by the
number of parking spaces that must be eliminated in order to
§ 58-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-22
1:459
comply with the legally established requirements for handicap
access or enclosure of outdoor refuse containers.
(2) General requirements applicable to all districts.
(a) Parking space location. All parking spaces shall be located on
the same lot as the use for which they are provided.
(b) Parking space size. The minimum size for each parking space
shall be 10 feet wide by 20 feet deep.
(c) If the use of the building lot is replaced by a use for which more
parking is required by this section, said new use shall comply
with the new parking requirement.
(d) If the parking requirement for a use is greater than the general
parking requirements established for the district in which said
use is located, the parking requirement which is specified by
this section for said use shall apply.
(e) The Planning Board shall determine the parking requirements
for a use which is not specified herein. The applicant shall
provide any information deemed necessary by the Planning
Board to determine the number of required parking spaces.
(f) Parking space requirements computed from the regulations
established in this section shall be rounded to the nearest
whole number to establish the actual number of parking spaces
required.
(g) Unless otherwise stated, references to parking required for
employees shall be based upon the greatest number of
employees on the premises at any one time.
(h) A public highway shall not be used for maneuvering directly
into or out of any parking space provided in accordance with
this section.
(i) For residential use, such off-street parking shall not occupy any
part of any required front yard except that portion of the front
yard which may be construed as the logical extension of the
side yard, being in particular that area running perpendicular
from the extreme or side of a structure on the premises or
garage thereon to a street or alleyway. No more than 50% of
any side yard, or 25% of any rear yard other than the required
driveway, shall be permitted for a parking area. Such off-street
parking space may be included as part of a required open
space for side or rear yards.
(j) On corner or through lots, parking space may not be included
as part of the required yards lying adjacent to either street.
§ 58-22 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-22
1:460
(k) All parking spaces and access driveways, when used in
compliance with this section, shall be paved or otherwise
surfaced with an all-weather, dustproof material, to be graded
and drained as to dispose of surface water conditions.
(l) In the case of multiple dwellings, two-family dwellings or
boardinghouses, all such parking shall not be less than five feet
from any of the aforementioned dwelling places so that a
constant access area is present for emergency response
vehicles and/or equipment.
(m) In any district, for every building built, altered, enlarged or
increased in capacity, off-street parking shall be provided as
follows:
[1] One parking space per bedroom for lodgers, roomers and/
or student accommodations.
[2] Two parking spaces per unit for a family.
[3] Buildings located on Main Street between the New York
State Canal and State Street and Erie Street and on
Market Street between Main Street and Water Street shall
provide parking as mandated by the Village Planning
Board and are exempt from the foregoing provisions of
Subsection B(2)(m)[1] and [2]; however, where an area is
available, such area shall be devoted to parking.
(3) Minimum requirements.
(a) Day-care centers and adult day-care centers shall provide one
space for each six persons, based on maximum occupancy, plus
one space for each employee.
(b) Adult care facilities, nursing homes and health-related
facilities shall provide one space for each six beds, plus one
space for each employee.
(c) Hospitals shall provide three spaces for each bed.
(d) Churches or other places of worship shall provide one space
for each three seats (equivalent to six feet of bench or pew
length) in the place of assembly that has the highest permitted
occupancy.
(e) Charitable or civic organizations shall provide one space for
each three persons permitted at maximum occupancy.
(f) Office uses.
[1] Offices of health-care professionals licensed by the State
of New York, including but not limited to those of
veterinarians, physicians, dentists or other health-care
§ 58-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-22
1:461
§ 58-23. Historic preservation.77 [Added 9-10-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
professionals, shall provide five spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
[2] All pharmacies, laboratories, radiology and physical
therapy spaces located within the hospital shall provide
five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) Industrial uses shall provide one space for each employee.
C. Penalties for offenses. Enforcement of this section shall be
accomplished as follows:
(1) The owner of the property where a violation of this section occurs
or who fails to provide parking facilities as per the requirements of
this section shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of $50, and in
addition, such violators shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by
the Village in determining such violation, and when such violation
is continuous each day thereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(2) The owner of any motor vehicle that is parked in disregard of the
provisions of this section and in any other way fails to comply with
this section shall be subject to a fine of $10, and in addition, such
motor vehicle owner shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by
the Village in determining such violation, and when such violation
is continuous each day thereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(3) Penalties for such violations shall be collected, and violations of
this section shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by the
Village Law of the State of New York.
A. Recognizing that the Village of Brockport's rich and varied history and
vibrant present are evident in its commercial and residential buildings
and surroundings and recognizing that the preservation, protection,
enhancement and continued use of these structures and sites serves the
best interest of all the people, this section is intended to:
(1) Preserve, protect and promote the use of historic landmarks which
reflect the Village's cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history.
(2) Safeguard the property rights of owners.
(3) Stabilize and improve property values.
(4) Foster civic pride.
77.Editor's Note: Former § 58-23, Fences and hedges, added 3-29-1965, was repealed
5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984.
§ 58-22 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-23
1:462
(5) Strengthen the economy.
(6) Protect and enhance the appeal of the Village for residents, tourists
and visitors and for use in educational purposes.
(7) Encourage the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and
development of the Village.
B. Historic Preservation Board. The Village Historic Preservation Board
will identify historic landmarks and districts and will issue certificates
of appropriateness. The Board shall be seven to nine members, all
Village residents, including, to the extent available in the community,
but not limited to as follows: one architect, two members of the
Historical Society, one real estate broker, one member from the
community at large, one attorney, one historian, one historic
archaeologist and one prehistoric archaeologist. All members shall
have a known interest in historic preservation and shall serve for terms
of three years, provided that two of the initial members be appointed
for terms of one year, two for a term of two years, and three for terms of
three years, and that subsequent members shall be appointed for terms
of three years. [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995;
9-19-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
C. Designation of landmarks and historic districts.
(1) For the purpose of effecting and furthering the goals and purpose
of this section and the preservation, protection, perpetuation and
use of landmarks and historic areas, the Historic Preservation
Board shall select: [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
(a) Landmarks for designation which shall be identified by a
description setting forth the general nature, characteristics
and location thereof.
(b) Historic districts for designation which shall be identified by a
description setting forth the general nature, characteristics,
location and boundaries thereof.
(2) In identifying any area, place, building, structure or similar object
as a landmark, the Historic Preservation Board shall apply one or
more of the following criteria: [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995]
(a) It possesses special character, historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the Village.
(b) It is identified with an historic personage.
(c) It embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style.
§ 58-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-23
1:463
(d) It exemplifies the cultural, economic, social or historic heritage
of the Village.
(e) It is the work of a significant designer, architect or builder.
(f) It is an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
(3) Identification.
(a) In identifying a group of properties as an historic district, the
Historic Preservation Board shall apply the following criteria:
[1] Geographically, within a clearly identifiable area, are a
number of structures which give it distinct historic or
aesthetic character.
[2] Although not within a clearly defined geographic area, the
structures constitute a thematic group by virtue of their
distinguishing common characteristics of use or historic or
aesthetic value.
(b) The boundaries of the historic district so designated shall be
specified in detail and shall be filed in the Village Clerk's office
for public inspection.
(4) The procedure for application for landmark designation is as
follows:
(a) Application.
[1] The application may be obtained at the Village Office.
[2] A completed application shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk to be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Board.
[3] The applicant shall be notified of the Historic Preservation
Board's decision as to whether the property should be
designated. [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
(b) A public hearing shall be held by the Historic Preservation
Board. The Historic Preservation Board and other interested
parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at the
hearing which will become part of the record regarding the
proposed landmark or historic district. [Amended
12-18-1995 by L.L. No. 9-199578]
(5) The Village Clerk shall forward notice of each property designated
as a landmark and the boundaries of each designated district to the
office of the Monroe County Clerk. The Village Clerk shall also send
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4)(c), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with testimony presented at a public hearing, was repealed 12-18-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995.
§ 58-23 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-23
1:464
the owner of said property or properties a copy of the ordinance
and a copy of said notice. [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L. No.
9-1995]
(6) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by reason of hardship by the decision
of the Historic Preservation Board to designate a landmark or by
disapproval of an application for designation as a landmark may,
within 30 days of receiving such an application or disapproval
notice, file a written application with the Village Board for review of
said decision. The Village Board shall, after public notice, hold a
public hearing to which the Historic Preservation Board, the
owners of the property in question and other interested parties
shall be invited. Within 30 days after the conclusion of that hearing,
the Village Board shall either confirm or disallow the decision of
the Historic Preservation Board. [Amended 12-18-1995 by L.L.
No. 9-1995]
D. Certificate of appropriateness. Regulation of any alteration,
construction, reconstruction or demolition.
(1) No person shall alter, construct, remove, reconstruct, demolish or
otherwise significantly change the exterior of any property
designated a landmark or within the historic district without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Board. Exterior improvements which need the
approval of the Board include:
(a) Erection of a new building.
(b) Demolition of a building, porch, garage or any part thereof.
(c) Additions, alterations or enclosures of porches.
(d) Replacement of windows or doors with different size, type or
design.
(e) Erection of a new fire escape, fence or new sign or
replacement sign.
(f) Sandblasting or other chemical treatment of brick or stone.
(g) Any other exterior changes requiring a building permit.
(h) Any major change in landscaping and changes in the amount of
paving in parking areas and their screening.
(2) The following procedures shall apply in regard to such a change in
any such property:
(a) Any application to the Village of Brockport for a building
permit for a change as described above shall also be deemed
an application for a certificate of appropriateness and shall be
forwarded to the Historic Preservation Board with copies of all
§ 58-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-23
1:465
detailed plans, elevations, specifications and documents
relating thereto. An application may also be filed with the
Historic Preservation Board in lieu of filing for a building
permit if no permit is required by the Village for the change.
The Historic Preservation Board shall act on such applications
within 15 working days. No building permit shall be issued for
the work until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued
by the Historic Preservation Board.
(b) Any request for change which would require a variance shall
be handled as specified in this chapter.
(c) Issuance.
[1] If the Historic Preservation Board finds that the change
proposed by the applicant will not adversely affect any
significant historic or aesthetic feature of the property and
is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and purposes
of this section or will remedy any conditions imminently
dangerous to life, health or property, as determined by the
Building Inspector or the Fire Department, then the
Historic Preservation Board shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness.
[2] No building permit shall be issued until a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Historic
Preservation Board.
[3] This certificate shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, any
building permit or variances required by the Village.
(d) If the Historic Preservation Board finds that the change
proposed by the applicant will adversely affect any significant
historical or aesthetic feature of the property or is
inappropriate or is inconsistent with the spirit and purpose of
this section, the Historic Preservation Board shall disapprove
the application and so advise the applicant, in writing, and a
copy shall be filed with the Village Clerk's office within 30 days
after receiving the application.
(e) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Historic
Preservation Board by reason of hardship or by disapproval of
an application for a certificate of appropriateness may, within
30 days of the decision, file a written application with the
Village Zoning Board for review of the decision.
E. Maintenance and repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior feature of
a landmark property or property within an historic district which does
not involve a change in design, material or outward appearance thereof
nor prevent any change that the Building Inspector shall certify is
required by public safety.
§ 58-23 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-23
1:466
(1) Every owner, lessee or occupant of a designated historic property
shall keep the same in good repair as follows:
(a) All of the exterior portions of such properties.
(b) All interior portions thereof which, if not maintained, may
cause exterior portions to deteriorate.
(2) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to all other
provisions of law requiring any such improvements.
§ 58-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-23
1:467

ARTICLE IV
Administration; Enforcement; Board of Appeals; Amendments;
Penalties
§ 58-24. Enforcement.
§ 58-25. Fees for building permits.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, appointed by
the Village Board to serve at the pleasure of the Village Board. No
building permit application shall be approved by the Building Inspector
or a building permit issued by the Village Clerk for any purpose except
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such other
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village of Brockport currently
in force at the time of application and also in compliance with the laws
of the State of New York, and rules and regulations as promulgated by
department and agencies of the state currently in effect at the time of
application.
B. No land shall be occupied and no building or structure previously
existing or hereafter erected, altered or extended, or upon transfer of
title to a new owner, shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector. A certificate of
occupancy shall not be required for transfer of title to a new owner of a
single-family dwelling. The Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of
occupancy in the same classification as previously issued unless
otherwise directed by the Planning Board. [Amended 5-7-1984 by
L.L. No. 1-1984; 1-19-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987]
C. A nonconforming use shall not be extended unless a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector and approved by
the Board of Appeals.79
D. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made at the same
time as the application for a building permit. When a certificate of
occupancy is required, the building permit shall not be issued unless
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.
A. The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of
occupancy, appeals and other matters covered by this chapter. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Village Clerk and be
altered or amended only by the Village Board. Until all applicable fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on
any application or appeal. [Amended 8-7-1961; 12-7-1970;
11-19-1973; 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 1-19-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987; 9-10-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
79.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C relating to certificates of occupancy for rooming
houses, added 12-7-1970, was repealed 2-4-1974, and former Subsections D and E were
redesignated as Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 58-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-25
1:469
§ 58-26. Board of Appeals.
B. Building permits issued prior to the enactment of this chapter shall
expire one year after the date of enactment of this chapter.
C. Building permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
become null and void unless construction has started within three
months of the date of issuance and construction completed within 15
months. When the time of starting construction or the time for the
completion of construction exceeds these periods, application may be
made for a new permit extension to the Board of Appeals, which, for the
good reason shown, may extend the permit at no extra cost.
D. When the application for a building permit is denied, that portion of the
fee in excess of the minimum shall be refunded to the applicant.
E. (Reserved)80
F. (Reserved)81
A. Creation, appointment and organization. A Board of Appeals is hereby
created. Said Board shall consist of five members. The Board shall elect
a Chairman from its membership, shall appoint a Secretary and shall
prescribe rules for the conduct of its affairs.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and
duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, which are more
particularly specified as follows:
(1) Interpretation. Upon appeal from the decision by an administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including determination of the exact
location of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect
thereto.
(2) Special permits. To issue special permits for any of the uses for
which this chapter requires the obtaining of such permits from the
Board of Appeals.
(3) Variances. To vary or adapt the strict application of any of the
requirements of this chapter in the case of exceptionally irregular,
narrow, shallow or steep lots or other exceptional physical
conditions, whereby such strict application would result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the
owner of the reasonable use of the land or building involved, but in
no other case.
80.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Certificate of occupancy for new construction and/or
change of use of a building, was repealed 2-4-1974.
81.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Rooming house application fee and certificate of
occupancy, added 12-7-197, was repealed 2-4-1974.
§ 58-25 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-26
1:470
(a) No variance in the strict application of any provision of this
chapter shall be granted by the Board of Appeals unless it
finds:
[1] That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully
described in the findings of the Board, applying to such
land or buildings and not applying generally to land or
buildings in the neighborhood, and that said
circumstances or conditions are such that strict
application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive
the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or
buildings.
[2] That, for reasons fully set forth in findings of the Board,
the granting of the variance is necessary for the
reasonable use of the land or building and that the
variance as granted by the Board is the minimum variance
that will accomplish this purpose.
[3] That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not
be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental
to the public welfare.
(b) In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals shall prescribe
any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable.
C. Procedure.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the
procedure specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals shall be
in writing, on forms prescribed by said Board. Every appeal or
application shall refer to the specific provision of the zoning
regulation involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation
that is claimed, the use for which special permit is sought or the
details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which
it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may
be. The Board of Appeals shall set a date for said hearing within 30
days of the filing of said appeal in the Village Clerk's office and shall
give 10 days' notice of said hearing by publication thereof in the
Village of Brockport's official newspaper. Further, the Board shall
mail (first-class mail) a written notice to property owners within
350 feet of the subject property 10 days prior to the scheduled
hearing. [Amended 7-1-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
(2) Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, each
of which shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in
the particular case.
§ 58-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-27
1:471
§ 58-27. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
public health, morals, safety and general welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations and ordinances, the most
restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern.
§ 58-28. Tract restrictions.
This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, impair or interfere with any
easements, covenants or agreements now existing between owners of land
or premises, except that, whenever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions upon the erection or alteration of structures or the use of the
premises than required by such easements, covenants and agreements, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 58-29. Public hearing fee. [Amended 5-7-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984;
7-1-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
Persons petitioning for a change of classification of use, a change in district
or grant of variance by the Board of Appeals or the initiating of any
applications, petitions or proceeding which requires a public hearing shall,
at the time of filing such application or petition, pay to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer the sum noted in the most current Village Fee Schedule to
cover the cost of publishing the notice of public hearing and other expense
incidental thereto.
§ 58-30. Penalties for offenses.
§ 58-31. Areas annexed.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended 11-16-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
B. Service of the notices shall be sufficient if directed to the owner, agent
of the owner or the contractor and left at his last-known place of
business or residence, if within the Village of Brockport, and if no place
of business or residence is found, then the notice shall be served by
posting in a conspicuous place on the premises which are the subject of
the violation.
A. Each parcel of land annexed to the Village of Brockport shall be
considered as being in that use district in which the use of the land and
of the structures would be conforming uses within the provisions of this
chapter. When the uses of the land or of the structure would, under the
§ 58-27 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-31
1:472
§ 58-32. Repeal of existing ordinances.
§ 58-33. Validity.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision of this chapter.
§ 58-34. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 4, 1960.
provisions of this chapter, be prohibited uses in all districts, such
parcel or parcels shall be classified as being in the O Residential Use
District, and such prohibited uses shall be designated as being legal
nonconforming uses.
B. When lands annexed to the Village of Brockport are separated from a
municipality which, at the effective date of the annexation, had in force
a zoning ordinance, such lands and structures shall continue in the
classification and under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the
municipality from which such lands are separated.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections B and C of this section, a
petition for the annexation of lands to the Village of Brockport
containing a provision designating the classification of use district in
which such lands shall be established may be accepted by the Village
Board as the designated use district or districts, and such lands
thereafter shall be subject to the regulations of the designated use
district or districts.
D. After annexation, the Village Board, at any time, may in the same
manner as provided by Village Law for changes and amendments to the
Zoning Ordinance, change or reclassify the use district designations of
and provisions applicable to the lands annexed.
A. The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Brockport adopted January
3,1928, as amended, is hereby repealed.
B. All rules, regulations and ordinances of the Village of Brockport
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as
of the date this chapter takes effect. This chapter does not repeal,
abrogate or impair now existing conditions or permits previously issued
relative to the erection or alteration of structures or the use of
premises.
C. Wherever this chapter imposes greater restriction upon the erection or
alteration of structures or uses of the premises than required by
existing provisions of law, ordinances, regulations or permits, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 58-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-34
1:473

ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance
[Added 4-20-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
§ 58-35. (Reserved)
§ 58-35.1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to assist in the continued revitalization of
areas throughout the Village to attract new residential, industrial, limited
light industry, and businesses; promote the public interest in continued
development; ensure regular maintenance and improvements to present
structures; safeguard against blight and preserve property values and
community standards; and to establish minimum maintenance standards to
safeguard life, limb, health, safety, property and public welfare in the best
interest of the residents of the Village of Brockport.
§ 58-35.2. Findings.
It is found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration, structures and properties have the further effect
of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums and that, if the same
are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and
spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of
public funds to correct and eliminate the same. By reason of timely
regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, growth of slums and
blight may be prevented and the neighborhood property values thereby
maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential
uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare
protected and fostered.
§ 58-35.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building located on the same lot
with the main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. Where
an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial
manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered
part of the main building.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for shelter, housing protection or enclosure of persons,
animals or property. Depending upon its applicability, the use herein of
"building" shall be considered part of the main building.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code Enforcement Officer employed by the Village
for the purpose of enforcing the terms of this article.
§ 58-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-35.3
1:475
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or structure
characterized by holes, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other
evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of maintenance.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof containing two or
more dwellings units and designed or used for occupancy by two or more
families living independently of each other.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or open space or any part
thereof or any building or structure that may be lawfully viewed by any
member of the public from a sidewalk, street, alleyway or from any
adjoining or neighboring premises.
GOOD WORKING CONDITION — Fully operable for the use intended.
GOOD WORKING REPAIR — A standard of maintenance that renders a
building safe, habitable and possessed of a neat and orderly appearance.
OPERATOR or MANAGER — Any person who has charge, care or control of
a building or part thereof.
OWNER — Includes any person having individual or joint title to real
property in any form defined by the laws as an estate or interest therein,
whether legal or equitable, and however acquired.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an association and any other organization recognized as an
entity by the laws of the State of New York.
PREMISES — A building, dwelling and/or grounds.
PROPERTY — Land and whatever is erected on, growing on, placed on or
affixed thereto.
REFUSE AND JUNK —
JUNK — Any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture, machinery,
motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer or similar object which is
abandoned, demolished, discarded, dismantled or so worn, deteriorated or
in such a condition as to be generally unusable in its existing state.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed or
erected at a fixed location, for example, a building, stationary and portable
carports and swimming pools, the use of which requires location on the
ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
VILLAGE — The Village of Brockport.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer employed by the Village
of Brockport to enforce the zoning laws of the Village of Brockport.
REFUSE — Includes but shall not be limited to scrap metal, scrap
material, waste bottles, cans, paper, rubble, boxes, crates, rags, used
construction materials, motor vehicle parts and used tires, all
cardboard, plastic material or glass containers, sweepings, pieces of
wood, excelsior, rubber and like material.
A.
§ 58-35.3 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-35.4
1:476
§ 58-35.4. Provisions to be minimum standards; conflict with other
provisions.
§ 58-35.5. Exterior standards.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of structures shall be
maintained so that the premises and buildings shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the standards of the community and shall not
constitute blight from adjoining property owners or lead to the progressive
deterioration of the neighborhood. Such maintenance shall include, without
limitation, the following:
A. This article establishes certain minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all structures and does not replace or
modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the structure, the premises or the equipment or
facilities contained therein, as are required by the State of New York
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
B. In any case where a provision is found to be in conflict with any
applicable zoning, building, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation,
fire or safety code of the Village of Brockport, County of Monroe, State
of New York or United States of America, the provision that establishes
the higher standard, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
shall prevail.
A. Foundations, porches, decks, steps, stairs and walls shall be in good
condition.
B. Vent attachments shall be safe, durable, smoketight and capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases.
C. Exterior balconies, porches, roof area (other than used for normal
maintenance), landings, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with
banisters or railings properly designed, installed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling and unsightly appearance.
D. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by
reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs that have become excessively
weathered, those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or those
whose supports have deteriorated so that they no longer meet the
structural requirements of the State of New York Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall, with their supports, be removed or
put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical
signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supports, be removed. Signs
denoting a business which is no longer on the premises shall be
removed within 30 days of the date on which the business ceases to
occupy the premises.
E. All exterior walls of a building, accessory building or structure, whether
residential, commercial or industrial, exposed to the public view shall
§ 58-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-35.5
1:477
be kept in a good state of repair. Storefronts or any portion of a
structure shall not show evidence of excessive weathering or
deterioration of any nature. Unoccupied storefronts shall be maintained
in a clean and neat appearance.
F. Any awnings or marquees and accompanying structural members shall
be maintained in a good state of repair. In the event that said awnings
or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or similar material and are
exposed to public view, such material shall not show evidence of
excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, holes or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
G. All vacant buildings shall be continuously guarded or sealed and kept
secure against unauthorized entry. Materials and methods with which
such buildings are sealed must meet the approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer as to design and building material. Owners of such
buildings shall take such steps and perform such acts as may be
required to ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe
and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the
public and that such property does not become infested with vermin or
rodents.
H. Exterior walls, including doors and windows and the areas around
doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of the building, shall be so
maintained as to keep water from entering the building. Materials
which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner.
I. All exposed exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of broken or
cracked glass, loose shingles or loose or crumbling stones or bricks,
loose shutters, railings, aerials, excessive peeling paint or other
conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. Said
conditions shall be corrected by repair or removal. All exposed exterior
surfaces of structures not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be
coated, treated or sealed to protect them from deterioration or
weathering. Wood, masonry or other exterior materials that will
naturally resist deterioration do not have to be treated but must be
otherwise maintained in a sound, secure, workmanlike manner.
Exterior surfaces that have been painted or otherwise coated must be
maintained in a neat, orderly, serviceable manner. Floors, walls,
ceilings, stairs and fixtures of buildings shall be maintained in a clean,
safe, sanitary condition. Every floor, exterior wall, roof, porch or
appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent
the collapse of the same or injury to the occupants of the building or to
the public.
J. Roof drains, overflow pipes, air-conditioning drains and any other
device used to channel water off or out of a building shall be maintained
§ 58-35.5 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-35.5
1:478
§ 58-35.6. Open areas and parking spaces; unregistered vehicles.
in a safe and operable condition and shall not drain onto a public
sidewalk, walkway, street, alleyway or adjoining property.
K. Lawns shall be kept cut and not to exceed 10 inches in height. Trees,
brush, shrubs and hedges shall be trimmed regularly during the
growing season so as to avoid an unsightly appearance or obstruct
sidewalks and roadways. Piles of materials such as dirt, sand and
similar materials shall be used or removed within 30 days of receiving
said materials. Failure to comply with this subsection, within five days
of being notified, will result in the Village taking any legal action
necessary to correct the violation. This will include the issuing of an
appearance ticket or/and the Village removing the material or cutting
the grass or having the same done by contract with a third party. Any
and all cost associated with correcting the violation shall be assessed
upon the real property on which the brush, grass or weeds are found.
The fees for action taken by the Village shall be established from time to
time by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution. [Amended
7-6-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
A. Surface or subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent the development of stagnant
ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, storm sewers or
other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where necessary.
No roof, surface or sanitary drainage shall create a structural, safety or
health hazard by reason of construction, maintenance or manner of
discharge.
B. Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in a safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be
filled and necessary repairs or replacement carried out.
D. Yards and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards
and rodent harborage and infestation. They shall be maintained in a
manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown about
the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be securely
closed or barricaded from access by the public. All temporary
excavations shall be kept covered or barricaded so as to protect the
general public from injury.
E. All land must be kept free of dead or dying trees and accumulations of
brush, shrubs, weeds, grass, stumps, roots, excessive and/or noxious
growths, garbage, refuse or debris which would either tend to start a
fire or increase the intensity of a fire already started or cause poisoning
or irritation to people or animals or cause or tend to cause or enhance
§ 58-35.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-35.6
1:479
§ 58-35.7. Commercial units.
an unhealthy or dangerous or obnoxious condition on said property or
on any adjacent or neighboring property.
F. No more than one unregistered vehicle may be stored in a dwelling's
driveway or yard, and said vehicle must pass New York State motor
vehicle inspection of the current inspection year, and the sticker must
be visible on the front windshield. This subsection shall be enforced by
the Village Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Commercial units shall at all times be maintained in compliance with
the provisions of this article regulating open spaces, buildings or
structures and littering.
B. No materials or stock-in-trade, garments, shoes or other wares may be
stored or displayed in a front or exterior or interior side yard, except for
motor vehicles for sale at a permitted motor vehicle sales
establishment. No soft drink or other vending machines, ice machines
or the like may be placed in front of a building on a public sidewalk.
Specifically excluded herefrom are chairs and tables used in connection
with a sidewalk cafe or restaurant, provided that there shall be
sufficient sidewalk passage for pedestrians. Materials may be stored in
a rear yard, provided that a storage area therein is completely enclosed
within a six-foot-high solid fence or evergreen hedge of equivalent
height and that the storage area does not infringe on or obstruct vehicle
parking or maneuvering areas.
C. No outside storage or accumulation of garbage, crates, rubbish, refuse
or debris shall be permitted at anytime, and all such garbage, crates,
rubbish, refuse, or debris shall be kept inside the building or buildings
on the premises or in an acceptable enclosure and shall be regularly
collected and removed from the premises.
D. No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing in open areas, and the same shall be collected at the close of
business each day by the occupant of such unit and moved to a clearly
designated area dedicated to said baskets, carts or wagons, or to the
interior of the building or buildings.
E. No mobile refrigeration unit shall be operated on the premises after the
closing of the business conducted thereon unless such mobile
refrigeration unit is electrically operated, except in an industrial zone.
F. All fences and planting areas installed on the premises shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. Such maintenance shall
include but not be limited to the replacement of trees and shrubs which
may die and/or otherwise be destroyed, the maintenance and cutting of
lawns, and the replacement and/or repair of fences which may become
in disrepair.
§ 58-35.6 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-35.7
1:480
§ 58-35.8. Infestation, storage and screening.
§ 58-35.9. Litter; sanitary facilities and methods; abandoned
refrigerators and freezers.
G. Persons owning or occupying a commercial unit shall keep all
walkways, public or private, abutting said premises free from litter and
trash of whatever nature.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basement and cellars shall be closed or
appropriately screened with mesh or other suitable material.
C. Furniture, materials, goods, supplies. [Amended 12-6-1999 by L.L.
No. 6-1999]
(1) Intent. The intent of this section is to promote the health and safety
of the community in general by reducing fire hazards and
eliminating harborage for rodents and the spread of diseases they
carry. The intent is to eliminate such conditions created by the
protracted storage or utilization of furniture not specifically
designed and intended for outdoor use and the detrimental effect
that such storage or use has on the health, safety and quality of life
for Village residents as a whole and to the value of the homes and
properties adjoining such situations in particular.
(2) Furniture. Any furniture designed and intended for indoor use,
including, but not limited to, upholstered furniture such as chairs,
couches, sofas, davenports, ottomans, loveseats, loungers,
mattresses, bed frames, box springs, etc., shall not be located,
used, housed or otherwise stored in or on any nonenclosed balcony
porch, deck, patio, roof, landing, stairs, fire escape, yard, sidewalk
or driveway.
(3) Materials, goods, supplies. No materials, goods or supplies may be
stored in any front yard or in any exterior or interior side yard.
Materials may be stored in a rear yard, provided that the area used
for storage is screened from neighboring properties by a fence or
hedge, provides protection from the elements, and that the method
and manner of storage complies with the other provisions hereof.
A. Residential, commercial and industrial premises, whether improved or
vacant, shall be maintained free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in appropriate private
receptacles for collection.
§ 58-35.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-35.9
1:481
§ 58-35.10. Responsibilities of owner, occupants, agent or operator.
§ 58-35.11. Inspection and enforcement.
B. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse in
accordance with the provisions of applicable codes. Each owner of any
building from which garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse, ashes or other
waste are collected shall provide refuse containers sufficient in number
to hold all collectible wastes which may accumulate. Containers must
be rodentproof and insectproof and watertight and must be kept
covered at all times. Such containers must be kept from public view till
day of pickup.
C. No refrigerator or freezer may be discarded, abandoned or stored in a
place accessible to children without first completely removing any and
all doors; also a certificate from an authorized person or company (New
York State Penal Law) showing that all freon has been lawfully removed.
D. Dumpsters and similar large receptacles shall be shielded from the
public view by means of appropriate landscaping, hedges, fences or
screening. Commercial users of dumpsters in noncompliance with this
article shall have 12 months from the date of its adoption to comply or
appeal for a variance. Dumpsters for the use of construction and/or
remodeling shall get a permit from the Village office. Residential
permits shall be good for 30 days, and industrial, limited light industrial
and business permits shall be good for 90 days. These permits may be
renewed at the Village office. This section shall not apply to receptacles
for clothing and the like donated to charity.
E. Shopping centers, supermarkets and similar business units shall
provide permanent, attractive, decorated litter receptacles within the
premises for public use, in sufficient quantity so that a person will not
have to walk in excess of 50 feet to use any such receptacles.
A. The owner, occupant, agent and operator in control of the building,
structure, lot or parcel of land shall be jointly and severally responsible
for the maintenance of the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition according to the provisions of this article.
B. Notwithstanding the failure of the occupant, agent or operator in
control of the building, structure, lot or parcel of land to maintain the
premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, the owner of the
building, structure, lot or parcel of land shall be an accessory
responsible party.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to make inspections
to determine compliance with this article. Inspections shall be made at
times determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Every operator or
owner shall cooperate with the Code Enforcement Officer in providing
access to the premises. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer
§ 58-35.9 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-35.11
1:482
§ 58-35.12. Property under construction.
determines that there is a violation of the provisions of this article, he
shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner or operator,
which shall include:
(1) An enumeration of conditions which violate the provisions of this
article.
(2) An enumeration of the remedial action required to meet the
standards of this article.
(3) A statement of a definite number of days from the date of the notice
in which the owner or operator must commence and complete such
remedial action.
(4) A statement of the penalties for noncompliance, as set forth herein.
B. A copy of such notice shall be filed in the Village Clerk's office, and such
notice shall be deemed sufficient if served upon the owner or operator
as follows:
(1) In person;
(2) By certified mail with return receipt requested; or
(3) By posting a copy of said notice on the building, only if attempts to
serve the owner or occupant by the first two methods set out above
are unsuccessful.
C. With the exception of § 58-35.5K, upon failure to comply with said
notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue an appearance ticket
returnable to the Village of Brockport Justice Court. [Amended
7-6-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999; 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
A. For purpose of enforcement of this article, if work is being done on the
property, either the prime or general contractor or the owner shall be
held responsible.
B. Materials may be stored in any area of the property upon which
construction is being carried on, provided that the method of storage
and the materials stored are in compliance with the requirements of
this article. In no event shall such storage be permitted for a period
exceeding one year.
C. Drainage crossing the property being developed must be maintained
during the period of development, and no materials may be stored, land
disturbed or other work done to interfere with drainage or to divert or
cause runoff of groundwater or stormwater in an unnatural fashion.
D. The person responsible as herein provided shall take all necessary and
reasonable steps to ensure that there will not be an unusual or
§ 58-35.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-35.12
1:483
§ 58-35.13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-16-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to imprisonment
not to exceed fifteen days or a fine not to exceed $250 or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
unwarranted amount of dust and debris blown onto or across
neighboring or nearby properties.
E. Construction roads must be kept wet or properly treated to decrease
the spread of dust and mud.
F. A temporary cover such as rye grass or a mulch must be applied on land
that has been stripped of its protective vegetation during the course of
its construction to prevent the spread of dust or mud.
G. All excavations in or near a public or private walkway or street must be
properly guarded and protected at all times by lights, flags, barricades
or other warnings sufficient in kind and amount to warn the public of
the danger of falling into the excavation.
H. Temporary electric service must be through electric lines that are
weatherproof and waterproof, such lines must not cross public
walkways or highways on the ground, nor shall they be placed on the
ground in areas subject to construction equipment traffic.
I. Grounds and buildings must be kept free of debris such as broken glass,
boards with fastenings protruding and other articles making travel
around the job site dangerous and unsafe.
§ 58-35.12 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-35.13
1:484
ARTICLE VI
Incentive Zoning
[Added 12-2-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 58-36. (Reserved)
§ 58-36.1. Title.
This article shall hereinafter be known and cited as "The Incentive Zoning
Law of the Village of Brockport."
§ 58-36.2. Purpose and intent.
The Village Board of Trustees (Village Board) has determined that it may
be appropriate to make adjustments to permissible use, density and area
requirements for the specific purpose of encouraging development using
principals set forth in the Village of Brockport's Comprehensive Plan while
providing amenities to the Village at a minimum cost to the residents and
taxpayers. It is the intent of this article to empower the Village Board to
grant incentives or bonuses to advance the vision and policies articulated in
the Village of Brockport's Comprehensive Plan and the following objectives:
§ 58-36.3. Legislative authority.
In accordance with § 7-703 of the Village Law of the State of New York,
the Village Board of the Village of Brockport is empowered to provide for
a system of zoning incentives or bonuses in exchange for specific social,
economic, or cultural benefits or amenities as the Village Board deems
necessary and appropriate and which are consistent with the intent and
purpose set forth in § 58-36.2.
§ 58-36.4. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all zoning districts in the Village of Brockport.
A. The preservation and enhancement of natural and cultural features.
B. The accommodation of land uses and physical site arrangements which
are not contemplated under conventional zoning but which would
further the land use goals of the Village.
C. The creation of usable open space and public access to recreation lands
and trails.
D. The orderly development of parks.
E. The provision of a more desirable environment than what would be
possible through the strict application of existing zoning regulations.
F. The promotion of the general health, safety and welfare of the Village.
§ 58-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-36.5
1:485
§ 58-36.5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used are defined as follows:
COMMUNITY BENEFITS OR AMENITIES — Open space, parks, historical
preservation, off-street parking and other specific physical, social or
cultural amenities, or cash in lieu thereof, of benefit to the residents of the
community, authorized by the Village Board.
INCENTIVES or BONUSES — Adjustments to the permissible density, area,
height, use or other requirements of the Zoning Code for the Village of
Brockport and any amendments thereto in exchange for a specific
community benefit or amenity. These adjustments may incorporate two or
more noncontiguous parcels of land.
INCENTIVE ZONING — The system by which specific incentives or bonuses
are granted, pursuant to § 7-703 of the New York State Village Law, on
condition that specific social, economic, or cultural benefits or amenities are
provided to the community.
§ 58-36.6. Benefits or amenities.
A. The following benefits or amenities may be either on or off the site of
the subject application:
(1) Preservation of open space.
(2) Construction, improvement and enhancement to Town buildings
and grounds including parks.
(3) Preservation of cultural or historic facilities in excess of those
required to mitigate proposed development impacts.
(4) Enhancement and preservation of designated historical landmarks.
(5) Other facilities or benefits to the residents of the community which
are consistent with the purpose and intent of this article, as
determined by the Village Board.
(6) If the Village Board finds that a community benefit is not suitable
on the site or cannot be reasonably provided, the Village Board may
require a cash payment in lieu of the provision of the amenity or
bonus. These funds shall be placed in a trust fund to be used by the
Village Board exclusively for amenities specified in these
provisions.
(7) Any combination of the above-listed amenities and/or cash in lieu of
any amenity(s) for specific purposes identified.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, stripping of any ground cover, site
grading, or any other site improvements or construction activities:
(1) Any property transfers shall have been made;
(2) A cash payment in lieu of amenities shall be made;
§ 58-36.5 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-36.6
1:486
§ 58-36.7. Incentives or bonuses.
The following incentives may be granted by the Village Board to an
application on a specific site:
§ 58-36.8. Criteria and procedure for approval.
(3) If the amenities include construction by the developer, the letter of
credit posted by the developer shall include provisions for such
work.
C. These amenities shall be in addition to any mandated requirements
pursuant to other provisions in the Code of the Village of Brockport.
A. Increases in residential or nonresidential unit density.
B. Changes in use.
C. Increases in lot coverage.
D. Changes in setbacks or height.
E. Increases in floor area.
F. Reduction of required buffer area.
G. Modification of parking requirements.
A. A preapplication conference is required prior to the submission of an
application for incentive zoning. The purpose of a preapplication
conference is to inform the applicant of applicable procedures,
submission requirements, development standards and other pertinent
matters before the applicant finalizes the incentive zoning proposal.
(1) The preapplication conference will be coordinated through the
Building Department and will normally be attended by the Mayor,
Superintendent of Public Works, the Building Inspector, and other
interested parties who may be designated by the Mayor.
(2) The applicant requesting consideration for incentive zoning is
required to attend the preapplication conference and is
encouraged to bring the project's design professional(s).
(3) Upon the request for the preapplication conference, the applicant
shall pay a fee in an amount determined by the Village Board by
resolution and as set forth in the fee schedule. This fee shall be
nonrefundable.
(4) Opinions presented during a preapplication conference are
advisory in nature and do not represent a commitment on behalf of
the Village Board or represented agency regarding the
acceptability of the incentive zoning proposal.
§ 58-36.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-36.8
1:487
B. An application for incentive zoning will consist of a letter of intent
accompanied by the following information:
(1) One concept plan showing the site developed to its fullest extent
under the zoning regulations in this chapter of the Village Code and
one concept plan showing the site developed in a manner that
incorporates the desired incentive and amenity to be provided.
These plans shall show the following information:
(a) Location and extent of all proposed land uses, including
development areas and open spaces, with areas shown in
acres.
(b) All interior streets, roads, access easements and their planned
private or public ownership, as well as all points of access and
egress from existing public rights-of-way.
(c) An area map showing adjacent parcels; that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration; all properties,
zoning districts, subdivisions, streets, access easements,
watercourses, drainage facilities, buildings, structures and
other significant natural and built features within 300 feet of
the applicant's property and all uses of abutting lands.
(2) A written description of the proposed amenity.
(3) The cash value of the proposed amenity.
(4) A narrative which:
(a) Describes the benefits to be provided to the community by the
proposed amenity.
(b) Provides a preliminary indication that there are adequate
sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal and fire-protection
facilities in the zoning district in which the proposal is located
to handle the additional demands the incentive and amenity
may place on these facilities beyond the demand on them as if
the site were developed to its fullest extent under the zoning
regulations in this chapter of the Village Code.
(c) Explains how the amenity helps implement the vision and
policies of the Comprehensive Plan and land use goals of the
Village as supplemented by the laws and regulations adopted
by the Village Board.
(d) Describes in detail the requested incentive(s).
(5) A completed Long Environmental Assessment Form, Part I.
(6) Payment to the Village in an amount established by resolution of
the Village Board as set forth in the fee schedule. This shall be
nonrefundable.
§ 58-36.8 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-36.8
1:488
C. In addition to the fee above, the developer shall be responsible for all
costs associated with reviewing the application, including legal fees
and engineering fees. To guarantee the payment of these costs, the
developer shall be required to deposit the sum of $1,500 with the
Village at the time of application. Any unused portion shall be refunded
to the developer upon completion of the project or withdrawal of the
application. The Village may request payment of additional fees as
required, and such payment shall be due within 10 days of request.
D. Twelve sets of the application shall be provided to the Village for
distribution and review. The Village Board, upon receipt of an
application, and as part of its review, may, in its discretion, refer the
application to the Planning Board for its review and recommendations.
E. If requested by the Village Board, the Planning Board shall forward a
written recommendation to the Village Board indicating whether or not
it supports the approval of the incentive and amenity. This
recommendation shall consider the following:
(1) The suitability of the site(s) for the type of open space preservation
proposed, the physical characteristics of the land and the relation
of the proposed development to surrounding existing and probable
future development.
(2) The adequacy of major roads, utilities and other facilities and
services to serve the development.
(3) That the proposal is conceptually sound, is consistent with the
Village Comprehensive Plan, and meets local and area-wide needs.
F. The application shall be referred to the Monroe County Planning
Department for its review if required by the General Municipal Law.
The Village may also refer the application to the Village Engineer, as
well as other local and county officials, representatives of federal and
state agencies and consultants as deemed appropriate. These agencies
may include, but are not limited to, the Monroe County Department of
Transportation, the New York State Department of Transportation and
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
G. All applicable requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review
(SEQR) Act82 shall be complied with as part of the review and hearing
process. In addition to other information that may be required as part of
the environmental assessment of the proposal, the assessment shall
include verification that the zoning district in which the proposal is to
be located has adequate sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal
and fire-protection facilities to:
(1) First, serve any vacant land on the site as though it were developed
to its fullest potential under the zoning regulations in effect at the
time of the amenity/incentive proposal; and
82.Editor's Note: See 6 NYCRR Part 617.
§ 58-36.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-36.8
1:489
§ 58-36.9. Expenses of compliance with SEQRA.
In accordance with § 7-703 of the Village Law, any applicant for incentives
or bonuses shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of preparing any
generic environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with the
project, and such charge shall be added to any site-specific charge made
pursuant to the provisions of § 8-0109 of the Environmental Conservation
Law.
(2) Then, serve the on-site amenity and incentive.
H. In order to approve an amenity/incentive proposal, the Village Board
shall determine that the requirements of SEQR have been met and the
proposed amenity provides sufficient public benefit to provide the
requested incentive. In order to make this determination, the Village
Board may require the completion of an environmental impact
statement. Thereafter, the Village Board is authorized to act on an
application for approval pursuant to this article.
I. The Village Board may impose conditions on a project to ensure that the
above findings are ensured through the subsequent plan review and
construction phases of the project.
J. Upon a favorable decision of the Village Board, an application shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for subdivision and/or site plan
approval pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Code and
regulations of the Village of Brockport. Failure to submit the application
to the Planning Board within six months of approval by the Village
Board shall render any incentive zoning granted hereunder null and
void unless extended by resolution of the Village Board. Any such
extensions shall be in increments of no more than six months and the
Village Board shall allow no more than two extensions unless the
applicant shall demonstrate exceptional circumstances warranting any
further extension.
§ 58-36.8 BROCKPORT CODE § 58-36.9
1:490
Chapter 59
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 59-1. Issuance of appearance tickets and/or summonses by Code
Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Inspector.
Pursuant to Criminal Procedure Law §§ 150.10 and 150.20, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Inspector of the Village of
Brockport, as defined in Chapter 36, § 36-1C, of the Code of the Village
of Brockport, is herewith authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets
and/or summonses when he has reasonable cause to believe that a person or
persons have committed a misdemeanor or a petty offense in his presence.
This authorization is restricted to the following ordinances or local laws of
the Village of Brockport:
A. Chapter 6, Berms, Fences, Hedges and Screen Plantings.
B. Chapter 10, Building Construction Code.
C. Chapter 14, Demolition of Buildings.
D. Chapter 15, Moving of Buildings.
E. Chapter 16, Driveways.
F. Chapter 17, Electrical Inspection.
G. Chapter 19, Fire Prevention.
H. Chapter 19A, Fire Alarm Systems.
I. Chapter 19B, Fire Lanes.83
J. Chapter 20, Flood Damage Protection.
K. Chapter 21, Garbage, Refuse and Open Burning.
L. Chapter 22, Garage Sales.
M. Chapter 27, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
N. Chapter 32, Motor Vehicle Repair Shops and Gasoline Service Stations.
O. Chapter 34, Parking.
P. Chapter 36, Minimum Housing and Buildings Code.
Q. Chapter 41, Plumbing.
R. Chapter 43, Signs and Billboards.
83.Editor's Note: Ch. 19B, Fire Lanes, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 58-36.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-1
1:491
§ 59-2. Issuance of appearance tickets and/or summonses by Police
Department.
Members of the Village of Brockport Police Department are authorized to
issue and serve appearance tickets and/or summonses, pursuant to the
Penal Law and the Criminal Procedure Law, relating to any misdemeanor,
violation or offense of any ordinances or local laws of the Village of
Brockport.
§ 59-3. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2005
6-20-2005 Minimum Housing and
Buildings Code
amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 8-2008
L.L. No.
2-2005
6-20-2005 Dogs amendment; cats
amendment
Ch. 5, Arts. II and
III
L.L. No.
3-2005
6-20-2005 Manager Ch. 32A, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2006
6-19-2006 Assessments:
termination of status as
assessing unit
Ch. 5A, Art. I
S. Chapter 45, Streets and Sidewalks.
T. Chapter 46, Trees and Vegetation.
U. Chapter 51, Trailers and Trailer Camps.
V. Chapter 53, Carbon Monoxide Detectors.84
W. Chapter 58, Zoning.
84.Editor's Note: Ch. 53, Carbon Monoxide Detectors, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 59-1 BROCKPORT CODE § DL-1
1:492
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2007
5-21-2007 Taxation: exemption for
improvements to oneand
two-family dwellings
Ch. 47, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2007
5-21-2007 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 13
L.L. No.
3-2007
10-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 58
L.L. No.
1-2008
1-22-2008 Sewers Ch. 42
L.L. No.
2-2008
5-5-2008 Senior citizens tax
exemption
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2008
8-18-2008 Flood damage prevention Ch. 20
L.L. No.
4-2008
8-18-2008 Limited-traffic streets Ch. 38
L.L. No.
5-2008
8-18-2008 Notification of defects Ch. 39
L.L. No.
6-2008
8-18-2008 Trees and vegetation Ch. 46
L.L. No.
7-2008
10-6-2008 Stormwater management
and erosion and
sediment control
Ch. 27
L.L. No.
8-2008
10-6-2008 Minimum Housing and
Buildings Code
Superseded by
L.L. No. 2-2014
L.L. No.
9-2008
12-15-2008 Taxation: Cold War
veterans exemption
Ch. 47, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2009
6-15-2009 Garbage, refuse and
open burning
amendment
Ch. 21
L.L. No.
2-2009
12-7-2009 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 13
L.L. No.
1-2010
7-19-2010 Trailers, trailer camps
and camping amendment
Ch. 51
L.L. No.
1-2011
4-27-2011 Sewers amendment Ch. 42
L.L. No.
1-2012
3-27-2012 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
2-2012
10-23-2012 Trees and vegetation
amendment
Ch. 46
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:493
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
3-2012
10-23-2012 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 59
L.L. No.
4-2012
11-27-2012 Taxation: Exemption for
property conversions
Ch. 47, Art. III
L.L. No.
1-2013
3-26-2013 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
2-2013
7-15-2013 Taxation: Exemption for
certain new or
substantially
rehabilitated multiple
dwellings
Ch. 47, Art. IV
L.L. No.
3-2013
12-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 58
L.L. No.
4-2013
12-16-2013 Parking Ch. 34
L.L. No.
1-2014
3-17-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
2-2014
6-2-2014 Minimum Housing and
Buildings Code
Ch. 36
L.L. No.
3-2014
8-18-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2014
12-15-2014 Animals: dogs
amendment; cats
amendment; flood
damage prevention
amendment; parking
amendment; Minimum
Housing and Buildings
Code amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 5, Arts. II and
III; 20; 34; 36; 58
L.L. No.
1-2015
11-16-2015 Alcoholic beverages
amendment; firearms,
fireworks and explosives
amendment; garbage,
refuse and open burning
amendment; peace and
good order amendment;
Minimum Housing and
Buildings Code
amendment; noise
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 4; Ch. 18; Ch.
21; Ch. 35, Art. I;
Ch. 35, Art. II; Ch.
35, Art. III; Ch.
35, Art. IV; Ch. 36;
Ch. 55; Ch. 58
§ DL-1 BROCKPORT CODE § DL-1
1:494
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2016
9-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 58
L.L. No.
2-2016
9-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 58
L.L. No.
3-2016
9-19-2016 Parks Ch. 34A
L.L. No.
1-2017
10-2-2017 Community choice
aggregation program
Ch. 13A
L.L. No.
1-2018
3-5-2018 Taxation: Gold Star
Parent Exemption
Ch. 47, Art. V
L.L. No.
2-2018
3-5-2018 Taxation: Cold War
Veterans Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 47, Art. II
(footnote only)
L.L. No.
3-2018
5-7-2018 Signs and Billboards
Amendment
Ch. 43
L.L. No.
1-2019
4-15-2019 Animals: Cats
Amendment; Chickens
Ch. 5, Art. III; Ch.
5, Art. IV
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2-2019 11-18-2019 Comprehensive Plan Ch. 13B 7
3-2019 12-2-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 58 7
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:495